The term '''''Freeway Face-off''''' refers to a series of hockey games played between the National Hockey League's Anaheim Ducks and Los Angeles Kings, both of the Pacific Division of the Western Conference. The series takes its name from the massive freeway system in the greater Los Angeles metropolitan area, the home of both teams; one could travel from one team's arena to the other simply by traveling along Interstate 5.  The term is akin to the ''Freeway Series'' which refers to meetings between the Los Angeles area baseball teams.
Along with the enmity shared between the city of Los Angeles and adjacent Orange County similar to baseball's Freeway Series, the Los Angeles Kings and Anaheim Ducks share an on-ice rivalry due to sheer geographic proximity. The two teams are situated in the same metropolitan area, and share a television market. The rivalry started with the Ducks' inaugural season in , and has since continued. 
The Kings last made an appearance in the Stanley Cup Finals in , but have popped back into the playoff picture on five different seasons. The Ducks since their inauguration have made the playoffs seven times. As of 2010   11, the Kings and Ducks have never met in the playoffs. Since 2003, the Ducks recent success in the playoffs, including the winning of the Stanley Cup in 2007 has bolstered Anaheim's fan base, at the same time the Kings' fan base still remains intact with loyal fans despite a recent lack of success. The Ducks also went to the Finals during their Cinderella run of 2003.
During regular season (and, to some extent, pre-season) games, Kings fans arrive at the Honda Center in numbers for away games against the Ducks, and Ducks fans have done the same at Staples Center. Games between the Southern California crosstown-rivals are often very physical and fight-filled. The rivalry was showcased for the NHL premier in London at the start of the 2007   08 NHL season with two games between the teams. 
The rivalry was further heated during the 2010 NHL Entry Draft, which was hosted by the Kings in their home arena of Staples Center.  When the Ducks took the stage to announce Cam Fowler as their 1st round, 12 overall pick, the audience predominantly consisting of Kings fans, let out boos.
Prior to 2007, there was no official name for the regular season meetings between the Ducks and Kings, the "Freeway Face-off" name was chosen by a poll of 12,000 local hockey fans. Other names being considered were "Freeze-way Series" and "Ice-5 Series." , Ducks-Kings Rivalry: Freeway Face-Off.
Several players have played for both teams, including:
As of 2010, the Ducks and the Kings have never met in the postseason. Because both teams are in the same division, they could theoretically meet in the Conference Quarter-finals, Conference Semi-finals, or Conference Finals, but could not meet in the Stanley Cup finals unlike MLB's Angels and Dodgers (another rivalry in the area) who can only meet in the championship round (the World Series). In 2011, for the first time since the Ducks were enfranchised in 1993, both Southern California hockey teams made the postseason and could meet in any of the first three rounds depending on the results of the final two days of the regular season.
Despite not being as publicized as some other NHL rivalries, the Ducks and Kings have a pretty intense rivalry that is known to Western Conference hockey fans, and fans of both teams. The Los Angeles Kings were the first NHL team in Southern California, brought in by the expansion era of 1967-68. The Anaheim Ducks (formerly Mighty Ducks of Anaheim) came into the league for the 1993-94 season along with the Florida Panthers. With the Kings having been in existence for 26 years before the Ducks arrived, many saw the Ducks as taking away from the Kings' fanbase and attention in the local market. The Kings were known to be one of the teams to establish hockey as a foothold in Southern California, largely due to the help of Wayne Gretzky. The Kings' success of the late 1980's and early 1990's really helped spike interest in hockey in Los Angeles, also spawning the growth of inline hockey.  The Ducks' arrival in nearby Orange County brought new fans to the Southern California hockey scene, and creating enmity between the two teams and their fans. Many Kings fans who were disillusioned with the team's status after 1993 became Ducks fans. However, both teams have loyal fanbases in large.
The rivalry is also known for local bragging rights, pitting big-city Los Angeles against its southern neighbor Orange County, which is known to be more suburban. Staples Center and Honda Center are less than an hour apart via local freeways. Many Kings fans fill Honda Center in great numbers, but numerous Ducks fans also make the short trip up the freeway to Staples Center as well. In recent years, crowds at both venues are quite diverse due to both teams' recent successes in the last few seasons.
There is much hatred between fans of the two teams. Kings fans like to taunt the Ducks with chants of "Ducks suck" and "Anaheim sucks" at every home game. In contrast, it has been said to hear "Beat LA" and "Stanley Cup" chants from Ducks fans when taunting the Kings.