Zondervan also publishes many other books by Christian authors focusing on topics of interest to Christians, and in the 1970s it produced ''The Late Great Planet Earth'' by Hal Lindsey, which has sold more than 30 million copies.  The publishing house is also known for inspirational titles: the Bible storytelling books of Ethel Barrett, ''Joni'' by quadriplegic Joni Eareckson Tada, Baptist minister and author Rick Warren's ''The Purpose Driven Life,'' which has sold more than 35 million copies, and Rob Bell, author of ''Velvet Elvis'' and presenter of NOOMA. NOOMA is a series of short spiritual films.  In 2004, Zondervan expanded to include Renee Altson, Shane Claiborne, Sarah Raymond Cunningham and Margaret Feinberg, to attempt to engage younger readers.
Zondervan was in the Christian record business for many years with the ''Singspiration'' and ''Zondervan Victory'' labels in the 1960s, ''Singcord'' in the 70s, and the Milk & Honey Records label in the 1980s.
 The resulting company was (measured by sales) one and a half times the size of its closest competitor, Word. Zondervan bought out Paragon in 1983, and eventually sold Benson to Zomba Label Group in 1993, now a part of Sony BMG Music Entertainment.
Pradis was the trademarked name for Zondervan's native format for biblical software. On 22 September 2009, Logos Research Systems, Inc, and Zondervan announced a new partnership, and the retirement of Pradis. Thirty-one titles were slated for availability in "early 2010" in the LOGOS Bible Software format. 
One key Pradis feature was customizable panes to efficiently divide the workspace into major areas, with a system of tabs within the panes to access many open books simultaneously without losing open books behind other windows, as is common with other systems. Pradis offered the ability to link works together by biblical references, but without providing topical linking between works. Advanced tools for original languages were available, as were additional commentaries and dictionaries, though the list of available offerings dwindled significantly before the termination of the line was announced.
Zondervan offered Pradis for license to other publishers, but response flagged. Now customers and publisher alike stand to benefit from greater compatibility.