The '''Arctic Policy of the United States''' refers to the foreign policy of the United States in regards to the Arctic region. In addition, the United States' domestic policy toward Alaska is part of its Arctic policy.
Since March 30, 1867 (when the United States purchased Alaska from the Russian Empire) the United States of America has been one of the eight Arctic nations and one of the five Arctic Ocean littoral countries. The United States has been a member of the Arctic Council since its inception in 1996 and is also an observer of the Conference of Parliamentarians of the Arctic Region.
The stated goals in United States Arctic Policy are: Meet national security and homeland security needs relevant to the Arctic region; Protect the Arctic environment and conserve its biological resources; Ensure that natural resource management and economic development in the region are environmentally sustainable; Strengthen institutions for cooperation among the eight Arctic nations (the United States, Canada, Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway, the Russian Federation, and Sweden); Involve the Arctic's indigenous communities in decisions that affect them; and Enhance scientific monitoring and research into local, regional, and global environmental issues.
On January 9, 2009, President Bush signed National Security Presidential Directive (NSPD)-66 on Arctic Region Policy, a collaborative effort replacing the Clinton-era Arctic policy directive,.  NSPD-66 is the official, active Arctic policy being pursued by the Obama Administration and its departments.  The policy's international aims are to support the ratification of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), promote participation in the Arctic Council, develop agreements with other Arctic countries on increased human activity in the region, and "continue to cooperate with other countries on Arctic issues through the United Nations (U.N.) and its specialized agencies." The policy argues against the need for a treaty among Arctic nations similar to the Antarctic Treaty restricting commercial and military activities.  The policy calls for the US to, "assert a more active and influential national presence to protect its Arctic interests and project sea power throughout the region," and to secure free passage of vessels through the Northwest Passage and the Northern Sea Route.
At the March 29, 2010 "Arctic Five" meeting in Ottawa, United States Secretary of State, Hillary Clinton, criticized Canada for not inviting the other three Arctic nations or indigenous groups.  Canadian Foreign Affairs Minister, Lawrence Cannon, said the meeting was not intended to, "replace or undermine the Arctic Council".
Canada is the United States' closest partner in Arctic affairs, due to geographic proximity and similar Arctic policy directives.  The countries work together on scientific research, including mapping the Arctic sea floor.  Two significant disagreements are the border dispute in the Beaufort Sea and the legal designation (international or internal waters) of the Northwest Passage.
The current Arctic policy of the United States has its beginnings in the Nixon Administration.  In December 1971, President Nixon produced National Security Decision Memorandum 144 to address the United States' stance toward the Arctic.  The memo suggested that the development of the United States' Arctic policy focus on three key areas:  minimize adverse risks to the environment; promote international cooperation in the Arctic; and provide for the protection of security interests in the region.
In 1984, the United States Congress passed the "Arctic and Policy Act of 1984" to provide for the national defense of the region, enhance commercial fishing endeavors, and fund environmental and climate research in the region.  The United States remained largely quiet in the international arena with regard to Arctic policy until joining the eight other Arctic countries by signing the Arctic Environmental Protection Strategy agreement in 1991.  The main purpose behind this agreement was to coordinate the protection of the Arctic region by: researching the various pollutants in the region and sharing the data; assessing the environmental impacts of development activities; and control pollutants and their effects on the Arctic environment.  The Arctic Environmental Protection Strategy was absorbed into the Arctic Council following the Yalta Declaration in 1997.
The Arctic Council was the face of United States Arctic Policy until the latest National Security Presidential Directive (NSPD-66) was signed by President Bush on January 9, 2009.  The diminishment of Arctic sea ice, the subsequent increase in human activities in the region, and territorial considerations of the unclaimed Arctic have provided a new sense of urgency to the Arctic issue.  This impetus is unique to the United States during this time because of climate change in the region.  While the Arctic Council still remains the authoritative international body on Arctic issues, the United States has started to develop its own strategy toward addressing its resources and claims toward the region.
The diminshment of Arctic sea ice has provided the strongest impetus for a more assertive United States policy in the Arctic region.  The United States focuses on numerous facets of the Arctic region in promoting and explaining their reasonings for a stronger policy position in the region.  As an Arctic country with territory at stake, the United States is continuously pushing for a larger influence in the region to pursue industry and energy development considerations.  One of the tenets of NSPD-66 is the ratification of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), this would provide clarity and the appropriate framework for the United States to submit a claim to some area of the Arctic as the sea ice continues to melt.  In addition, new passageways in commercial shipping may become available due to the breaking of ice.
The United States Geological Survey estimates that 22 percent of the world's oil and natural gas could be located beneath the Arctic and that some of these reserves would be within the Exclusive Economic Zone of the United States.  The Arctic contains significant deposits of precious minerals, timber, and fish.  The Arctic Policy of the US can account for great increases in wealth if the Exclusive Economic Zone of the United States can be proven to extend into these areas.  Research plans to determine the extent of this shelf and the amounts of resources it contains is a primary directive of NSPD-66, the prevailing Arctic Policy of the United States 
The population influx in the Arctic region is also predicted to coincide with more commercial shipping, marine tourism, and the transportation of large passenger vessels.  This poses coverage gaps to the US Navy and US Coast Guard search and rescue functions.  Due to the non-military nature of the Arctic Council, the United States will also need to pursue separate military agreements with other Arctic countries to ensure a protected and secure region.
The US Arctic Policy Group is a federal inter-agency working group comprising those agencies with programs and/or involvement in research and monitoring, land and natural resources management, environmental protection, human health, transportation and policy making in the Arctic. The APG is chaired by the Department of State and meets monthly to develop and implement US programs and policies in the Arctic, including those relevant to the activities of the Arctic Council.
The Interagency Climate Change Adaptation Task Force was initiated by the Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ), the Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP), and NOAA in 2009 and includes representatives from more than 20 federal agencies.  President Obama has called on the Task Force to develop federal recommendations for adapting to climate change impacts both domestically and internationally.
The EOP is headed by the White House Chief of Staff. Entities within the EOP include: Council on Environmental Quality, National Security Council, Office of Management and Budget, Office of Science and Technology Policy, President's Intelligence Advisory Board, and others.
The CEQ's  released its  July 19, 2010.  One recommendation was to create , which is co-chaired by the CEQ and the OSTP..  The USARC, in conjunction with the Navy and under the aegis of the National Ocean Council, is developing an Arctic Strategic Action Plan.
Co-chairs the National Ocean Council.
The National Security Council's Tom Atkin is involved in Arctic Policy.
The State Department   s Bureau of Oceans and International Environmental and Scientific Affairs (OES) includes the Office of Ocean and Polar Affairs (OPA), which is responsible for formulating and implementing US policy on international issues concerning the oceans, the Arctic, and Antarctica.  Julie Gourley at the OES is the Senior Arctic Official representing the United States at Arctic Council meetings. OES's Deputy Assistant Secretary David Balton is the lead US negotiator for the Arctic Council's search and rescue initiative.
The Navy   s Task Force Climate Change released the Navy Arctic Roadmap in November 2009 and the Navy Climate Change Roadmap in April 2010.
Admiral Gary Roughead believes overfishing and melting sea ice are increasing the importance of the Navy in the Arctic. He also favors the United States ratifying the United Nations Law of the Sea Treaty    so we have a seat at the table       and so the United States could    expand its sovereign rights to the increasingly accessible outer continental shelf areas of the resource-rich environment of the Arctic.       Navy Rear Admiral David Titley is heavily involved in Arctic Policy.
Secretary Ken Salazar is a key player in Arctic affairs.  DOI is involved in Arctic policy dealing with federally administered Alaska lands.
Involved with Arctic policy dealing with pipeline issues.
Senator Lisa Murkowski is a strong proponent of ratification of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea and has introduced three Arctic bills in the 111th Congress: Senator Murkowski has participated in the Conference of Parliamentarians of the Arctic Region.
On August 3, 2009, Sen. Begich introduced the Inuvikput Package of Senate Bills 1560-1566:
The Alaska Region, with USGS and Alaska Department of Environmental Conservation, hosts the Alaska Climate Change Executive Roundtable, a coalition of senior level executives of both federal and state resource management agencies from throughout Alaska that has been meeting regularly since the Climate Change Forum for Alaska in February 2007 to share information and facilitate cooperation among agencies.
NWTF is tasked with facilitating the creation of a joint federal-state entity to coordinate US and Alaskan interests that result from the warming of the northern oceans.  Members include: Rep. Reggie Joule, Rep. Bob Herron, Sen. Lyman Hoffman, Sen. Bert Stedman, ADEC Commissioner Larry Hartig, North Slope Borough Mayor Edward Itta, Unalaska Mayor Chris Hladick, Nome Mayor Denise Michaels, NANA Corp VP Chuck Green, and Alaska Marine Conservation Council Chair Dave Kubiak.  Alternates are Rep. Bryce Edgmon, Sen. Donald Olson, and Fish & Game Commissioner Cora Campbell.
IARPC consists of fifteen-plus agencies, departments, and offices across the US Federal government and is chaired by the National Science Foundation. IARPC develops the US Arctic Research Plan and coordinates US research programs to support US Arctic policy.
The Commission   s main purpose is to establish the national policy, priorities, and goals necessary to construct a federal program plan for basic and applied scientific research with respect to the Arctic, including natural resources and materials, physical, biological and health sciences, and social and behavioral sciences and to recommend Arctic research policy, and to communicate our research and policy recommendations to the President and the Congress.
The Arctic Research Consortium of the United States was formed in 1988 to identify and bring together the human and facilities resources of the Arctic research community in the United States. ARCUS is a non-profit corporation consisting of institutions organized and operated for educational, professional, or scientific purposes. The ARCUS headquarters and staff are located in Fairbanks, Alaska.
The University of the Arctic is a cooperative network of universities, colleges and other organizations committed to higher education and research in the North.
Anchorage-based think tank on Arctic and other issues.  Worked on the Arctic Marine Shipping Assessment.
The Northern Forum is a non-profit, international organization composed of sub-national or regional governments from eight northern countries.
The range of some sub-Arctic fish stocks is likely to extend into Arctic areas due to climate change, and decreasing ice-cover will likely lead to more fishing activity.  Scientific understanding of Arctic fish populations is limited and needs to be studied before increased Arctic fishing occurs.
In May 2008, President Bush signed a  passed by Congress relating to Arctic Fisheries. The resolution stresses the need for the United States to work with other nations to conserve and manage future Arctic fisheries.
In the area of the Arctic north of the Atlantic, extensive commercial fisheries and international managerial mechanisms already exist. North of the Bering Strait, there are currently no significant commercial fisheries and no international management mechanisms.
The Arctic Fishery Management Plan went into effect December 3, 2009, closing the Arctic Management Area to commercial fishing.
The NPFMC is one of eight regional councils established by the Magnuson Fishery Conservation and Management Act in 1976 to manage the nation's fisheries. With jurisdiction over the  Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) off Alaska, the Council has primary responsibility for groundfish management in the Gulf of Alaska and Bering Sea and Aleutian Islands, including cod, pollock, flatfish, mackerel, sablefish, and rockfish species. Other large Alaska fisheries such as salmon, crab and herring are managed primarily by the State of Alaska.