In the autobiography Dr. Lee tells the story about his life and beliefs. In his twenties, Rev. Dr. Lee had suffered from a variety of incurable diseases for seven years and awaited death with no hope for recovery. However, one day in the spring of 1974, he was led to a church by his sister and when he knelt down to pray, the living God immediately healed him of all his diseases. 
 with just 13 members. Countless works of God, including miraculous healings, signs and wonders, have been taking place at his church. In 1988, not only the main sanctuary of the church, but also the offices, the staircase, and even the corridor were full of people attending worship services. The church organized Nissi Orchestra, which was organized in March 1992 as the first praise-specialized orchestra in Korea. In 1993, Manmin Central Church was selected as one of the    World's Top 50 Churches    by the Christian World magazine (US). 
On February 23, 1995, Korean Pastors' Prayer Fellowship held the 149th National Pastors' Conference in Manmin Central church. About 1,000 pastors attended. Lee preached about the secret of church growth.
In 1997, his church choir participated in Choir Festival in commemoration of FEBC(Far East Broadcasting Company)'s 22nd anniversary together with Yoido Full Gospel church and Youngrak church etc.
Manmin Central Church was ejected from the  in April 1999 over "heretical claims". But the church spokesman tells Manmin Central Church has followed the evangelical theology and orthodox Biblical teachings since its founding in 1982.
In 1999, Munhwa Broadcasting Corporation, a South Korean television broadcaster, aired a documentary critical of Jaerock Lee, which program had to air counterdefense report of the church later according to the court ruling; in response, 300 Manmin Central Church members invaded the television station, attacking security guards and breaking into the station control room to cut the power, while another 1,500 organised a sit-down protest in a nearby street; 600 riot police were needed to restore order. The station had previous been prevented by court order from airing a story on Lee's sex life and the station later received a court order to air Manmin Central Church's response to the initial documentary. MBC filed a lawsuit against the church and 61 people involved in the attack, seeking damages of    2.7&nbsp;billion; the Seoul Southern District Court granted damages in the amount of    696&nbsp;million in November 2000 against the church and some of the participants in the attack, but threw out the case against Lee himself.
The church organized world-wide missionary works in the United States, Russia, the Philippines, Kenya, Uganda, Tanzania, Pakistan, Argentina, Honduras and India. In July, 2000, The church organized Uganda crusade and Lee visited Uganda to lead the Uganda United Crusade. Leaders of the  in Uganda have accused him of being a cult leader, pointing to an alleged July 1998 statement by Lee that he was "sinless and exempted from dying";in response, a spokesman of the church told, "We have seen the work of devil, but the devil was defeated in the name of Jesus Christ".  Representatives of Ugandan President Yoweri Museveni welcomed Lee at the airport. They told Lee "Uganda is dealing with overwhelming spiritual and social problems and desperately needs the message of Christ". Thousands of Ugandans came to Nakibubo Stadium for the rally, and many responded by professing faith in Christ, and others were allegedly cured of physical and spiritual ailments when Lee prayed for them. The event was broadcast on the government television station, which reaches 3 million people in Kampala.
CNN correspondent Yusuf Kalyango Jr. reported that Rev. Dr. Jaerock Lee proved to many Uganda people that he is a man of God by manifesting the works of spiritual power that prove that the Bible is true in Nakibubo Stadium. His mission in Uganda was for the people of Uganda to enter New Jerusalem before God.
Manmin Church publishes Manmin News Paper, Manmin Magazine and Broadcasting of GCN TV, Manmin TV for Evangelization and Mission testifying to the Gospel of Jesus Christ.
In 2004, World Christian Doctors Network was organized by Manmin central Church to confirm the healing cases performed by the power of God with medically clarified data so that it may magnify the glory of God.
In the 2007 WCDN conference in Miami, US, Dr. John Youl Chun, former dean of the College of Medicine of Kyung Hee University, presented the healing case of Taiwanese Pastor Chen Tsen Man, who had been healed at the Friday all-night service at Manmin Joongang Church. She had suffered from infantile paralysis since the age of 2, and since she met with a traffic accident 14 years ago, she had to use crutches to support herself. She has recently used a wheelchair due to the excruciating pain in her legs. But when she visited the church she was healed and came to walk without crutches or a wheelchair through the prayers of Dr. Jaerock Lee.
Global Christian Network was launched in 2005 to spread messages filled with life and the works of God's power to all corners of the world through broadcasting media. In February, 2006, the church organized miracle healing festival in Kinshasa, DR Congo. Before the beginning of the crusade, DR Congolese president Joseph Kabila invited Dr. Jaerock Lee and his group to the presidential palace to have confabulation and he requested Dr. Lee's prayer for the stability and peace of the DR Congo.
In July 2006, the church organized three-day "Salvation Miracles Revival Crusade" at New York City's Madison Square Garden, USA. Frank Wright, the president of the National Religious Broadcasters, expressed his opinions on the crusade. "Rev. Lee's message is very spiritual yet very easy to understand. It was amazing to see so many people being healed through his prayer." Dr. David Waisman, a Peruvian congressman, said, "I was touched. Rev. Lee is seeking to overcome evil with goodness. Through the power of God, the mute came to speak." 
On September 2009, the church organized 'multi-cultural festival' in Jerusalem, Israel.
On the second night of the festival, September 7, Dr. Frank Wright, the President of NRB(National Religious Broadcasters) said in his greeting message, "We have gathered to praise the living God and declare that today is a day of grace. There's no way that I could hide the feeling of joy to see many people being healed by faith after living in torment with diseases.", reports Christian Telegraph. He is not different than any other man, only in his devotion." Kim went on to claim that Lee did not consider himself divine.
The event drew roughly 3,000 attendees from 36 countries to rally for peace in the Middle East.
The Manmin Church has grown exponentially through the years and as of July 2009, Manmin Central Church has congregation of more than 100,000 members
Manmin Central Church is actively involved in community service. It has established "The Relief Committee" that regularly provides living expenses and scholarships to the elderly living in solitude and youths who find themselves as heads of households. For the elderly in collaboration with government offices, the Church operates "Manmin Welfare Town" and "Rainbow-rising House" welfare institutions. Other welfare institutions include "Joint Weddings" for disabled couples "Mission House" to assist foreigners living and working in South Korea, "The Luke Medical Mission", a group of medical professionals among Manmin members, visits social welfare institutions from time to time and offers free medical examinations while the Manmin Evangelization Brigade invites to    The Sharing of Meals of Love Event    individuals who are in difficult financial situations and thus resort to assistance and shelters provided by the government. "The Edification and Welfare Mission" visits youth detention centers and prisons to worship together with inmates and presents them with gifts.
In May, 2010, the church sponsored 2010 WCDN (World Christian Doctors Network) conference in Rome, Italy, which was organized to medically analyze divine healing cases performed by God, clarify the data before and after the healing, and testify with that data that God is alive and the Bible is authentic. Dr. Teh Mii Lii, Obstetrician & Gynecologist from Malaysia presented the healing case in which a woman had an amnion rupture in 19th week of pregnancy and accordingly had the possibility of miscarriage or premature delivery, but later delivered a normal child easily by the prayer of Dr. Jaerock Lee.
In October 2010, the church organized a Korean culture festival in Tallinn, Estonia. The church's leader Jaerock Lee and local singers Tonis Magi and Dave Benton were to appear at the event. The singers were led to believe that the event was sponsored by the South Korean embassy. This later turned out to be false, prompting Tonis Magi to cancel his appearance. The Korean grand embassy in Helsinki regretted having been mistakenly connected with the festival and hoped that the event would not give visitors a false impression of Korea. The event's marketing director Sergei Semjonov denied any wrongdoing: "We've never told Tonis Magi that the event will be sponsored by the Korean Embassy. We were actually talking about Korean public bodies." Some Christian sources called the event the "Estonia Miracle Healing Crusade 2010" and claimed that it brought the most people to this arena in the Christian history of Estonia.
Prior to Dr. Lee   s preaching, the performance team of Manmin Central Church presented a top class Christian performance and glorified God. It was followed by Dr. Lee   s sermon entitled ``God the Creator       and "The Reason Why Only Jesus Christ is our Savior". In his message he emphasized that the believers who accepted Jesus Christ as their Savior should cast away sins and become sanctified. When he prayed for the sick, many people were healed of various diseases including epilepsy and cancers and they came up to the stage to testify to their healings, reported Korea Times. Mrs. Alina Aivazova, wife of Dr. Leonid Chernovetskyi, Mayor of Kiev, the capital of Ukraine attended this crusade and was healed of arthritis and spondylitis, and testified that the pain over her whole body disappeared, Christian Daily News reported. This crusade was broadcast to 220 countries via aired TV, Cable TV and the Internet.
H.E. Fernando Borbon, Costa Rica Ambassador to Korea who is also an associate pastor with the Manmin church is working as a leading Christian leader in Korea.
Its senior pastor and founder Rev. Dr. Jaerock Lee claims to have suffered from a variety of incurable diseases for seven years before his recovery. Rev. Dr. Lee has written 39 books, including ''Tasting Eternal Life before Death'',
Dr. Lee led massive crusades in many countries like Uganda, Japan, Pakistan, Kenya, the Philippines, Honduras, India, Russia, Germany, Peru, DR Congo, the USA, and Israel and delivered The Message of the Cross. "Wherever The Message of the Cross was preached, the Holy Spirit worked like blazing fire, and many people began to understand God's plan and have hope for eternal life through this message,    says Dr. Lee.
A vivid depiction of Jesus' life,    Footprints of the Lord    contains the spiritual significance of the Passion of Jesus.
The books titled "Understanding the Message of the Cross of Jesus Christ", which is same contents as the book "The Message of the Cross", "Heaven" and "Hell"  were exhibited at the Book Expo America 2011 in New York.
Featured authors at the BEA 2011 included Pulitzer Prize winning novelist, Jeff Eugenides, Man Booker Prize winner, Anne Enright, and South Korean evangelical author Dr. Jaerock Lee. 
Before he established the church, he had been sick for 7 years just after he got married. Lee attempted to commit suicide several times. But one day his elder sister took him to a Korean healing evangelist, after which he claims his illnesses disappeared. In the book "Tasting Eternal Life Before Death", he confesses he will always pursue God`s grace and subject himself to God`s will. 
Lee holds an honorary Doctorate of Ministry from Kingsway Theological Seminary in Iowa, awarded in 1996. He was selected as one of the Top 10 Most Influential Christian Leaders in 2009 and 2010 named by Christian Telegraph. Lee was recognized as    Missionary of the Year,    while U.S. mega church Saddleback pastor Rick Warren was named    Diplomat of the year.   
It was the second time that Lee was selected as one of top 10 most influential Christian leaders since 2009.