U.S. Cellular was created in 1983 as a subsidiary of Telephone and Data Systems (TDS), Inc., which still owns an 81% stake.
U.S Cellular's Unlimited Call-Me feature allows users (including prepaid users) to receive calls without charge while in their local calling area. In addition, they offer unlimited incoming text, picture, and video messages.
As a public service, U.S. Cellular works with National Center for Missing and Exploited Children to provide free AMBER Alerts via text messaging.
On October 1, 2010, U.S. Cellular became the first wireless carrier in the United States to offer plans with features such as free phone replacement, one-and-done contracts, points-based rewards for customer loyalty, monthly minute overage protection, and a monthly discount by electing to receive paperless statements and paying your bill automatically. The discount is currently 3% for payments via credit or debit card and 5% for payments made via an e-check. This program was launched as the Belief Project. 
U.S.Cellular touts its service, having one of the highest customer retention rates among its competitors, as reported by some market research firms.
J. D. Power and Associates continually rates U.S. Cellular as having "Highest in Wireless Call Quality Performance" for several of its coverage regions.  The North Central Region (IL,IN, MI, OH, WI) has received the award from 2006-2011. 
Consumer Reports does an annual survey of wireless service providers and U.S. Cellular's customers said how they really felt. The company has the highest call quality and network satisfaction of any national carrier as stated by the survey.
Originally, U.S. Cellular used Digital AMPS "TDMA" cell phones in most markets, but the company has completed shifting over to 1xRTT CDMA technology. After the switch, U.S. Cellular has discontinued all analog and TDMA services. In 2009, U.S. Cellular started converting its network to EVDO which offers 3G speeds.   U.S. Cellular plans to eventually use GSM based LTE for its future 4G network.
The company offers national 3G coverage through roaming agreements. Native coverage is mainly in the Pacific Northwest, Midwest, parts of the East and New England. Although headquartered in Chicago, U.S. Cellular did not offer service in the Chicago metropolitan area until it acquired territories from PrimeCo Communications between 2002 and 2003, after the formation of Verizon Wireless.
U.S. Cellular announced that it will start offering 4G coverage to customers by the end of 2011. The company decided to go with LTE for it's 4G coverage. The rollout  is planned for selected cities in Iowa, Wisconsin, Maine, North Carolina, Texas and Oklahoma. These include some of U.S. Cellular's leading markets such as Milwaukee, Madison and Racine, Wis.; Des Moines, Cedar Rapids and Davenport, Iowa; Portland and Bangor, Maine; and Greenville, N.C.
The company offers phones manufactured by LG, Samsung, HTC, RIM, Motorola, and Pantech.
U.S. Cellular launched the Samsung Galaxy i800 Tablet PC in November, 2010.
On October 1st, 2010 U.S. Cellular unveiled its customer reward program as "The Belief Project".. All Belief Plans are National Plans, and include national calling and coverage for Voice and national 3G data coverage. Mobile-to-Mobile (M2M). Points can be redeemed for;
Earn Belief Points for being a customer and redeem them for faster phone upgrades and more.
Sign an initial two-year commitment and you won't have to sign another contract.
Upgrade your phone at a promotional price every 18 months--or as soon as 10 to 11 months with Belief Points--without signing a new contract.
Take comfort if your phone is ever accidentally damaged, lost or stolen.
The company has its headquarters in almost  in the Citicorp Plaza complex in O'Hare, Chicago, Illinois, near O'Hare International Airport.Baeb, Eddie. "." ''Crain's Chicago Business''. April 23, 2008. Retrieved on January 10, 2010. US Cellular's lease will expire in September 2011. The company stated in 2008 that it hired CB Richard Ellis to help determine whether the company should stay in its current headquarters facility, move to central Chicago, or move to the Chicago suburbs.
U.S. Cellular owns the naming rights to:
It has opened the U.S. Cellular pavilion in Hadlock Field, home of the Portland Sea Dogs in Portland, Maine. U.S. Cellular is the official wireless sponsor for the St. Louis Cardinals and St. Louis Rams, as well as a Hall of Fame Partner of the Chicago Bears.
U.S. Cellular purchased the facility naming rights to U.S. Cellular Community Park in a six year, $650,000 agreement.
U.S. Cellular is the presenting sponsor of the August 1, 2009 NASCAR Nationwide Series race at Iowa Speedway.  The race was titled the U.S. Cellular 250.
Additional corporate sponsorship includes the Calling All Communities and Calling All Teachers programs as well as the Associate Matching Gifts program.
The sonic logo, tag, audio mnemonic was produced by Musikvergnuegen and written by Walter Werzowa from the Austrian 1980s sampling band Edelweiss.