The project is intended to follow tens of thousands of companies to give a true multidimensional diagram of the history of the area's "corporate DNA". This is going to be a living database that will continue to evolve as long as the tech sector exists."Dr. Michael Savioe, The School of Management, University of Texas at Dallas, Tech connections, Vo. 8 No. 1, Autumn 2004, page 5
The idea behind the project was to develop a History Framework and database for the Telecom Corridor and to thereby illustrate the Telecom Corridor   s Highly Networked Community.
In order to prove and illustrate the environment and fertile ground for new start-ups and relocating companies the project demonstrates the family like bonds and history of the local companies and their executives.
It is also to simplify and increase networking among area companies and their executives through the common thread that they share and to push networking to a higher level.
The Telecom Corridor Genealogy Project started in February 2003 as a tool for economic development for the region that is called the Telecom Corridor.
The concept was first outlined in discussions at the Richardson Economic Development Technology Advisory Board (REDTAB) and further developed with the help of the Metroplex Technology Business Council 3rd Friday  Committee.
In March 2003 the founder  had already been able to collect 300 entries of 100 different people for the database. In order to get more momentum for the project he decided to seek out the local University -  in April 2003.
He met with , Director of the Center for Information Technology and Management () in the School of Management at The University of Texas at Dallas.
Shortly after this meeting Dr. Savoie and his Center developed a program to manage the database and hosted it on UT Dallas website for people to contribute their data online.
As a result of this work the database grew about 400 entries and 150 individuals and first results from the data were shown at the Metroplex Technology Business Council () Executive Committee. In May 2003 the committee allowed Mr. Peck and Dr. Savoie to use the trademark  in the name of the project. Subsequently the project became know all over the Telecom Corridor and Dallas/Fort Worth Metroplex due to its rapid growth and was subject in interviews, photos (Peck, Hicks, Savoie & Robinson). It was , Sunday Business Section, Page 1 in June 2003 and a Radio Interview with Paul Peck & Art Roberts on    Tech in Touch   , WBAP 820, with Kym Yancey followed shortly after that.
A next step in the project was the addition of company profile/history data (by Jerry Cupples) for cross-referencing purposes in July 2003. Following was another meeting with Dr. Savoie, including () Members & Claire Lewis the preliminary Telecom Corridor Genealogy Project Web Page was developed and online at the ().
After the project grew in 2003 the Dallas Morning News followed up and published a 2nd article in June 2004; almost exactly 1 year after the first.
Due to limited human resources the project lay dormant until February 2010.
In February 2010 the 's  decided to revive the project and approached Paul Peck with the idea of providing and intern for him to help him with the project. Due to the time that has passed since '04 the revival process seemed even harder considering what had changed in world of social media and the up coming web 2.0.
Questions had to be answered. What can the project do that a LinkedIN or Facebook can't. That involved a lot of research on social networks and business networks and even social network software applications.
Conventional economic development policies are believed not to be universally usable for attracting high-tech firms to areas/cities, but rather that those locate in clusters with certain characteristics:
Even though the Telecom Corridor Genealogy Project had only been founded in 2003 there were reports and talks about the significance of the history of companies and their workforce in this area since the early 1990ties. That history matters in economic development is widely agreed upon and the history of the companies and their family tree got captured and referred to by many authors.
The future vision is to promote further networking among area companies and their executives through the common thread that they share and to push networking to a higher level modeling Silicon Valley community network with rapid knowledge flows and high supply chain relationships through...
The idea of the project was and still is influenced by other similar models of regional business "family tree" projects.
The regional business family tree that is most famous is the Silicon Valley Fairchild family tree. The Fairchild project resulted in a map that shows the genealogy of the companies in Silicon Valley that spun out or were acquired by Fairchild semiconductors from 1957 till 1979 ().
Another economic development related project was done by the  and the social network software provider . The project resulted in the analysis of the food industry in Athens, Ohio and produced a better connected business community and the understanding for the same.