Welcome to the '''Ohio townships taskforce''' of WikiProject Ohio, used to better organize information in articles related to '''Ohio townships'''.  It is hoped that this taskforce will help to focus the efforts of other Wikipedians.  If you would like to help, please sign up below!
This taskforce aims to create articles on all of Ohio's civil townships, which are listed here.
To improve the depth and content of Ohio township articles and to maintain their stability and accuracy.
To add this taskforce's banner to a talkpage use the following code:
Articles shall have a title in the form "TOWNSHIP NAME Township, COUNTY NAME County, Ohio", e.g. Oxford Township, Butler County, Ohio.  Names should be checked against the list at List of Ohio townships.  If a township has a unique name and is not similar to any others, then a redirect at "TOWNSHIP NAME Township, Ohio" should be created.  Where there are more than one of the same or similar names, a disambiguation page should be created that lists all the variants, e.g. Union Township, Ohio.  The DAB page should be entered into the townships category (see below).  
Articles on paper townships should be made as redirects unless there is historical value, e.g. Millcreek Township, Hamilton County, Ohio.  Townships that incorporated as a city, e.g. Van Buren Township, Montgomery County, Ohio or which merged with a city should be redirects to the city article and the former township status noted in the lead.  
Townships that no longer exist and were not incorporated into a city, e.g. Deerfield Township, Hamilton County, Ohio should have articles explaining their status.  These should be placed under  .
As much information as possible should be included.  If information is not available, remove that line.  Some details have been filled in for you. See   for additional fields that are available and the table at   for all fields and descriptions of usage.
This is the lead from the article on Oxford Township: 
Lead paragraphs should contain:
This information does not need to be presented in strict order given because that could result in awkward phrasing, but it is given a guide.
For every municipality and census designated place in Ohio, maps have been created.  If the township contains one of these, just copy the map to the appropriate place.  (See note in next paragraph.)  If there are no maps available, insert a thumbnail of the county map or request one be made at  .  Examples of the maps on Oxford Township and Adams Township, Clinton County, Ohio are depicted.
If you do decide to create maps of the townships, a source to do so exists here: .  This PDF file from the Ohio Department of Natural Resources contains a map showing all of Ohio's townships, along with the location of each of Ohio's 88 county seats.  From this source, and using a good image editor, you may create a countywide map of that county's townships, as has been done for Logan County, Ohio. A county map in a somehwat different format, based on U.S. Census maps , has been done for Hancock County, Ohio. SVG would be the file format of choice for these created maps, which can then be uploaded to Wikipedia or Wikimedia Commons.
To provide links to more maps, it's helpful to include coordinates in the articles. Use the corresponding template, such as  in the article (see   for more details). See also  .
Detailed population data from the U.S. Census Bureau exists for all townships. See the information .  Where it says "United States" pull down to "County subdivision" and select Ohio.  A list of counties will come up; choose one and the townships will be identified.
Another source is provided by the Ohio State University, .  Click on a county on the map and data can be obtained, including the population figures in each city and township.  Clicking on the line "Subcounty data" under demographics, allows one to obtain an array of data on each township.
If they can be obtained, previous Census data should be listed.  If there is data for the township and municipalities within it, create a table to list the data, otherwise it should be displayed in a bulleted list.  See Marion Township, Clinton County, Ohio for an example of a table and Liberty Township, Butler County, Ohio for an example of a list.
The date the township was created should be noted along with who established it.  In nearly all cases it will be the county commissioners.  If the township was one of the original ones of the county, this should be noted.  The original and subsequent boundaries should be noted.  St. Clair Township, Butler County, Ohio's article contains these paragraphs:
The townships that border the subject should be noted, starting in the south and proceeding clockwise.  Again, quoting St. Clair Township:
Virtually all of Ohio's townships are governed on the basic plan descibed in this paragraph, which should be copied and added to all articles:
Townships have recently gained the option to expand to five trustees but few if any have done so.  In 2002, Deerfield Township, Warren County, Ohio's voters rejected this idea.  Some townships have adopted "home rule" status.  If this is the case this should be noted and  .  Special features of a township's government, e.g. having a full-time administrator to run its affairs, operating police and fire departments, and handling its own zoning (many let the county do this), should also be noted.
Listing the current officers of a township should be done with a sentence that begins ''"As of 2008, the officers were  . . . "'' per  .
Details on the township's history should be noted.  Famous people who have resided there can also be noted.
Details on what post offices and telephone exchanges serve the township should be noted, e.g. Harlan Township, Warren County, Ohio.  Try to be specific, such as saying most of the township is in a certain exchange but the southwest corner of the township is in another exchange.  Major roads should be noted, e.g. interstates, U.S. and state highways.  If an interstate highway passes through, any exits or the lack thereof should be listed.  Airports and navigable waterways should be noted too.  See the PUCO's page  for detailed maps of the service territories of electric, gas, water, and telephone companies.
The school districts that cover the township should be noted.  Be specific, as with the post offices and telephone exchanges.
See the excellent maps of school districts on the PUCO's site,  which are PDF files and very detailed.  (However, some are outdated, e.g. the Butler and Warren maps do not include the recently created Monroe Local School District.)
Another way to learn what districts cover each township is to consult the "rates of taxation" each County Treasurer is required by law to issue.  For example,  are the Warren County rates for 2004.  Under the first township, Clearcreek, we see that parts of it are in the Springboro Community City, Lebanon City, Franklin City, and Wayne Local School Districts.
A list of all districts in a county should be posted on the county article.
Try for print sources.  Many counties in the 19th century had comprehensive county histories printed, e.g. Josiah Morrow's 1883 history for Warren County.  Many county historical or genealogical societies have reprinted these volumes or compiled more recent collections, e.g. Clinton County.  Some of these, e.g. the Warren County history, have been transcribed and posted on-line.  Citations to atlases and maps are also appropriate, e.g. Vernon Township, Clinton County, Ohio and Milford Township, Butler County, Ohio.  Under the References header,  should be included to list  .
As most townships will are sparsely populated, few have web-sites.  Those that do should be listed.  All articles should link to the county homepage and other sites relevant to the township in general. See   for guidelines on what is and isn't acceptable.
All townships should include '''''' before the first category and after the last external link, with one line padding. See:Bath Township, Allen County, Ohio for an example
Every township should be listed in ''' ''' and ''' ''' (if available). Defunct townships should be categorized under ''' ''' and disambiguous pages should be under ''' '''.