Why I keep on getting more and more foolish messages like proposals to get quick money (100000 $) ! etc. from a bank etc. who account holder is dead or other bullshit like that. Who is behind all this and what they gain by wasting people's time ?  &nbsp;  01:11, 3 September 2010 (UTC)
I find I receive junk e-mails with nonsensical contents and subject lines, with an attached image. I've never opened one of the images, but I wonder what this is about. --  ( ) 19:32, 4 September 2010 (UTC)
One time I was in a mood to click a link that promised free iPhone. iPhone was indeed free, but to qualify for it web site required to sign up for number of "promotions", like half a dozen out of forty available, and each of them was non free, requiring products purchase or payments for services. Since I obviously did not trusted the site, I haven't purchase anything, but I clicked couple links that I found interesting (one was Disneyland something, important for later developments). And at the beginning I filled the form with my real address in it(but phone number thanx god was fake, duh! should have gave them local police station number!). Next thing a couple months or so later I received backpack full of toys, addressed - opps had to go, finish later.   ( ) 00:06, 5 September 2010 (UTC)
Is there a way to simulate data corruption on a file? Like a special program that can corrupt a file to varying levels so you can test how much the data is retrievable?   ( ) 09:47, 3 September 2010 (UTC)
Thanks!   ( ) 18:35, 3 September 2010 (UTC)
I've read the Parchive article but I don't understand how it works. It makes indexes of file hashes which can be used to repair files? How exactly is that done? What level of damage can the file be before the Parchive can't fix it?   ( ) 09:56, 3 September 2010 (UTC)
Is there anything that can easily turn a webpage into a PDF? I have seen the the Firefox add-on 'PDF Download' but it is tagged as Adware, does the conversion online, and has had bad recent reviews. Thanks   ( ) 10:17, 3 September 2010 (UTC)
I want to write a greasemonkey script that will popup an alert box at a certain time, say 6pm. Sort of like an alarm clock. In javascript, is there a way to make a function execute at a set time?   ( ) 11:08, 3 September 2010 (UTC)
I am thinking about purchasing a cell phone and contract that will allow me about 800 anytime minutes free on weekends and evenings.  (perhaps a variation, free incoming)
I also want to be able to retrieve email and brouse Web.
I can get such a plan for about 60.00 a month.
I would then like to cancel my home internet and home phone.
I only want to do this if I can plug in the new phone to my lap top and be able to read my email on the lap top and to hopefully write emails on the lap top that will be sent back through my cell phone.   
DOES ANYONE KNOW IF THIS IS POSSIBLE.  ANY ADVICE IS APPRECIATED. I AM GOING OUT TO DO SOME HANDS ON TESTING BUT HAVE NO IDEA WHAT WOULD BE THE BEST PLAN OR PHONE.  I DO SEEM TO FAVOUR THE SLIDE KEY BOARD FOR TYPING TEXTS.  A bigger phone screen would also be helpful for reading texts etc.     Preceding   comment added by   ( ) 17:06, 3 September 2010 (UTC) 
I'm trying to write a math thing in Java where there is a fraction class, a radical class, a polynomial class, and so on. When defining multiplication for fractions, I would multiply the numerator and the denominator, but there could be many things in the numerator, like an polynomial or a radical or something. First, how would i declare the class of the numerator, and second, could i write something saying "call the multiply method of whichever class this belongs to"?   ( ) 21:44, 3 September 2010 (UTC)
Okay, it's working now. Thank you so much!   ( ) 01:09, 4 September 2010 (UTC)
Where can I find the terminal window of Safari 5.0.1? I want to do some tweaking.Thanks--  ( ) 23:22, 3 September 2010 (UTC)