Born in Long Island to Allen and Rita Redlich, his family moved to Wisconsin and then to Albany while Redlich was a child. He grew up in the town of Guilderland, New York. Redlich graduated from Rice University with a B.A. in Mathematical Economics in 1988. He received a Masters from Stanford University in Political Science in 1992, and a J.D. from Albany Law School in 1994.
He spent a year in Hiroshima, Japan teaching English Conversation, and then returned and began his career as a lawyer.
After brief stints as a solo practitioner and working for the New York State Nurses Association, Redlich spent 3 years as a trial lawyer with the Allstate Insurance Company. He then served for three years as Principal Law Clerk to the Hon. Robert P. Best, Justice of the Supreme Court in Fulton County, New York. In 2003, Redlich opened his own law firm. His law firm specializes in criminal defense and personal injury.
Redlich was a registered Democrat before joining the Republican Party circa 2001. He has had a long and favorable relationship with the Libertarian Party and is one of only two Libertarians in New York to hold an elected office (Dan Halloran, a member of the New York City Council, is the other). In the past, he has run with support from the Liberal Party of New York; he has also sought support of the Green Party of New York and Working Families Party. Later, during his gubernatorial campaign, he would coordinate some of his events with Green Party candidate Howie Hawkins. He has served on the Guilderland town board since 2007 as a Republican.
Redlich ran as the Republicans' nominee against the now-retired Michael McNulty for the seat representing New York's 21st congressional district. He lost both elections, the latter by a 78-22 margin. Redlich, during his congressional runs, did not have the support of the Conservative Party of New York State as most Republicans traditionally do; instead, the Conservative Party endorsed McNulty in both races.
Redlich announced in February 2010 to pursue the Republican and Libertarian Party nominations for Governor of New York. Redlich defeated Sam Sloan for the Libertarian nomination, 27-17, at the party convention; Alden Link will be Redlich's running mate. Eric Sundwall, a former leader of the New York Libertarian Party and a short-lived candidate in the New York's 20th congressional district election, 2009, is Redlich's campaign manager. He attended the New York Republican Convention, but was not nominated, received no votes, and failed to muster any support for a petition drive. He went on to endorse Rick Lazio in the Republican primary, calling it an "easy choice."
Redlich has been accused of cybersquatting. He purchases domain names related to his political opponents and others and posts websites about them such as http://www.christineodonnell08.com/, primarily as a means of revenue (the O'Donnell site nets him approximately US$85 per day in advertising revenue from Google AdSense). He has heavily advertised on the Internet during his gubernatorial campaign.
Redlich posted a blog post in April 2008 criticizing what he saw was an overblown reaction to Miley Cyrus's appearance in ''Vanity Fair'', suggesting that sexual objectification of females under the age of 18 has historically been accepted. In October 2010, Roger Stone, the campaign manager for Kristin M. Davis, encouraged an outside group to circulate flyers labeling Redlich a "public danger," citing that post as a source, and encouraging people to "call the police" if they encountered him. The flyer received a rebuke in the form of an open letter from Redlich's wife.
Redlich's most prominent political position is expressed in his motto, "stop wasting money." He proposes placing a salary cap on all state workers limiting them to a salary of $100,000 or less, with those making over $100,000 having their salary cut at the first opportunity, while still protecting existing union contracts. He supports same-sex marriage, prosecution of corrupt public officials, ending corporate welfare, the elimination of some state agencies, and referendum approval of pay increases for legislators. He opposes a constitutional convention, calling it a distraction. He proposes limiting local governments to five sources of revenue. He supports the construction of the proposed mosque near the World Trade Center site. He supports reforming driving under the influence laws and supports ending the War on Drugs.
After the election, Redlich announced he was relocating to Palm Beach County, Florida, primarily citing poor weather in upstate New York, but also indicating the Stone incident played a role in his decision to withdraw from politics.