The Real Goods Solar Installation division provides integrated PV systems to residential and commercial customers in California and Colorado. It has California offices in Hopland, Ukiah, Santa Rosa, San Rafael, Campbell, Santa Cruz, Fresno and Murrieta as well as an office in Boulder, Colorado.
Through its catalog, website, and store in Hopland, Real Goods' retail division sells a range of earth-friendly goods including renewable energy-generating equipment and lifestyle goods for homes and gardens.
In 1977, 29 year-old John Schaeffer lived on an off-grid commune in Mendocino County, California, and commuted  to work each day as a computer operator. Since he drove into town, he became the designated person to pick up supplies for the commune. Frugal by nature, Schaeffer found himself driving all over Mendocino County to buy needed tools and equipment at the best prices. After an especially frustrating shopping trip, Schaeffer thought how great it would be if there was one    general    store that sold all the    real goods    for off-grid living at fair prices.. Real Goods Solar. . Retrieved 2010-09-14. Within a year, Real Goods was born. In 1978, Schaeffer took $3,000 in savings and a $5,000 loan from his father and opened the first Real Goods store in Willits, California.
Back on the commune, Schaeffer was tired of squinting to read to his children by kerosene lamp at night and missing ''Saturday Night Live'' on television. Looking for alternatives, he figured out how to run a light fixture and a television from his car battery. This branded him a rebel in the    neo-Luddite    commune until more and more people joined him to watch weekly broadcasts of ''Saturday Night Live''.
One day, a man from Los Angeles arrived at the Real Goods store in Willits, California with a Porsche full of solar panels. First developed at Bell Laboratories in the 1950s and used in the 1960s in the NASA space program, solar panels had yet to find commercial applications. On a whim John bought 100 of these novel 9-Watt panels for $600 apiece. He quickly sold them for $900 each to the many off-grid hippies and marijuana growers in Mendocino County who wanted to enjoy light fixtures, TV and a few of mainstream civilization   s other creature comforts without doing business with utilities. These sales made Real Goods the first company to sell a solar panel commercially in the United States.Morris, Stephen (Spring/Summer 2008).    30 Years of Solar: How Real Goods and the Solar Industry Have Grown Together Over Three Decades   . ''Real Goods Spring/Summer 2008 Resource Guide''. Real Goods' store also sold other alternative energy products, gardening supplies, chicken wire and wood stoves, clothing and books. The success of the Willits store prompted Schaeffer to open an additional store in Ukiah, California, in 1980 and a third store in Santa Rosa, California in 1982. That same year, Real Goods published the first edition of ''The Solar Living Source Book'', which was written as a comprehensive source for sustainable living principles and practices. By 1985, Real Goods' annual sales were $3 million.
Growth was erratic, and by 1985 all three retail stores had closed, leaving only the mail order business. In 1985, Schaeffer sold his share of Real Goods to his partner and moved to Bali, Indonesia, to retire, but returned to California six months later when the company went bankrupt. He invested his last $3,000 in a 16-page catalog and started a mail order business out of his garage, sending catalogs to the 2,000-name mailing list the company had accumulated. Customers returned and the company was revived.
During the 1990s, Real Goods expanded its business by presenting a clear message about the benefits of solar energy. In 1990, the entire solar industry received a boost from the 20th anniversary of Earth Day and the Persian Gulf War, and Real Goods took advantage of it. That year, the company also set its Billion Pound Goal to keep one billion pounds of carbon dioxide out of the atmosphere by 2000, which it completed three years early in 1997.
In 1991, Real Goods held its first direct public stock offering, selling stock directly to its customers, and raised $1 million. The following year Real Goods declared a National Off-The-Grid Day, which soon became the National Tour of Solar Homes, during which the public could see solar-powered living firsthand. Real Goods held its second stock offering in 1993, and in 1994, used those funds to break ground on the Solar Living Center (SLC) in Hopland, California, a place for people to study and experience the principles and practices of sustainable living in action. The same year, Real Goods launched its e-commerce business. In 1995, the SLC hosted the first annual Solfest, a renewable energy and sustainable living festival that features speakers, artists and musicians as well as hands-on workshops and exhibits. The following year brought the official opening of the SLC, and, in 1998, Schaeffer formed the Solar Living Institute (SLI), a nonprofit organization whose mission is to promote sustainable living through inspirational environmental education. The SLI offers classes and workshops and manages the  SLC.
During the 1990s Real Goods received several accolades and awards. The company made ''Inc.'' magazine   s Top 500 Fastest Growing Companies list and John Schaeffer was the Small Business Administration   s    Small Business Person of the Year    in 1994. The company received three Rodale Awards, as well as news coverage in ''The Wall Street Journal'', ''Fortune'', ''Time'' and numerous other publications.
Real Goods grew significantly in the first decade of the 21st century. By this time, the company had five brick and mortar stores located in Hopland, Santa Rosa, Los Gatos, Berkeley and West Los Angeles, California. The company   s catalog and e-commerce businesses grew as well, and Real Goods increased its annual revenues to $19 million.
In 2001, Real Goods merged with the sustainable lifestyle company Gaiam Inc. () in a stock swap worth $8.7 million. Per the merger agreement, Real Goods shareholders received one share of Class A GAIA common stock for each 10 shares of Real Goods stock owned. Gaiam consolidated order processing and distribution in Cincinnati and accounting responsibilities in Broomfield, Colorado, and implemented a new supply chain management information system.
With the influx of additional capital and the power of Gaiam behind it, Real Goods looked for a promising growth opportunity and found it in the residential solar installation market. Since Real Goods was now headquartered in Colorado yet maintained the SLC, SLI and offices in California, and since the federal government and both states offered attractive tax incentives for installing solar systems, Real Goods opened its residential solar system installation division in both states in 2002. The commercial solar business was also growing, and Real Goods launched its commercial solar installation division in 2004.
For his work in the renewable energy field, John Schaeffer received the 2007 Green Power Pioneer Award. In 2008, Real Goods positioned itself for aggressive growth by separating its mail order division from Gaiam, re-launching the Real Goods website as a stand-alone e-commerce channel, expanding its solar division and going public. On May 8, 2008, Real Goods completed an initial public offering as Real Goods Solar and raised $55 million. Real Goods Solar began trading on the NASDAQ under the symbol RSOL. Through holding 100 percent of Real Goods    Class B shares, Gaiam maintained control of Real Goods.
Between 2007 and 2008 Real Goods acquired four solar installation companies in California and became one of the nation   s largest solar installers. In November 2007, Real Goods Solar acquired San Rafael, California-based Marin Solar for $3.2 million in cash and stock. In a similar deal inked in January 2008, RSOL purchased Carlson Solar, headquartered in Hemet, California for $3.2 million in cash and stock. In August 2008, Real Goods Solar completed its third acquisition     Santa Cruz, California-based Independent Energy Systems for $3.6 million. In October 2008, RSOL completed its fourth acquisition in less than a year by acquiring Regrid Power of Campbell, California in a deal valued at $3.8 million in cash and stock. During the first decade of the 21st century, both the commercial and residential sides of the solar installation business were growing at about 30 percent per year. With the acquisition of Marin Solar, Real Goods added the commercial experience and expertise necessary to position itself as a major competitor in the commercial solar installation market.
Real Goods    vision is to lower humankind   s ecological footprint on Earth, thereby contributing to a healthier future for people and the planet. The company   s mission is to realize its vision through providing the best in earth-friendly products, sustainable living education and leading-edge renewable energy solutions.
Today, Real Goods Solar maintains offices in Denver, Colorado, as well as Hopland, Ukiah, Santa Rosa, San Rafael, Campbell, Santa Cruz, Fresno and Murrieta, California. By 2010, RSOL had installed its 6,000th residential solar system, enabled more than 100,000 homes to go off-grid worldwide, and installed more than 10 megawatts of solar power on commercial projects ranging from high schools and office buildings to wineries
Real Goods' retail division has headquarters in Boulder, Colorado, and a distribution center in West Chester, Ohio. Through its catalog and e-commerce distribution channels, Real Goods offers a range of items for on- and off-grid living, including gardening, pond and composting supplies, camping gear, organic bedding, non-toxic cleaning and laundry solutions, air and water purifiers, appliances and renewable energy systems for solar, wind, hydro and solar hot water.
In 1996 Real Goods opened its flagship retail store in Hopland, California, the company's fifth retail location. In the early 2000s, Real Goods refocused on its national mail order and local solar installation businesses and closed all of its physical stores except for the Hopland store. Housed in a strawbale building utilizing passive solar design principles, the store is lighted and heated by an onsite solar system and by south-facing windows that capture the sun   s heat.
Real Goods published its first edition of ''The Solar Living Source Book'' in 1982. It was written as a one-stop information source for renewable energy and sustainable living. Now in its 30th anniversary (13th) edition, and printed using soy inks on 100 percent post-consumer content recycled paper, the Solar Living Source Book is a comprehensive reference for the layperson on renewable energy technologies and sustainable living. There are more than 600,000 copies in print in 44 English-speaking countries.
In 1998, John Schaeffer founded a 501(c)(3) nonprofit education institute called the Solar Living Institute (SLI) with the mission of promoting sustainable living through inspirational environmental education. The result is an organization that functions both as a renewable energy and green living experiential classroom and as an example of successful sustainable development. Throughout each year the SLI hosts between 50 and 75 hands-on workshops on everything from photovoltaic system design and installation and strawbale home construction to beekeeping, green career seminars and its Earth Day for Kids programs that introduces inner-city kids to renewable energy and environmental responsibility. The SLI also runs a year-round internship program that offers interns in-depth, hands-on training in renewable energy systems, sustainable building, community gardening and more. In 2009, the SLI began teaching classes online and in 2010, the nonprofit launched an online solar-energy training program. The SLI had taught more than 1,000 workshops to nearly 10,000 students.
 In 2000, Real Goods installed a commercial solar system at the SLC that produces 160,000&nbsp;kW-hours of electricity annually     one of the largest solar installations in northern California. Opened in 1996, the SLC serves as a    place in the sun    for everyone interested in sustainable living from customers to shareholders to see the products and practices of this lifestyle in action. Approximately 200,000 people visit the SLC each year. The SLC also hosts the annual Solfest celebration, a two-day renewable energy and sustainable living fair and fundraiser for the SLI that includes workshops, demonstrations, educational panels, keynote speakers, music, artists, wine tasting and dancing.
In 1990, based on concerns about global warming, Real Goods set a goal to keep one billion pounds of carbon dioxide (CO2) out of the atmosphere within 10 years through customer purchases of products that reduce CO2 production. Calculations of CO2 reduction on a product-by-product basis were based on a formula developed by the Union of Concerned Scientists. In addition, Real Goods changed its energy usage, shipping and other corporate practices to become more environmentally friendly. The company tracked its progress through regular updates in the Real Goods catalog. In 1997, that goal was achieved three years ahead of schedule. In 2005, Real Goods and Gaiam set another goal to eliminate one billion pounds of CO2 from the atmosphere by 2010. In 2008, that goal was achieved two years early.
In 2007, Real Goods increased the post-consumer recycled paper content for its catalogs from 20 percent to 30 percent. This earned the company Forest Stewardship Council certification. From 2008 to 2010 Real Goods lowered its paper and printing impact another 75 percent by reducing paper weight, catalog trim size and reducing the number of catalogs mailed by driving more business to the internet. Real Goods customers are asked to reduce the number of catalogs they request, and catalogs are mailed based on past purchase activity. Customers are also encouraged to shop at Real Goods    website as exemplified by the    Don   t Buy From This Catalog    campaign the company ran in its Spring/Summer 2010   Don   t Buy From This Catalog!    (Spring/Summer 2010). ''Real Goods Spring/Summer 2010 Resource Guide''. Retrieved 2010-09-15. and Fall/Holiday 2010 catalogs.
In 2006, Real Goods and Gaiam partnered with The Conservation Fund to introduce the world   s first carbon-neutral product shipping program called Go Zero. Gaiam Real Goods made a contribution that allowed Go Zero to plant nearly 1,500 trees, which offset the company   s operations at its headquarters and fulfillment center for that year. Shortly after, Real Goods began an ongoing program where customers can add $2 to their order to have a tree planted and thereby zero out the carbon impact of shipping the order. Real Goods also reuses shipping containers and purchases 100 percent recyclable and biodegradable packaging made from 100 percent post-consumer waste printed with soy inks.
In 2008, Real Goods     with Gaiam as its majority shareholder     moved into new corporate offices and went solar with a 100&nbsp;kW solar system, installed by Real Goods, that provides approximately 20 percent of the company   s energy requirements. In addition, the new headquarters feature low-VOC paints, bamboo flooring and cabinetry, earth-friendly carpet and glue, and recycled office cubicles. In 2008, Real Goods also added composting collection to its comprehensive office recycling program, and some company parties are now zero-waste events.