Infobox Television episode
In the episode, after Claire (Julie Bowen) finds flirty texts from a boy on Alex's phone, Claire tells Haley (Sarah Hyland) to give her advice, in which she tells Alex (Ariel Winter) to kiss the boy, which makes her go up to the boy, and asks' him in front of his friends, embarrassing him, also Mitchell (Jesse Tyler Ferguson) is having trouble kissing Cam (Eric Stonestreet) in public. 
At the Dunphy's house, Claire (Julie Bowen) after "accidentally" reading Alex's text messages asks Haley (Sarah Hyland) to talk to Alex (Ariel Winter) about the flirty text messages on her phone while Phil (Ty Burrell) helps Jay with his printer. Haley gives bad advice to Alex saying if she doesn't kiss the boy he'll think she's a lesbian. Alex runs to Jeremy's house to tell him about her feelings and asks him to kiss her before realizing Jeremy's friends are behind the door. She proceeds to run home and learns that is was Claire's idea for Haley to talk to Alex making her furious.
Meanwhile, Gloria (Sofia Vergara) starts cooking traditional Colombian meals in honor of her grandmother causing jokes from Jay (Ed O'Neill). After realizing what he's done Jay decides to help Gloria cook. Not known to Jay, Gloria uses tricks to get revenge on Jay. While shopping for a new shirt and being rejected a kiss Cameron (Eric Stonestreet) confronts Mitchell (Jesse Tyler Ferguson) about his problem with Public Displays of Affection. Mitchell responds about Cameron's neediness. 
Soon the whole family come together to honor Gloria's grandmother. Soon the party turns south when Mitchell denies a kiss from Cameron. The family then realizes it's due to Jay being emotionally closed off that Mitchell can't kiss Cameron in public. Phil then runs down the stairs after printing a picture of Gloria's grandmother for Jay. Jay's response creates more evidence why Mitchell won't show PDA. In order to shut them up, Jay kisses Mitchell then Claire with Mitchell and Cameron kissing in the background. After the party Claire finally tells Alex the truth about her past. Alex is still initially angry, but then becomes happy again when she and Jeremy decide to wait before kissing. The episode then ends with a epilogue by Gloria.
The episode deals with some criticism from some quarters for the first season's portrayal of Cameron and Mitchell as not being physically affectionate with each other. The criticism spawned a Facebook campaign to demand Mitchell and Cameron be allowed to kiss. It was also criticized by Ryan Murphy, creator of ''Glee'' who called it "ridiculous". In response to the controversy, producers released a statement that a season two episode would address Mitchell's discomfort with public displays of affection. Executive producer and co-creator Steven Levitan has said that it was "unfortunate" that the issue had arisen, since the show's writers had always planned on such a scene "as part of the natural development of the show."
 This means that it was seen by 4.6% of all 18   49 years olds, and 13% of all 18   49 year olds watching television at the time of the broadcast. This marked a twelve percent decline in the ratings from the season premiere, "The Old Wagon". Despite this, the episode became the highest rated show on Wednesday and the third highest rated episode of the series so far. "The Kiss" was the most-watched scripted show for the week of broadcast among adults aged 18   49, and the twenty fourth most-watched show among all viewers.
James Poniewozik of ''Time'' liked the main plot and its subtle nature, but wished "the rest of the episode around it had been stronger". Alan Sepinwall of HitFix praised the fact that the kiss was in the background comparing it to better than the "ghoulish" episode of ''Cougar Town''. Tom Maursad of ''The Dallas Morning News'' stated in his review "the episode was full of really funny moments". Matt Roush gave the episode a positive and praised Cameron's pratfall calling it "perfect slapstick".