The '''Pedro Rossello Convention Center''' is the largest convention center in the Caribbean, located in San Juan, Puerto Rico.  It is the centerpiece of the San Juan Convention District, which now includes a large 500-room convention center hotel, operated by the Sheraton chain, and water fountains and other related infrastructure.
The Convention Center includes a  Exhibition Hall that can seat up to 16,965 persons and a  ballroom that can accommodate up to 4,158 persons.  All in all, approximately 25,000 persons can be accommodated within the center simultaneously and can handle conventions of organizations as large as 10,000 participants.
The Center is operated by the Puerto Rico Convention Center District Authority, which also operates the Jose Miguel Agrelot Coliseum, also known as the "Choliseo", and the Government Reception Center in Old San Juan, as well as the 113-acre district on which the Convention Center and the atttached Sheraton hotel are located.  Its current executive director is Jaime Lopez.
The convention center is named after former Governor Pedro Rossello, who proposed and initiated the design, finance and construction of the structure.
1994 - Governor Rossello and Puerto Rico Tourism Company Executive Director Luis Fortuno announce the development of the Golden Triangle Project to be located in the Miramar section of Santurce, the old Isla Grande naval station and the Puerta de Tierra section of San Juan.
1996 - Design of new Convention Center commences
1997 - Three-year long relocation and razing of state government facilities at old Isla Grande naval station begins
2000 - Groundbreaking ceremony hel and construction begins
2001 - Puerto Rico Convention Center District Authority begins operations
2005 - Gov. Anibal Acevedo Vila inaugurates Convention Center 
2009 - Convention Center achieves 1.5 Million Visitors in 1,500 Events 
2009 - Sheraton's anchor Hotel at the Convention District initiates operations 
2010 - Gov. Luis Fortuno signs law naming center after his predecessor, Gov. Rossello