When Kashmir was sold to Gulab Singh the descedants of  Raja Jambu Lochan moved towards Azad Kashmir Pothar Khyber Pakhtwonkhaw and other areas it is said that they were in fact four brothers who moved from Kashmir to these areas (today those areas are Rawalpindi, Jehlum, Azad Kashmir and some parts of Khyber Pakhtwonkhaw ). Some of the sons of these four brothers also moved to the modern day places Gujar Khan and Khauta.
This is a strong tradition that exists amongst the most distinguished of Rajputs of all faiths, the recording of family names and continuance of the family tree. Muslim Rajputs of prominence hold and continue to record their genealogical trees since their Hindu past even after their conversion to Islam, to the present day.Claimants of Rajput heritage will more than likely not have ancestral records of family lineage.Like other Rajputs The People Pakhral Tribe also give a great importance to their Family Tree.
Pakhral People are always Know for their Bravery and They have Been Contributing to British and Pakistan Army for a Long Time.
Raja Fazaldad Khan Represented Biritish Army in Both World War 1 and World War 2.Raja Muhammad Akbar won Medal of Courage in Both 1965 and 1971 Indo-Pak war.Raja Muhammad Zaman,Raja Khuadad Khan,Raja Mehdhi Khan,Raja Mehar Khan and Numerous others have Been Representing Pakistan Army and Have won Medals for Their Family and have made the Clan Proud.
Pakhral People have always been activley Participating in the Politics of Pakistan.Raja Pervez Ashraf is a Serving Member National Assembly from Pakistan Peoples Party and has served as Minister for water and Power.Farzana Raja is also a Member National Assembly from Pakistan Peoples Party and Chair Person Benazir Income Support Program.
Raja Muhammad Abbas is an EX-Candidate for Provincial Assembly Punjab from Pakistan Peoples Party and His Brother Raja Gulfraz Ahmed is The Divisional President Rawalpindi of Benazir Force Pakistan(Affilated with Pakistan Peoples Party).
A famous village of the Pakhral clan is  Shohwa (known in area as Karkan Shohwa) near Rawalpindi. Pakhrals are also settled in Suiyan Sharif Sehnsa Kotli (Azad) Kashmir,.Dhoong is the heart of Pakhral Rajput. This is the home town of Raja Obaid Fiaz s/o Raja Faiz Ahmad.
There are number of villages in Tehsil Gujar Khan and Dist Rawalpindi nad some of them are known as Sahang,sagri( Sagar Khan a famous person belongs to Pakhral minhas rajput family),Karal Pakhral,sihala, Paag,Pakhral Rajgan, Moori rajgan etc.pakhral rajputs are also living with honour in the distt chakwal particularly in the chakwal Khokhar Rajgan Saba Mohra Jandala Pakhral are famous villages of Pakhral Rajputes Sub.Maj Raja Abdul Ghani (LATE) POW second world war of Khokhar Rajgan ,Khan Bahadur Capt.Raja Mehr Khan,Capt. Raja Abdul Hamid Khan,Raja Nazir Ahmed Khan BA Alig  of Saba Mohra, Raja Fazal Hussain of Jandala Pakhral are some personalities of Teh Chakwal