In October 2010 a new Y82 service was introduced. Service y81 operates every 30 minutes in an anti-clockwise direction with service y82 introduced to travel in a clockwise direction. Around the Bulwell Loop (Snape Wood/Hempshill Vale). When combined, these two services provide a 15 minute frequency to Bulwell, Hyson Green and then the City Centre.
Some morning and evening journeys will be numbered y81A and y82A to serve Blenheim Industrial Estate this provides a new link with Hyson Green to these industrial areas. It was announced on 3rd December 2010 through the Notices and Proceedings that services Y81/A and Y82/A will be axed from January. 
It was announced on the 1st December through the Route One Magazine that Dunn Motor Traction t/a yourbus will acquire the National Express operations which were operated by Veolia Transport. Ironically these were the operations that were once operated by Dunn Line. The coaches are expected to be housed at the Heanor Gate premises.
Also it has added more commercial and tendered services to its operations, most notably the Y36 which provides a direct on the road competitor to Nottingham City Transport's service 36. The Y36 was started as a limited daytime only service, but was expanded in May 2010 with the addition of a Sunday service. The Y36 continues to thrive and in October 2010 an Optare Tempo demonstrator was borrowed to evaluate its suitability on the route.
In September 2010 a number of school contracts (which came with the newly won 228/229 service) were started by the company. These are tendered by Nottinghamshire County Council.
Its Managing Director is Scott Dunn, part of the Dunn family who previously managed Dunn-Line prior to the sale to Veolia, who currently run various aspects of Rotala and Yourbus. Day to day Operations are overseen and Headed by Stephen Bryce who previously worked at Dunn-Line and Diamond Bus under Scott Dunn. Scott Dunn's father, Bob Dunn is also involved in the operations. Scott Dunn regularly visits the company and also assists with several engineering and operational aspects of yourbus.
The company, like other Dunn family operated companies, houses pages on Facebook and Twitter and has found these to be a successful marketing tool, especially advantageous in extreme weather and other difficult conditions, such as December 2010 when heavy snow caused chaos in and around the Matlock area of Derbyshire and Hucknall area of Nottinghamshire.
Some journies or part of journies are supported by Derbyshire County Council
Y36,Y100, 228 and 229 operate beyond city boundary, but are treated by Yourbus as city services.
Most of above services tendered to Nottinghamshire County Council
The company have a varied fleet, from ex-Probus Management and Diamond Bus Dennis Darts to ex-Arriva Derby Volvo Olympians.
The fleet also, until July 2010, consisted of Wright-bodied Scanias which spent a loan period at Diamond Bus prior to arriving at Yourbus. These were originally branded for the 36 (Nottingham City) but was soon quickly debranded. In July, these buses were sold to Ensignbus of Purfleet for sale.
5 Volvo B10B Wright Endurances were operated by the company, but these have now all been withdrawn or moved on to Ensign bus. 
As previously mentioned, an Optare Tempo was used as a demonstrator in October 2010.
The company is notable for using various types of Dennis Darts with various liveries of West Midlands-based company Diamond Bus, these quite commonly being Red Diamond-liveried Wright Crusader-bodied Darts displaced from their Droitwich Spa depot. Also, Royale Black Diamond liveried 828, a Plaxton Centro, has made a appearance with Yourbus.
Although it shares the same Rotala Managing Director with Diamond Bus, it is not part of Rotala even though it shares some aspects of the main fleet numbering system, running board system and uses buses on hire from the two companies, it is in fact a separate entity.