The '''2011 International V8 Supercar Championship''' is an FIA sanctioned international motor racing series for V8 Supercars. It is the thirteenth V8 Supercar Championship Series and the fifteenth series in which V8 Supercars have contested the premier Australian touring car title. It is the first since the series was elevated to 'International Championship' status by the FIA. The championship began on 10 February in the Middle East at Abu Dhabi's Yas Marina Circuit and will finish on 5 December at the Homebush Street Circuit. If all the provisional events are confirmed it will be contested over 28 races at 15 events. These events will be held in all states of Australia and in the Northern Territory as well as in the United Arab Emirates, and New Zealand. The 52nd Australian Touring Car Championship title will be awarded to the winner of the series by the Confederation of Australian Motor Sport.
With the first five events of the season complete, 2008   09 champion, Triple Eight Race Engineering Holden driver Jamie Whincup holds a commanding 262 point lead in the championship over his team mate Craig Lowndes. Holden Racing Team driver Garth Tander is a further 37 points behind.
Jamie Whincup won the opening race of the championship at the Yas V8 400, at the time it was his twelfth consecutive victory in races held outside of Australia, taking in wins in New Zealand, Abu Dhabi and Bahrain going back to the 2008 Gulf Air Desert 400. Whincup won by 14 seconds over the close pair of Alex Davison and Mark Winterbottom who in turn lead another pair of Fords in Shane Van Gisbergen and Tim Slade. The second race was considerably more chaotic with a multi-car pile up in the opening laps ruling out amongst others Holden Racing Team's Garth Tander. Tander's new team-mate 2010 champion James Courtney, provided HRT with an opposing result, winning a late race battle with Jason Bright to take the second race win and to gain some points back after receiving the 50 point penalty the day before. Whincup was third ahead of David Reynolds completing an impressive return to the series after sitting out 2010.
Garth Tander won a shortened first race of the Clipsal 500. The race hinged on two safety car periods late in the race caused by incidents involving Russell Ingall and James Moffat. Tander lead Triple Eight Race Engineering team-mates Jamie Whincup and Craig Lowndes across the line at the head of a bunched queue. Jason Bright and Fabian Coulthard saw Holden fill the top five places ahead of Mark Winterbottom. The biggest of the incidents in the race saw Steve Owen crash at turn 8 with sufficient force that car would not be repaired in time for the non-championship Albert Park 400 a week later. Whincup became the first repeat winner for the year by winning the Sunday race by 1.3 seconds over Rick Kelly. The second place for Kelly was the best result since the formation of Kelly Racing in 2009. Ford Performance Racing and Holden Racing Team filled the next few positions with Mark Winterbottom taking third over James Courtney, Garth Tander, Paul Dumbrell and Will Davison. Whincup had diced entertainingly with Will Davison early in the wet conditions, while Turn 8 claimed more cars with Lee Holdsworth and Warren Luff both crashing out, while Bright crashed heavily at the Senna Chicane.
The following events make up the 2011 series. The round at Barbagallo Raceway was reinstated with the Western Australian Government providing $5 million to redevelop the circuit. The Desert 400 was scrapped with V8 Supercars stating that the decision not to hold the event was because the circuit's international racing calendar was too full for an early season date.
The following teams and drivers have been confirmed for the 2011 series.
Trading Post became the naming rights sponsor of the #6 FPR Ford Falcon which will be driven by former Holden Racing Team driver Will Davison.
Tekno Autosports and driver Jonathon Webb ended their association with Dick Johnson Racing to run the team separately with support from Triple Eight Race Engineering.
Walkinshaw Racing downsized to a single-car team, with the #10 Racing Entitlement Contract initially placed for sale, but was subsequently purchased by organising body V8 Supercar Australia to achieve their long-held ambition to reduce the grid to twenty-eight cars.
2010 Walkinshaw Performance endurance co-driver David Reynolds joined Kelly Racing in the #16 Commodore, replacing Tony Ricciardello. Greg Murphy also joined Kelly Racing, replacing the outgoing Jason Bargwanna.
After a long-running dispute over the ownership of Dick Johnson Racing, co-owner Charlie Schwerkolt sold his stake in the team and left with the #18 Racing Entitlement Contract, but has leased it back to Dick Johnson Racing for the purposes of running two cars in 2011. James Moffat was later announced as the driver for Car #18.
After previously confirming his departure from the team he won the championship with, James Courtney joined the Holden Racing Team in the place of Will Davison.
Reigning Fujitsu V8 Supercar Series champion Steve Owen was confirmed as the outgoing Greg Murphy's replacement at Paul Morris Motorsport.
Brad Jones Racing was the last team to confirm its driver line-up, with Jason Bargwanna joining the team while Jason Richards continues to recover from illness.
Tony D'Alberto switched from Holden to Ford for the 2011 season. He ran a Holden Commodore at the season-opening Abu Dhabi race before switching to Ford ahead of the Clipsal 500.
2011 V8 Supercar season