The route started in 1995 with an hourly service which was increased to half-hourly in 2005 and new vehicles were introduced in 2009. The route carried 500,000 users in 2008 and passenger numbers have grown by 150% between 2004 and 2009. The route currently suffers from overcrowding due to unanticipated recent growth in passenger numbers. It is primarily operated by the group's Stagecoach in Bedford division.
Route X5 was launched in September 1995. It operated hourly and provided a number of new links between towns which had not previously been connected by bus or rail services. It was initially branded as Varsity, a reference to a pre-World War 2 service between Oxford and Cambridge via Luton. The western part of the route replaced an infrequent Stagecoach United Counties service between Oxford and Bedford. The route was initially operated with a variety of high-floor coaches.
The route remained largely unchanged until August 2004, when it was diverted via Stewartby and Lidlington to replace withdrawn local services. Further changes around the same time saw the X5 diverted to serve Eaton Socon and St Neots town centres rather than serving the towns via a stop on the A421 bypass road, thereby adding to the journey time between Bedford and Cambridge. However, evening journeys were sped up by avoiding Eltisley, which was instead covered by another route.
Early in 2005 the X5 was doubled in frequency to operate half-hourly. This received some positive feedback, although evening services were criticised for being too infrequent and offering few through journeys.
In 2006 the route briefly faced competition in the form of an air service between the two termini operated by Sky Commuter. This followed an unsuccessful attempt by Alpha One Airways to operate on the corridor.
In April 2007 the route was curtailed within Oxford to terminate at Gloucester Green bus station site and no longer serve the little used final section to Oxford railway station. The changes were in part due to new European Union driver hours limits.
A modified double-decker bus with extra luggage space was trialled in 2007, with a view to introducing double-deck operation on the route, but was not deemed successful, so the service continued to be operated with high-floor Volvo B10M coaches.
In 2008 the route was rebranded as Cross Country, a name also used for the X4 service between Milton Keynes and Peterborough. Passenger numbers improved dramatically, with over 500,000 users in 2008.
 In August 2009 it was reported that some passengers in the St Neots area were being left behind by coaches on the route as they were too full. This problem escalated in December 2009, when higher than expected loadings saw many evening journeys significantly overcrowded. Between 2004 and 2009 patronage increased by 150%. Another name used to promote the service was The X Factor.
The X5 connects Oxford to Cambridge via Bicester, Buckingham, Milton Keynes, Bedford and St Neots. It provides interchange facilities within Milton Keynes by serving Milton Keynes Coachway and Milton Keynes Central railway station.
The route is 85&nbsp;miles long, and largely follows the path of the notional Oxford-Cambridge Arc. It serves Oxford's Gloucester Green bus station and Cambridge's Parkside terminal point, and makes use of Bedford bus station. It also serves the park and ride site at Madingley Road on the outskirts of Cambridge. In Milton Keynes, the service stops at the Milton Keynes Coachway for interconnection with National Express north-south services, at Milton Keynes Shopping Centre and at Milton Keynes Central railway station for the West Coast Main Line. Buckingham is served via a stop at the out-of-town Tesco site. A stop at Bicester North railway station was added to the route in 2008.
The service is part of Stagecoach's Megabus network.
The route uses a fleet of seventeen Volvo B9R coaches with Plaxton Panther bodywork. These vehicles, which were purchased new in 2009 include free WiFi access, air conditioning and leather seats and are wheelchair accessible. They carry route branding for the service, although the Cross Country branding used in some marketing does not feature on the vehicles.
 A year later, the route won the Coach Marketing award at the 2010 UK Coach Awards for a promotion effort by Stagecoach.