Note:  If you are seeing this page as a result of an attempt to re-nominate an article for deletion, you must manually edit the AfD nomination links in order to create a new discussion page using the name format of  .  When you create the new discussion page, please provide a link to this old discussion in your nomination. -->
The result was    '''delete'''.   ( ) 17:36, 31 October 2010 (UTC)
This article looks like a completely legitimate article, but is actually a promotional piece with fake sourcing. Stacy Harris is a non-notable professional blogger and PR consultant who has been exploiting Wikipedia for several years in an effort to promote herself and her website. She seems to have a virtual army of sockpuppets/meatpuppets to defend her articles. See, for example, the following discussions which are littered with comments from single purpose accounts:
Much of the current Stacy Harris article, including 40 of the last 50 revisions, were written by various sockpuppets of   who is indefinitely blocked and has  . This includes virtually all of the article's sourcing which was added in response to another editor's speedy deletion request. Most of the article is currently cited to "Stacy Harris, Encylopedia of Tennessee, 2010, Pp. 332-3" which is a completely fictitious source. The other prominent source "Nashville Magazine, December 2009, Pp. 31-33, 68-69" also appears to be fictitious (although there was a ''Nashvillle Magazine'' in the 1960s). In addition to most of the article being unverifiable, it is also written in a promotional style, and fails to establish any actual notability of Stacey Harris. This Wikipedia PR campaign has gone on for long enough and needs to be shut down. ''Note to closing admin: Please check for sockpuppet astroturfing.''   ( ) 18:36, 24 October 2010 (UTC)
Let's deal in informed opinion ("This article is within the scope of WikiProject Biography... This article is within the scope of WikiProject Journalism") and in facts (separating each from that which is not credible).        
If "this article looks like a completely legitimate article" where does it follow that it "is actually a promotional piece?"  What is the basis for calling an entry, added to and excised by any number of contributors a period of evidently some months, "at least 75% puffery."  
Being a paid extra is presumably not a big deal in Hollywood (even though the overwhelming numbers of unemployed SAG members at any one time are staggering).  Being a paid extra over a period of several decades in Nashville is like any other acting credits, including the others cited- impressive for any woman, particularly as she ages.  I don't see a mention of being a plaintiff in a lawsuit but, if there is one, agreed.  There is no relevance.
The statement refuting Stacy Harris being a blogger has already been addressed on this page.  If she is a "PR consultant" presumably she is promoting clients.  Not herself.  (Can you even find a photo of her, a full name or a DOB, etc. on her own Web site?)   Where is the evidence that either she or her presumed but "army of sockpuppets/meatpuppets" have been "exploiting Wikipedia for several years" (presumably undetected in this conspiracy, I gather)?   If this could not be proven in court, perhaps it should not be written at all, let alone as gospel.
All fictitious sourcing should be removed.  Agreed. Anything written in a promotional style should be rewritten by the person making that judgment.    
Every living person profiled in Wikipedia who is internationally-recognized as a professional and an expert in her/his field would seem to pass the notability test.  To be a member of the inaugural class of an internationally-recognized leadership organization such as Leadership Bluegrass, for example, is but one of the several easily verifiable examples (http://www.ibma.org/events.programs/leadership.bluegrass/alumni.asp).   Email from music industry professionals, fans and industry experts from all over the world (as documented by posted testimonials) are another. Perhaps a Wikipedia editor is put off by yet another of Harris' achievement: her having been a Mensan.  
Harris was also the editor for the top country-music publications of her time.  These statements establish credibility and are no more statements of self-promotion (not only, but most especially, when Harris is not making them) than anything that any accomplishment an employer would WANT to see, as an example of excellence in the field, on any fact sheet or resume.  Similarly, Harris apparently built on the achievements mentioned bringing her to the attention of ABC Radio News and Newsweek creating opportunities to represent them in Nashville.
While it's easy to pick apart any Wikipedia entry, if one is so inclined, to criticize the Tennessee Encyclopedia of History and Culture for its short entries- when the original publication (in hardback) is only a single volume- is ridiculous.  (While a single-volume encyclopedia of any subject- of which there are more than I can count- may seem silly, perhaps that's what persuaded the publisher of this particular volume to do an online expansion.) 
Re: Stacy's Music Row Report.  It evolved from an online bulletin board presence in the early days of the internet when Harris worked for the owner of nashville.com who has since gone on to be a "Tea party" type watchdog.  It was then part of the (now defunct) Country On Line before it became part of roughstock.com., geocities and later countrymusicreport.com.  
The biggest problem with the Stacy Harris entry, apart from the someone imaginatively providing her with a half-sister, the repetitious entries and other obvious, previously-cited information that one would think editors would have removed, is that some sections are not well-organized.  The broadcasting section should include nothing more than her broadcasting credits.  Writing credits should be moved to the writing section.
With so many pointless revisions resulting in the removal of sourced material, the excising of this  documentation tends to blunt the criticism of poor sourcing other than that mentioned.
Beware of any Wikipedia "contributors" who make additions that are dishonest or try to make subjects such as, in this case, Stacy Harris more impressive (or even notorious) than they already are, but also beware of those who excise, as they, too, appear to have an agenda other than securing for Wikipedia a reputation for credibility and excellence. 
Wikipedia notability and legitimate citations have been established as has the fact that some of the notability is pre-Interent.  That many citations have been excised has apparently gone unnoticed by those editors who suggest otherwise yet have not spent much time contrasting edits.  As far as one editor's suggestion that Harris is resting on her laurels, that is what many successful people who have saved their money are content to do tend to do as they approach retirement.  
Nevertheless, Harris' peers have weighed in at http://stacyharris.com/industry.html and http://stacyharris.com/media.html while Stacy Harris' online bio (at http://stacyharris.com/author.html) indicates that her work has been acknowledged in books written by Eileen Sisk,  Ivan Tribe, Steve Eng, Alanna Nash, Tom C. Armstrong, Cliff Linedecker,  Stephen Miller, Anne Fletcher, Staff Sgt. Barry (Ballad of the Green Beret) Sadler, Warren B. Causey and Rick Marschall and by Adam Compton in The Texas State Historical Association's The Handbook of Texas Online, while authors Karen Breen and Judith Silverman acknowledged Harris' children's books in the Index to Collective Biographies for Young Readers (1988) and author Hao Huang cited Stacy Harris' oeuvre in Music in the 20th Century, Volume 2 (1999).   All of these sources are readily available (in libraries, book stores, or via a check of Amazon.com) and verifiable, whether it be by a simple look at an acknowledgment page, index or page number.
For example, author John O'Dowd acknowledges Harris's contribution to one of his articles at  http://www.hollywoodstarletbarbarapayton.com/samijo/page5.html
Further Harris has been interviewed by abcnews.com, Poz Magazine, Glenn Whipp, a staff writer for the Los Angeles Daily News,, Chad Dougatz, of launch.com and the Launch.com Radio Network   s New York bureau, Dave Retseck, a reporter for Crystal Lake, Illinois    Northwest Herald, BBC Business News reporter Kate Noble, WMAQ-TV (Chicago) weekend co-anchor/reporter Anna Davlantes, by Steve Penbrook, arts and entertainment editor for the (Fort Wayne, Indiana) Journal Gazette and by Family Chronicles' contributor Barbara Krasner-Khait (http://www.familychronicle.com/ReadingTheOmens.html).
Additionally, Harris who, for many years was a regular contributor to Country Music People (the United Kingdom's largest country-music publication) was listed in the 2002 British Country Music Association Yearbook (34th edition).  
Writing in the December 2002/January 2003 issue of Shout (the magazine of "Insurgent Thought + Culture"), Andy Baker, in an article titled Hey There Cowboy: Is New Country the Ambiguously Gay Genre?, for which Harris was interviewed) referred to her as "Stacy Harris, a Nashville-based journalist highly regarded for her exhaustive, behind-the-scenes reporting of the  industry." 
All of the above are unsolicited and not the work of sockpuppets or meat puppets.  Similarly, that Harris is an author of several books about the areas of her expertise is not in dispute.
Her music reviews are featured in numerous artists "internet press kits" of the artists whose work she has reviewed (when those reviews have been favorable) and it is THEY who deem her work important enough for THEM to use for promotional purposes.  Similarly, Multi Talent Management/ publicistwire.net (http://www.publicistwire.net/PDF/Arts_Entertainment.pdf) includes Harris among its international list of notable media contacts.  