GOALS was originally established in 1994 as an outgrowth of the Walt Disney Company's acquisition of the then named Mighty Ducks of Anaheim professional hockey franchise.  Since then this not for profit program has expanded into many low income communities, fielding a combination of educational enrichment, team and fitness oriented athletics, and community service activities where GOALS youth help others.  While GOALS is by far the worldwide leader in providing ice hockey access for minority children, the program has taken major strides in other sports opportunities such as lacrosse, soccer, tennis and roller hockey.  Currently, the program involves more than 2,000 youth ages 6 to 19 each year.  GOALS operates indoor and outdoor facilities, a bus fleet, and provides necessary equipment, insurance, coaching, teaching and supplies at no charge to participating youth.  GOALS organizes activities within designated under served communities and links those areas to central GOALS facilities with a community bus network.  One of the hallmarks of the GOALS program is that youth are required to serve through a "Summer of Service" in an arm of the program called GOALS Cadets. This initiative is an effort to read storybooks to children in school, clean up parks, paint out graffiti - through a program called GOALS CityPride, coach disabled young people through GOALS Special Sports, visit veterans at local VA hospitals, and pack food for local food distribution centers that support the poor.
In 2005 GOALS began a strategic expansion in close partnership with the City of Anaheim, with the opening of "GOALS Gardens", an adaptive reuse of the indoor Martin Recreation Center in Anaheim's La Palma Park. This  indoor center was renamed and renovated with an indoor rink and has become the home for roller hockey, indoor soccer, and some adaptive recreation utilizing ringette hockey as a feature sport.  GOALS expanded a bus fleet to meet increased geographic growth into neighboring cities adjoining Anaheim and ferries hundreds of low income youth daily to and from GOALS facilities.  In 2009 GOALS dropped the "Disney" from its name as a joint decision made by both organizations.  The entertainment corporate giant still provides some support to the community based organization with the hope that other regional entities will expand their level of support for the betterment of low income children and families.  
In 2010 GOALS opened the  "Dreamscape" which features two championship tennis courts, circumferential track for jogging and fitness, a  artificial turf arena for field sports, a small community garden, and a  fitness gym with anaerobic fitness equipment. The McCarthy Construction Company led a group of 37 construction and design firms to create this mufti-million dollar facility as a massive community service project. Plans are underway to develop a major second phase - "Dreamscape Too" with a basketball center, volleyball center and synthetic ice skating rink on a nearby  land parcel in north central Anaheim.  
Orange County Register September 2, 2010 "Game On - GOALS Turns Vacant Lot Across From Anaheim's Glover Stadium Into Sports Complex"
EdCal Education California November 23, 2009, Volume 39, Number 18 "Anaheim service learning group earns honor"
Orange County Register March 3, 2010 "Project brings soccer, tennis to Anaheim kdis"
Orange County Register March 11, 2010 "Dream Project - Project Gives Low Income Kids Place To Play Athletics"
Orange County Register August 13, 2009 "Clean Up - GOALS CityPride Program Aims To Beautify City's Core As Teens Cleen Up Graffiti
Vancouver Sun April 28, 2007  "Hockey Program for poor children just ducky too"