In 2006, Vincent and Liza Concepcion sued AT&T Mobility over their mobile phone contract, contending that the cell phone company had engaged in deceptive advertising by falsely claiming that their wireless plan included free cell phones.  Their suit became a class action.  AT&T asked the U.S. District Court for Southern California to dismiss the suit, because in their contract with the company, the Concepcions had agreed to use an individual arbitration process, rather than filing any class action lawsuits.  The district court declined to dismiss the suit, ruling that California law prohibits contracts that unfairly exculpate one party from its wrongdoing, such as clauses that do not allow class action lawsuits in consumer adhesion contracts where the individual damages are small.  AT&T appealed the case, saying that the Federal Arbitration Act should preempt state law.  On October 27, 2009, the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals upheld the lower court decision.  AT&T then appealed to the Supreme Court.
The Court heard oral arguments on November 9, 2010. Justices Scalia and Sotomayor questioned Pincus (attorney for AT&T Mobility) about when unconscionability doctrines are made under state law. Pincus argued that the California law was not being applied uniformly. Scalia challenged that assertion when he asked, "Are we going to tell the State of California what it has to consider unconscionable?". Other justices questioned different procedural issues arising from the unconscionability discussion and the scope of the rule AT&T was proposing. Deepak Gupta, representing the Concepcions, argued that the contract AT&T imposed on Respondents was clearly unfair. He asserted that state law should be a guidepost in these questions. Some of his arguments drew criticism from Chief Justice John Roberts. Gupta concluded by arguing that California "has made a judgment that if you preclude class-wide relief... that will gut the State's substantive consumer protection laws..."
The majority opinion was written by Justice Antonin Scalia, and joined by Chief Justice John Roberts and Justices Anthony Kennedy, Clarence Thomas, and Samuel Alito.  "Requiring the availability of classwide arbitration interferes with fundamental attributes of arbitration," Scalia wrote.  "We find it hard to believe that defendants would bet the company with no effective means of review, and even harder to believe that Congress would have intended to allow state courts to force such a decision."
The minority opinion was written by Justice Stephen Breyer, and joined by Justices Ruth Bader Ginsburg, Sonia Sotomayor, and Elena Kagan.  Breyer stated that class arbitrations are appropriate ways to resolve claims that are minor individually but significant in the aggregate. "Where does the majority get its contrary idea     that individual, rather than class, arbitration is a fundamental attribute of arbitration?"  He said that without class actions, minor frauds would not be remedied.  "What rational lawyer would have signed on to represent the Concepcions in litigation for the possibility of fees stemming from a $30.22 claim?"