In February 2007, Langbehn and Pond, along with three of their four adopted children were in Miami, FL to depart on a a cruise. Pond collapsed before the cruise departed and was rushed to Jackson Memorial Hospital's (JMH) Ryder Trauma Center. When Langbehn and their children arrived, a JMH social worker told Langbehn she was in an    anti-gay city and state    and required a health care proxy to see Pond. Langbehn had a power of attorney (POA) which was faxed to the hospital within an hour of Pond   s arrival. However, Langbehn and their 3 young children were kept from Pond   s side for eight hours. Pond slipped into a coma from a brain aneurysm and died without her partner of 18 years or her children by her side.
Langbehn unsuccessfully sought an apology from the hospital, and eventually turned to Lambda Legal Defense Fund. Lambda Legal filed suit against Jackson Memorial on June 25, 2008, in Federal District Court of  Miami, FL The Langbehn-Pond Family story caught national headlines and was the subject of an op-ed piece by syndicated columnist Leonard Pitts  Throughout 2008, 2009, and 2010 work by the Committee for Fair Visitation at Jackson Memorial Hospital negotiated changes with the hospital regarding same-sex visitation.  The committee consisted of partners throughout the LGBT Community including Lambda Legal, Human Rights Campaign (HRC), Gay and Lesbian Medical Association (GLMA) among others. On April 13, 2010, Jackson Memorial Hospital in conjunction with the Committee announced significant changes to visitation policies regarding LGBT patients. In addition to the changes at Jackson Memorial Hospital, the Joint Commission (formerly the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Hospital Organizations - JCAHO), published new guidelines addressing inclusion of LGBT patient and families in hospital visitation.  Langbehn began educating LGBT groups as well as mainstream media about her family   s story.  Langbehn spoke to bloggers, journalist and as a keynote speaker at larger function. Nearly 30 speech later, Langbehn continues to speak on the issues of marriage equality, same-sex hospital visitation, and the need for continued national attention regarding equality.
Langbehn continued to speak on the topic of hospital visitation and equality for all Americans. Langbehn spoke publicly for the first time, on June 18, 2007, about partners death just fourth after Pond   s death Olympia, WA Pride gathering. Langbehn continued to speak out, despite the outcome of her lawsuit. Langbehn   s perseverance caught the attention of the New York Times Writer, Tara Parker- Pope .  As a result of the article, White House chief of staff, Rahm Emanuel brought the article to the attention of President Barack Obama.  On April 15, 2010, President Obama called Langbehn from Air Force One to apologize for the treatment her family received at JMH and to inform her about the Presidential Memorandum he signed earlier that day. President Obama   s Memorandum  directed the Secretary of Health and Human Services, Kathleen Sebelius to create a rule allowing hospital visitation for same-sex couples comparable to those of married and opposite sex couples.  Following Langbehn   s phone call with President Obama, she spoke live to CNN news anchor Anderson Cooper on the show  Anderson Cooper 360  .
On June 22, 2010, Langbehn and her three children met with Secretary Sebelius and then attended a gay pride reception at the White House. Prior to the reception, President Obama met with Langbehn and the children to again offer his apology. While speaking at the reception, President Obama described the struggles the Langbehn-Pond family faced and the impact of his memorandum. The President said,  "Just a few moments ago, I met with Janice Langbehn and her children... And when Janice's partner of 18 years, Lisa, suddenly collapsed because of an aneurysm, Janice and the couple's three kids were denied the chance to comfort their partner and their mom -- barred from Lisa's bedside. It was wrong. It was cruel. And in part because of their story, I instructed my Secretary of Health and Human Services, Kathleen Sebelius, to make sure that any hospital that's participating in Medicare or Medicaid -- that means most hospitals -- (laughter) -- allow gay and lesbian partners the same privileges and visitation rights as straight partners   .
In 2007 the Human Rights Campaign published a report entitled the    Healthcare Equality Index    which examined equality of care in US Hospitals. In 2010, the HEI reported indicated progress, crediting the Langbehn-Pond story for bringing the issue of hospital vistiaton for same-sex couples into the public eye.  The proposed rules for    Fair Visitation    is currently in the finally writing phase at the US Department of Health and Human Services.  Over 1250 public comments were received during the open comment period.  The rule went into effect on January 18, 2011.
In 2010, Langbehn was awarded the Olympia, WA    Capital City Pride Award for 2010   .  On September 25, 2010, Langbehn was awarded the National Equality Award by the Human Rights Campaign for her continued fight for equality in hospital visitation. Langbehn continues to speak for the need of equality for all and impressing upon her audiences that    holding Lisa   s hand was not a gay right but a human right   . Notable Editor of the Windy City Times, Tracy Baim wrote about the Langbehn-Pond family in her recently published book,. Also in 2010, the Human Rights Campaign  published  assessing America   s hospitals in their inclusiveness for treating LGBT families and individuals. This report was dedicated to the memory of Langbehn   s partner, Lisa Marie Pond.  Lambda Legal will present Langbehn with their Liberty award in New York City on May 2, 2011.
Langbehn resides in Lacey, WA raising the children that Pond and she adopted from the Washington State foster care program.
Langbehn   s partner of 18&nbsp;years, Lisa Marie Pond, collapsed on 18 February 2007 after a fatal brain aneurysm, she was only 39 . Arriving at Ryder Trauma Center,  Jackson Memorial Hospital in Miami, Langbehn was barred from seeing Pond. Langbehn would not see Pond or receive information about her health status. Langbehn contacted friends in their hometown, Lacey, WA and the required documents  were faxed to the hospital. Regardless of the legal documents Langbehn and their jointly adopted children were not allowed to see Pond until eight hours later.  Pond was declared brain dead the following morning. According to her wishes, her organs were donated, saving four lives.