Caroline Sunshine was born September 5, 1995, in Atlanta, Georgia to parents Thom and Karen Sunshine.  She has two younger brothers, John (born in 1997) and Christopher (born in 2000).  Sunshine was raised in Orange County, California, and began studying ballet at the age of 3. In kindergarten she landed her first lead role playing Goldilocks in a classroom play, then acted with the Orange County Children's Theater, and danced competitively with the South Coast Performing Arts studio in Tustin, California.  Sunshine's stage credits include ''Annie Warbucks'' at the Orange County Children's Theatre, ''The Nutcracker'' at the Academy of Dance and South Coast Performing Arts, and ''Stage Door'' at the Lutheran High School of Orange County.
  Later that same year, she gained popular notoriety for her role as Barbara Winslow in her first feature film ''Marmaduke'' based on the comic strip of the same name.  Sunshine currently has a recurring role on the Disney Channel original series ''Shake It Up!''  as European exchange student Tinka Hessenheffer alongside Kenton Duty as her flamboyant fraternal twin brother Gunther.  The glitzy brother/sister duo of Gunther and Tinka is said to be inspired by Ryan and Sharpay Evans of Disney's ''High School Musical'' franchise.
Sunshine currently lives in Orange County, California with her father Thom, her mother Karen, and her two younger brothers Johnny and Chris.  Sunshine enjoys dancing, traveling, baking, and outdoor activities including surfing, snorkeling and rafting.  When she isn't working, Sunshine is involved in several charitable causes including the ''Joyful Sewing Organization'' that makes blankets for cancer patients, ''Working Wardrobes'', which gives underprivileged women and victims of domestic abuse confidence and teaches them courses in how to properly interview for a job, the ''Adoptahero.org'' program that provide for the needs of soldiers and their families, and the ''Loaves and Fishes Ministry'' that helps feed the homeless.