Maritime boundaries exist in the context of territorial waters, contiguous zones, and exclusive economic zones; however, the terminology does not encompass lake or river boundaries, which are considered within the context of land boundaries.
Some maritime boundaries have remained indeterminate despite efforts to clarify them.  This is explained by an array of factors, some of which illustrate regional problems.
The delineation of maritime boundaries has strategic, economic and environmental implications.
The terms  , frontier and border are often used as if they were interchangeable, but they are also terms with precise meanings.
A boundary is a line.  The terms "frontier", "borderland" and "border are zones of indeterminate width.  Such areas forms the outermost part of a country.  Borders are bounded on one side by a national boundary.  There are variations in the specific terminology of maritime boundary agreements which have been concluded since the 1970s.  Such differences are less important than what is being delimited.
Features which affect maritime boundaries include islands and the submerged seabed of the continental shelf.
The process of boundary delimitation in the ocean encompasses the natural prolongation of geological features and outlying territory.  The process of establishing "positional" borders encompasses the distinction between previously resolved and never-resolved controversies.
The limits of maritime boundaries are expressed in polylines and in polygon layers of sovereignty and control, calculated from the declaration of a baseline. The conditions under which a state may establish such baseline are described in the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS). A baseline of a country can be the low water line, a straight baseline (a line that encloses bays, estuaries, inland waters,...) or a combination of the two.
For example, in the map at the right which shows Australian Arctic Territorial (AAT) maritime zones, the Adelie Land or French territorial claim to Antarctica is indicated as a break the AAT waters. This portion of the Antarctic coast between 136   E  and 142   E has a shore length of 350&nbsp;km and associated maritime zones which are not recognized by all governments.
The zones of maritime boundaries are expressed in concentric limits surrounding coastal and feature baselines.
In the case of overlapping zones, the boundary is presumed to conform to the equidistance principle or it is explicitly described in a multilateral treaty.
Contemporary negotiations have produced tripoint and quadripoint determinations.  For example, the 1982 Australia   France Marine Delimitation Agreement, it was assumed that France has sovereignty over Matthew and Hunter Islands, a territory that is also claimed by Vanuatu. The northernmost point in the boundary is a tripoint with the Solomon Islands. The boundary runs in a roughly north   south direction and then turns and runs west   east until it almost reaches the 170th meridian east.Anderson, Ewan W. (2003). ; Charney, Jonathan I. ''et al.'' (1993). ''International Maritime Boundaries,'' Vol. 1, p. 905; Charney, (1998).  The effect of these negotiated specifics is reflected in the map of Australian maritime zones at the right.
The concept of maritime boundaries is a relative new concept. The historical record is a backdrop for evaluating border issues.  The evaluation of historic rights are governed by distinct legal regimes in customary international law, including research and analysis based on
The study of treaties on maritime boundaries is important as (a) as a source of general or particular international law; (b) as evidence of existing customary law; and (c) as evidence of the emerging development of custom.  The development of "customary law" affects all nations.
The attention accorded this subject has evolved beyond formerly-conventional norms like the three-mile limit.
Multilateral treaties and documents describing the baselines of countries can be found on the website of the United Nations.
For example, the Australia   France Marine Delimitation Agreement establishes ocean boundaries between Australia and New Caledonia in the Coral Sea (including the boundary between Australia's Norfolk Island and New Caledonia). It consists of 21 straight-line maritime segments defined by 22 individual coordinate points forming a modified equidistant line between the two territories.  The effect of this treaty is incorporated in the map of Australian maritime zones at the right.
Controversies about territorial waters tend to encompass two dimensions: (a) territorial sovereignty, which are a legacy of history; and (b) relevant jurisdictional rights and interests in maritime boundaries, which are mainly due to differing interpretations of the law of the sea.
Many disputes have been resolved through negotiations, but not all.
The locations of specific islands are reflected in the configuration of each maritime boundary, including
Among the array of unsettled disputes, the maritime borders of the two Koreas in the Yellow Sea represent a visuallly stark contrast.
Kim, Kwang-Tae.  ''Time'' (US). November 23, 2010. Although the North asserts a differently configured boundary line, there is no dispute that a few small islands close to the North Korean coastline have remained jurisdiction of the United Nations since 1953.Ryoo, OMB Form No. 0704-0188 (at  ).
The map at the right shows the differing maritime boundary lines of the two Koreas. The ambits of these boundaries encompass overlapping jurisdictional claims. The explicit differences in the way the boundary lines are configured is shown in the map at the right.  
In a very small area, this represents a unique illustration of differences in mapping and delineation strategies.
Violent clashes in these disputed waters include what are known as the first Yeonpyeong incident, the second Yeonpyeong incident, and the Bombardment of Yeonpyeong.