On November 11, 2010, Ken Paxton announced he would run for Speaker of the Texas House of Representatives against current Speaker Joe Straus of District 121 in  Bexar County and fellow Republican Warren Chisum of District 88 in Pampa, Texas.  Paxton expressed his feelings that, "On Election Day, we witnessed a monumental shift in the political climate, and I believe that historic opportunities demand bold action in defense of our conservative values. Voters across Texas sent a clear message that they favor leadership dedicated to protecting our freedoms and fighting government growth. Texans have provided us with an historic mandate, and they expect us to use this mandate to honestly advance conservative principles and not simply protect the status quo. These goals can only be accomplished with a conservative Speaker."
Ken Paxton attend Baylor University in Waco, Texas in 1981 studying Psychology.  In 1985 he was elected Student Body President of Baylor University's Student Government Association.  He graduated the same year and continued his education at Baylor, attending the Hankamer School of Business earning his MBA in 1986.  Ken Paxton then worked for two years as a Management Consultant before returning to school in 1998.  Ken enrolled at University of Virginia School of Law and earned his J.D. in 1991.  
After law school Paxton joined the firm of Strasburger & Price, L.L.P from 1991 to 1995.  He then went to work for J.C. Penney Company, Inc., as in-house legal counsel. In 2002 he left J.C. Penney to start his own firm specializing in estate planning, probate, real estate and general business matters and to run for office in Texas House District 70.
Since moving to the  McKinney area, Ken Paxton has served on numerous local organizations and councils.  These include being a Member of the Allen Chamber of Commerce, Board of Directors for Centennial Medical Center, Member/Former Board of Directors at the Collin County Bar Association, Member of the Dallas Estate Planning Council, Member of the Frisco Chamber of Commerce, Board of Directors at Marketplace Ministries, Member of the McKinney Chamber of Commerce, Member of the McKinney Rotary, and a Charter Member of Stonebriar Community Church.
On March 12, 2002, Ken Paxton ran for his first nomination in the Republican Party Primary for Texas House of Representatives district 70 against five other republicans.  He captured 39.45% of the vote, and moved in to a runoff with fellow republican Bill Vitz, who he defeated with 64% of the vote. He then went on to face Fred Lusk (D) and Robert Worthington (L) for the newly redistricted open seat.  On November 4, 2002, Paxton secured his first win with 28,012 votes to Lusk's 7,074 votes and Worthington's 600 votes.
November 4, 2004, Paxton faced a challenge from Martin Woodward (D) after running unopposed for the Republican nomination.  Paxton captured 76% of the vote, or 58,520 votes compared to 18,451 votes for Woodward. 
On November 4, 2006, Paxton won his 3rd term to the Texas House of Representatives, defeating Rick Koster (D) and Robert Virasin (L).  Paxton received 30,062 votes to Koster's 12,265 votes and Virasin's 1,222 votes.
On November 4, 2008, Paxton won re-election to the Texas House of Representatives, again defeating Robert Virasin (L).  Paxton received 73,450 votes in the election while Virasin received 11,751 votes. 
Paxton ran unopposed for re-election in both the Republican primary and the general election.
Since joining the House in 2003, Representative Paxton has been endorsed and supported by multiple non partisan and conservative organizations.  On the National level, Paxton was one of six Texas House candidates endorsed by ''HuckPAC'' the official Political Action Committee of former Republican Governor Mike Huckabee.  
Paxton has also received endorsements and "A" ratings from the National Rifle Association and the state affiliated chapter Texas State Rifle Association.  