Anyone, whether directly involved or not, may add evidence to this page. Create your own section and '''do not edit in anybody else's section'''. Please limit your evidence to a maximum of 1000 words and 100  . Giving a short, concise presentation '''will be more effective'''; posting evidence longer than 1000 words will not help you make your point. Over-long evidence that is not exceptionally easy to understand (like tables) will be trimmed to size or, in extreme cases, simply removed by the Clerks without warning - this could result in your important points being lost, so don't let it happen. Stay focused on the issues raised in the initial statements and on diffs which illustrate relevant behavior.
It is extremely important that you use the prescribed format. Submitted evidence should include a link to the actual page diff in question, or to a short page section; links to the page itself are insufficient. Never link to a  , an editor's contributions, or a   for all actions of an editor (as those will have changed by the time people click on your links), although a link to a log for a specific article or a specific block log can be useful. Please make sure any page section links are permanent. See  .
This page is not for general discussion - for that, see the  . If you think another editor's evidence is a misrepresentation of the facts, cite the evidence and explain how it is incorrect '''within your own section'''. Please do not try to refactor the page or remove evidence presented by others. If something is put in the wrong place, leave it for the Arbitrators or Clerks to move.
Arbitrators may analyze evidence and other assertions at /Workshop. /Workshop provides for comment by parties and others as well as Arbitrators. After arriving at proposed principles, findings of fact or remedies, Arbitrators vote at /Proposed decision. Only Arbitrators (and clerks, when clarification on votes is needed) may edit the proposed decision page.
I was a part of the Elizabeth Kucinich afd, thats out side of the project.   ( ) 21:05, 24 November 2010 (UTC)
I will admit some of the arguements are understandable, I mean some of my edits are wierd, but other than 23 minutes in hell, none of those articles are in my public interests, you didnt know that until I admitted that, but other than that one afd I would say timneu22 has a valid point in his accusations, ban me however long, i deserve it, but Robert young and the grg/wop will NEVER be silenced, we have science on our side.   ( ) 20:53, 8 December 2010 (UTC)
My view of the relationship among WP, the GRG Yahoo group, the World's Oldest People WikiProject, RYoung and his colleagues on both the GRG Yahoo Group and WOP WikiProject can be found  in responses to LongevityDude in an AfD discussion.
LongevityDude's  reflects the problem well.
Here's LongevityDude's  of how other editors should work with GRG/WOP.  Griswaldo's apt response. But, somehow, LongevityDude  .
My summation at the closing of the JV AfD helps .   ( ) 14:58, 26 November 2010 (UTC)
Here's some .  ( ) 14:58, 26 November 2010 (UTC)
The same AfD features fine samples of  to .
And  summarizes my experiences with RY. Over time he's accused me of being a homophobic, anti-porn cabalist.
I am not a party to this case, but I have noticed that an AFD I closed,   has been brought up, and that an IP mentioned it on the main case page.  (This edit appears to be misplaced in the section for  , and I believe a clerk may want to move it to a separate section or talkpage.)
I don't have a huge amount of evidence to give, save my involvement in fairly recent discussions.  My involvement began with the  , in which I voted to delete and commented on the vitriolic responses from some of the "keep" voters; my comment is  (which I had slightly refactored after realizing that hounding could be misinterpreted as  ).  I have an extremely high threshold for invective- I have PDD-NOS, and in real-life I can be rather abrasive at times- and due to my real-life interest in history I'm capable of cutting through such invective to the heart of an issue, so I'm not normally one to worry about people's tempers flaring; however, I could tell that things there were getting out of hand, and that people coming to this AfD without a ''lot'' of experience dealing with screeds of angry text would have a hard time separating out the real arguments from the ranting (in my opinion,   made quite a valiant effort, and should be commended for it).  A couple of days later, I happened across a thread on the   (how I got there I don't remember), and I realized that the users belonging to it were the source of most of the ranting at the Jan Goossenaerts AfD.  My comments are still there, specifically in the   section, which I stand by.  My primary involvement there was to provide a fresh voice, as I saw evidence of a huge walled garden that wouldn't be fixed without outside voices.  Thanks to the efforts of editors like  , the situation there is definitely getting better; however, the fact that this wikiproject was able to maintain this huge walled garden for such a long time is somewhat disconcerting.
When this issue was brought to ANI, a couple of users had made claims that this was an attempt to sabotage an expert in the field.  To rebut this claim, I stated that experts were welcome, but that they had to adhere to policies like   and   like everyone else.  To demonstrate my point, I repeated an analogy I had initially made at the WikiProject World's Oldest People talkpage  (with a slight addition in my next edit ); we don't and wouldn't allow Moonies to take total control over articles on the Unification Church, nor should we allow gerontology experts to take total control over articles relating to their field.  His response, "", was a complete misrepresentation of what I had said.  I responded with , where I pointed out that in fact I was not comparing the content of the two types of articles, but trying to point out why experts don't have the last word on notability or verifiability within their field.
This will be extremely brief; however, I would just like to say that Timneu22 has a valid point about Longevitydude's new-found interest in Timneu22's AfDs.  Timneu22 and I are both New Page Patrollers, so we communicate on a fairly regular basis, and I've noticed much of what he's said in his section.  There was   that fizzled out, which I'm surprised and disappointed didn't garner more attention then, and I think that Longevitydude's behavior warrants further scrutiny.     ( ) 04:24, 8 December 2010 (UTC)
He went around intimidating and attempting to convert editors:; he also went around threatening editors with blocks without prior attempts to seek consensus . The dispute was on whether or not some words were to be bolded. The article originally came WITH those bolded words; JJB elected to change them and attempted to pass it off almost immediately as new consensus, which was extremely rude and inconsiderate; etiquette dictates that the opposition should take the matter to talk and propose the new change there, not the defendant. Reading off from the timestamp of the warning, only one prior attempt by John J. Bulten was attempted to propose change to that article, to which no replies had yet been made. 
JJB did the following: (1) submitting batches of biographies on long-lived people for deletion under near-identical criteria;  (2) spamming the same AfD message with minimal differences, , (3) broken multiple AfD contributing policies (such as not voting on your own AfD,,  and (4) attempts, using spammed messages more than once to the same editor, and often to several different editors as well, to scare off editors who voted "keep" on articles he nominated for deletion..
In this diff Bulten attacks   for making identical comments on five AfDs when he has also spammed identical messages (see above). This has led to confusion and misconceptions about his aims owing to his hypocrisy.
Several things are telling from his diatribe
He admits that consensus was still sought with regards to biography-level notability, and then presents completely unevidenced belief that makes his own sentences seem self-important when there is actually no real meaning or vaild point made from that argument.
Since it is argued that since outside sources choose to grant coverage of "world's oldest persons", it is only proper that Wikipedia articles be created and/or considered for them as long as enough information has been established, among other reasons. John J. Bulten believes that as they were all supercentenarians, it is thus appropriate for their articles to be deleted as batches, rather than as individual entities considered separately. As stated, in the batch of articles mass-nominated for deletion shown above, JJB attacked other users for submitting identical comments to each of those AfDs, whereas, as stated, he himself submitted identical comments to each of those AfDs with minimal changes to suit the article in a "one-size-fits-all" style, and voted on his own AfDs in a similar "one-size-fits-all" style.
Rejuvenation Research is stated to be a highly and peer-reviewed journal with reliability established; JJB smeared RejRes as "unreliable GRG published"  in order to push his point without first validating the reliability of the source.
As seen  , John J. Bulten establishes a friends network on Wikipedia which is inappropriate and disruptive given the nature of his behaviour. Despite stating "add your name here", he has been known to add names himself . The word "friends" can be taken to mean editors he has corresponded regularly with, but in an Internet-ish sense it can also be taken to mean an ally; Thus his behaviour, in addition associated with his tendency to add names himself, can be considered   and I see this to be highly disruptive. 
JJB '''started''' negotiations by calling a dispute on Wikipedia over bolding words (touched upon previously above) a "war". That is a violation of  .   '''( ,  )''' 07:57, 27 December 2010 (UTC)
First off, I am going to say this: that to categorically report every unfair/incorrect/false assertion made against me and others that believe that Wikipedia policies on notability and verifiability should result in a fair amount of coverage of supercentenarians on Wikipedia, would be extremely difficult, time-consuming, and perhaps detrimental to those who would not care to read a laborious list of misdeeds.
Nonetheless, I intend to fully state my position here by January 15. This section should be construed as "under construction" until that date arrives.
I. Response to JJBulten
It has been clear, from the beginning, that JJBulten's motivations and operations on Wikipedia have been contrary to Wikipedia policy, and have involved POV-pushing, canvassing, scheming, plotting, bullying, intimidation, misuse of the system, wasting people's time, and most of all, editing in a manner which is over-all detrimental to the subject matter on Wikipedia.
Far from attempting to find common ground or assume good faith, JJBulten has attempted to fan the controversy by opening old wounds and pouring salt on them.
From an outside source:
DHanson317 	
Posted: Dec 25 2010, 11:18 PM
Group: Members
Posts: 40
Member No.: 1,043
Joined: 31-October 10
User BrownHairedGirl has decided herself the necessity to remove all flags. Why she's doing this now, I do not know. 
Report Post
Group: Members
Posts: 1
Member No.: 1,052
Joined: 12-December 10
I'll tell you what shes doing, by taking away the flags, shes showing that there's no need for articles about supercentenarians in each nation. Shes making the way for me to delete articles on all the supercentenarians who arent the WOP.
John J. Bulten 
From the above comments, we have evidence of conspiracy. That's a strong word, and I direct it primarily at the current motivator behind it, JJBulten. Please consider analyzing and digesting the above statement:
FALSE. Notability of an article is not disestablished by editorial decisions to remove flags. However, this is evidence that JJBulten (who brought BHG to this Arbitration Request, even though she was not actively editing these articles for about 3 years now) has attempted to influence other editors to remove material and degrade articles, in preparation for his plan to delete them.
Notability is not established/disestablished by the behavior of editors on Wikipedia; notability is established by outside sources.
Walter Breuning, for example, is not a world's oldest person yet, but he has received substantial continuing coverage well beyond the local and "one event" rationale of a single line-item obituary:
Yet I suppose by JJ Bulten's illogical assertion, all we would have to do is to delete an American flag by his name and "voila!", now he's not notable and his article should be deleted.
But the bigger issue is not that Bulten's comment is illogical. The bigger issue is that his editing (involving article degradation and deletion), POV-pushing, anti-scientific agenda (he claims that Biblical ages such as "Noah lived to 950" are literally correct, and thus people living to 114 today are not notable) is detrimental to Wikipedia's fair and efficient operation. BHG herself created the "list of supercentenarians by nation" idea in 2007, as a compromise for articles that were on the cusp of notability. It was also seen as a more-efficient organization scheme (by nation). We see a lot of categorization on Wikipedia by nation for topics outside supercentenarians, whether it be "Canadian actors" or what have you.
Now, we have an editor who has identified past disputed, re-opened them, and attempted to fan the flames of controversy by merging disputes about supercentenarian articles from 2007 with JJBulten's own far-far-right, radical conservative agenda (I note that even Christian apologist Arthur Custance believed that humans once lived hundreds of years, but not in modern times, while JJBulten has stated he believes people can live to 950 today).
Update: On December 25, JJBulten confessed to his mission, to delete all articles on supercentenarians that he can (he's actually deleted articles on World's Oldest Person titleholders too, such as Elizabeth Watkins).
Now, today he confesses why:
II. Message 2
1. What Alexandr said (and quoting Brendanology):
Alexsandr 	
Posted: Dec 17 2010, 10:18 AM
Report Post
Supercentenarian
Group: Members
Posts: 149
Member No.: 1,021
Joined: 29-July 10
QUOTE (Brendanology @ Dec 17 2010, 10:07 AM)
JJB has employed a number of tactics on Wikipedia, including:
I feel that as long as he presents his arguments in a RATIONAL manner, he can stay. But if he begins trying to convert or recruit members here who are also editors on Wikipedia (such as myself, DHanson317, and NickOrnstein), out he goes. The 110 Club is a place to discuss supercentenarians, and is not a recruiting ground or an extension of his practices on Wikipedia.
If I were him, I'd find it strange to be banned from the 110 Club before I have even made my first post.
It's a free forum; we should let him stay for at least a while. If he causes disruption, criticises, or offends members who edit on Wikipedia, then it's straight to Complaints.
Just my 2 cents.
You right: here be place for the discuss of supercentenarians. but JJb is not beings interested in that. Has anything ever that he do on wikipedia indicate that he has interest like us?
No.
All he do there is try destroy all work for maintain coverage of not-bible supercentenarians. If it be JJB then he not here for right reason.
2. JJB's response:
Posted: Dec 27 2010, 12:15 PM
Report Post
Youngster
Group: Members
Posts: 2
Member No.: 1,052
Joined: 12-December 10
QUOTE (Alexsandr @ Dec 27 2010, 11:43 AM)
Read what he posts yesterday. he not here for good. Delete his account I think.
Alexsandr, are you trying to say I should be banned because I disagree with you?
I'm standing up for the Bible and you can call me narrow-minded all you want, I am proud of it, by pursecuting me you'll only increase my reward.
From the above message, JJBulten admits that what he THINKS he is doing is "standing up for the Bible" by destroying the scientific standard. Can we allow this kind of agenda-pushing on Wikipedia?
II. Response to Sandstein
I will have a lot more to say...to be continued.  01:38, 27 December 2010 (UTC)
III. Response to DavidinDC
Aside from misspelling "apparently" and "incorrigible," DavidinDC's recently-added comments are part of the problem, not part of the solution. Rather than focus on the material, he's adding extraneous commentary about his wife, whatever. That's all irrelevant.
DavidinDC had a conflict of interest and there's clear and convincing evidence that he "teamed" with JJBulten on 9 AFD's on a single day. He has let his ego get in the way of the issues. He makes false or biased comments about the reliability of sources or the availability of sources, falsely stating more than once that articles had zero sources, or just one source, when in fact they had many. As usual, no amount of evidence is enough for David to "see" the sources, even when posted. One can check a myriad of AFD's, such as Asa Takii or Tase Matsunaga.  15:07, 5 January 2011 (UTC)
Place argument and diffs which support your assertion; for example, your first assertion might be "So-and-so engages in edit warring", which should be the title of this section. Here you would show specific edits to specific articles which show So-and-so engaging in edit warring.
Presenting evidence chronologically, as this is how I try and make sense of how things got into a mess. 
30 March 2008 Now blocked user  , in response to enquiries by   explains the link between the WikiProject and the GRG group. 
27 August 2008 Ryoung122 back from break. 
6 September 2008 Ryoung122 makes first post-break edit to Longevity myths, adding a source that may be dubious (LexisNexis search gone dead). 
7 September 2008 Ryoung122 refers to his thesis as a    published    source although expresses no opinion as to whether it is RS. 
9 November 2008 On Longevity myths Ryoung122 reverts a cleanup of date and other overlinking.  Performs many similar reverts on the article in the same period. 
8 December 2008 Ryoung122 incivil to   about date linking. Boasts of his degrees. 
23 December 2008 Ryoung122 incivil and shouting in an edit summary.    learn your history! There is PLENTY of evidence, this is incontrovertible fact. Clever removal for someone with a hidden agenda, but I am an historian   . This is on Stone Mountain, and an issue related to Ku Klux Klan, so tempers likely to run high. 
6 January 2009 Accuses another user (not clear who) of persecution. . 
6 January 2009 Ryoung122 posts on his talk page that he is being bullied. 
24 January 2009 Ryoung122 posts on talk page of Gerontology Research Group to say that the article is too    stunted   , doesn   t do justice to the group. 
21 February 2009 Canadian Paul raises a    serious accusation    against Ryoung122 on  . Ryoung122 has accused him of recruiting a meatpuppet. Thread carries on till 18 March. Canadian Paul gives diffs of behaviour he sees as unacceptable. 
13 March 2009 Ryoung122 defends using WOP Yahoo! Group as a reference     doesn   t matter if you have to register, because it   s free. 
24 April 2009 JJBulten arrives at Longevity myths, rewrites the article. Some poor material was in there already, merged in from Longevity in February 2009 , unsourced at that time.  JJBulten adds a number of Christian theological, primary Bible, and other non-academic sources. References are incomplete.  
9 May 2009 Ryoung122 posts on talk page of Longevity myths that he has found a scientific article using the term    longevity myths   . This is in fact just the English translation of the title of a Japanese language article.  
9 May 2009 Ryoung122 defends his master   s thesis as RS on the basis it is    national award winning research   . .  His master   s thesis did in fact win an award . 
14 August 2009   and   consecutively !vote the same way in  . Longevitydude protests that he isn   t a sockpuppet of Kingcouey, they just share a computer. Several IPs vote in the same AfD; their votes were deleted. Apparently they live together and Kingcouey lets Longevitydude use the computer when he isn   t using it. Kingcouey indeffed as a sockpuppeteer.
20 October 2009   questions Longevitydude about sockpuppeteering.  
28 November 2009 Ryoung122 edits BLP of L. Stephen Coles, removing sourced info that he is a visiting scholar at UCLA, edit summary shows that the purpose is to foreground GRG work. 
13 March 2010 Ryoung122 and DerbyCountyinNZ argue on   that validation has to pass through Louis Epstein   s website. 
20 March 2010 Longevitydude adds silly comment to his own talk page, purportedly from Canadian Paul. He then blanks the page. 
14 October 2010 Bolding war on List of verified oldest people. User: Brendanology shouts in edit summary. Ryoung122 accuses JJBulten of stirring up trouble. DerbycountyinNZ accuses Griswaldo of being part of a tag team. 
Ryoung122 pushes for inclusion of material he has authored himself, in response to posts by uninvolved editors. . 
Ryoung122 shrugged off a friendly warning by me about conflict of interest. 
Ryoung122 reverted edits intended to bring Longevity myths into line with fringe theory article good practice. If the topic is myths (or narratives, stories, legends, claims   ), then reference to scientific fact needs to be kept brief. (Cf Virgin birth of Jesus, where after discussion, all material about parthenogenesis was removed as irrelevant.) Ryoung reverted my edits. 
Ryoung122 added an unencyclopedic section    List of Extreme Longevity Myths    that, he said in mainspace, could be expanded to an article eventually. .  
Ryoung122 shrugged off an accusation that he was using his Yahoo! group to canvass support in a merge discussion. Ryoung says    Is that you Canadian Paul? You should sign in   . 
Ryoung122 accuses me of canvassing, in what was a post for support in assisting the Longevity myths article to NPOV.   
Ryoung122 shrugs off the COI issue by saying that an    essay    he wrote (meaning the Wikipedia article Longevity myths, preceded his association with Guinness World Records, so in his view there was no conflict of interest.
I have just, by googling, become aware of the extent of off-wiki canvassing in this dispute.  is just one example. The invision free website contains several similar examples.   ( ) 17:40, 11 February 2011 (UTC)
I hate to have to do this, but since apparently an alternative between a full ban and a mere topic ban is currently on the table for this editor, I think it's worth pointing out here.
JJB has engaged in seriously problematic editing not just in the topic of the present case, but also elsewhere.
Both of these cases, I believe, exhibit some of the same problems shown here: a pattern of hostility, opinionatedness and obstinacy.     21:56, 12 February 2011 (UTC)