The '''Los Angeles Convention Center''' ('''LACC''') is a convention center in the southwest portion of downtown Los Angeles.  The LACC hosts annual events such as the Greater Los Angeles Auto Show and Anime Expo, and is best known to video games fans as host to E3. Its newest major events are the Primetime Emmy Awards, Microsoft WPC, Abilities Expo, and frequent TV show and movie filmings. With L.A. Live next door the available activities are never ending at Club Nokia, Nokia Theater, Staples Center, The Conga Room, Grammy Museum, Lucky Strike, and Ritz-Carlton Residences. On September 15, 2008, the Los Angeles Convention Center achieved a historical mark by becoming the first U.S. convention center and first Los Angeles City building of its age and size in the U.S. to be awarded the highly sought after certification in Leadership of Energy and Environmental Design for Existing Buildings (LEED-EB) from the United States Green Building Council (USGBC).
The Convention Center, designed by architect Charles Luckman, opened in 1971 and expanded in 1993 and 1997. It was originally built as a rectangle building, between Pico Boulevard and 11th Street (now Chick Hearn Ct.) on Figueroa Street. The northeast portion of the Center was demolished in 1997 to make way for the Staples Center. The Convention Center Annex of green glass and white steel frames, mainly on the south side of Pico, was designed by architect James Ingo Freed.
The area in front of the Convention Center is known as the Gilbert Lindsay Plaza, named for the late councilman who represented the Downtown area of Los Angeles for many years. A -high monument honoring "The Emperor of the Great 9th District" was unveiled in 1995.  The drive between Figueroa Street and the Convention Center building is also named after Councilman Lindsay.
On March 1, 1983, a tornado caused damages to the roof and upper-level panels. The building was repaired and new Convention Center lettering signs were installed at a total cost of $3 million.
The LACC is one of the largest convention centers in the United States with over  of exhibition space,  of meeting space, and a 299 seat theater.
The lobby floors in the north half of the building feature two large ) multicolor maps of inlaid terrazzo. The project was installed by artist Alexis Smith in 1993. A map of the world centered on the Pacific Rim covers the entire floor of the main lobby, while a map of the constellations around the north celestial pole covers the floor of the upstairs lobby.
The convention center can also be seen in the 2008 video game " " as "The Los Angeles Exhibition Hall".
In 2010, a $1-billion proposal to build a combination football stadium and convention center has been made by the Anschutz Entertainment Group (AEG) and businessman Casey Wasserman to attract the return of professional NFL football back to the Los Angeles area. See Farmers Field (Los Angeles). The retractable-roof center would be able to host other major events, such as the Final Four basketball tournaments and World Cup championship games.