The Dragon stadium is not the only sports arena to become energy efficient.  The Philadelphia Eagles announced a new plan to make their stadium, Lincoln Financial Field, more energy efficient by the 2011-2012 season.  Lincoln Financial Field will have 2,500 solar panels and 80 20-foot-high wind turbines installed, as well as a generator that runs on natural gas.  The Lincoln Financial Field will be the first stadium in the United States capable of generating all of its own electricity.
The Eagles hired the Florida-based company Solar Blue to install their solar panels and wind turbines.  The team will spend $30 million to have everything installed by the start of the 2011-2012 season.  The solar panels and wind turbines will generate about 25 percent of the stadium's energy needs, and the generator will provide the rest.  Not only is the Eagles' stadium energy efficient, but it is also eco-friendly.  The Eagles had Aramars, the food service and cleaning contractor at the Eagles' stadium to use nontoxic cleaning supplies and toilet paper, tissues, and towels which are made from 100 percent recycled fibers.  These efforts have allowed th team to recycle over 30 percent of its waste, which has doubled since 2008.  Even more, the Eagles compost over 25 tons of organic waste and over 10,000 gallons of grease and kitchen oil were converted into biodiesel last year.  These efforts have made the Eagles the "greenest" team in the NFL.  
Major League Baseball teams have also joined in the efforts of making their stadiums more energy efficient and eco-friendly.  AT&T Park, the home of the San Francisco Giants uses solar-powered system consisting of 600 120-kW panels.  This system provides enough electricity to power the stadium's scoreboard, which is equivalent to powering 40 homes.  
Fenway Park is also increasing their efforts to become more energy efficient.  The stadium has solar panels which generate enough electricity to provide the stadium with over 37 percent of its hot water.   Fenway also composts grass clippings and encourages recycling.