The art collection was established in 1950. The current director of the Art Museum is Gordon Knox. The director of the museum reports to the dean of the ASU Herberger Institute for Design and the Arts, and community members are represented through an Art Museum Advisory Board. The museum is located in two buildings. The main exhibition space is the Nelson Fine Arts Center, designed by architect Antoine Predock. A second museum facility, the Ceramics Research Center lies just to the north, in the Tempe Center."." Arizona State University Art Museum. Admission to the museum is free.
 Over five years, James donated over 149 works by various American, Mexican, and European artists to the museum. The collection was originally included among the stacks at the university's first library building, the Matthews Library. The Neoclassical building was constructed in 1930 and was remodeled in 1951.  The library was expanded in 1955,"." Arizona State University Libraries, Department of Archives and Manuscripts, University Archives. but in 1966, with the library space outgrowing the university's collection, Matthews Library was closed and 16 miles of books were moved to the Charles Trumbull Hayden Library, which had been completed the previous year and remains the university's main library today."." Arizona State University Libraries.
The art collection remained at the Matthews Library building, renamed Matthews Center. Contributions from donors expanded the museum's collections, particularly of prints and American crafts. In 1977, the museum received a National Endowment for the Arts matching grant to purchase of contemporary American ceramics. By 1978, the museum occupied the entire second floor of the Matthews Center, with some 10,000 square feet of exhibition space.  In April 1989, the ASU Art Museum moved into the newly-completed Nelson Fine Arts Center, designed by architect Antoine Predock, where the museum remains today. The Nelson Center is 49,700 square feet and includes five galleries as well as administrative offices and storage and processing areas. Soon after the Art Museum's move to its new facility, the size of its staff doubled, and a curator of education, a print collection manager and several administrative and security workers were added to the staff.
In 1992, Marilyn A. Zeitlin became the museum's director. Zeitlin was praised for expanding the museum's collections eightfold during her tenure. However, the museum experienced controversy when ''The Arizona Republic'' revealed that a university audit in early 2007 showed that the the museum had received $450,000 over seven years from prominent donor Stephane Janssen, one of the museum's largest donors, and arranged with him to buy art from Janssen's company. The arrangement was found to not be illegal but was discontinued. Zeitlin stepped down at the end of the year in 2007 after 15 years as director. There was "unanimous agreement that the ASU Art Museum has flourished" during Zeitlin's tenure.
In March 2002, the Ceramics Research Center opened in the Tempe Center just to the north of the Nelson Center. The center was designed by Gabor Lorant Architects, Inc. and includes 7,500 square feet with two galleries, open storage stacks and a research library. Additional facilities at the library's two buildings include a lecture room, a print study room, and a "nymphaeum" (courtyard).
Works of contemporary art held by the museum include works by Hung Liu, Karel Appel, Derek Boshier, Deborah Butterfield, Sue Coe, Vernon Fisher, Jon Haddock, William Kentridge, Lynn M. Randolph, Frances Whitehead, and William T. Wiley. 
 The core of the Latin American collection was donated to the museum in 1950 and includes works by David Alfaro Siqueiros, Diego Rivera, and Rufino Tamayo. Later acquisitions of pieces by Mexican artists include works by Carlos Merida, Leonel Gongora, Rafael and Pedro Coronel; Jose Guadalupe Posada, Leopoldo Mendez, and other members of the Taller de Grafica Popular; and the contemporary artists Alejandro Colunga, Lucio Muniain, and Nestor Quinones. Works by Cuban artists in the museum collection include works by Yamilys Brito, Pedro Alvarez, Tonel (Antonio Eligio Fernandez), Osvaldo Yero, Abel Barroso, Rene Francisco, Jacqueline Brito, Fernando Rodriguez, Jose A. Toirac, and Kcho. The museum has also acquired pieces by Brazilian artists Tiago Carneiro da Cunha, Efrain Almeida, and Oscar Oiwa.
American works comprises one of the museum's smallest collections. ASU's holdings of American art began with the museum's original contributions from Oliver B. James. Earlier works in the collection include early American limner painters, while the most recent works are from 20th century modernists, including Charles Demuth, Yasuo Kuniyoshi and Stuart Davis. Among the holdings in the American collection are various 19th-century Romantic landscape paintings from the 19th century, Ash Can School works, and portraits, include Gilbert Stuart's ''Mrs Stephen Peabody'' (1809). The museum holds Georgia O'Keeffe's first skull painting, ''Horse's Skull on Blue'' (1930); Edward Hopper's ''House by a Road'' (1942); and Albert Pinkham Ryder's ''The Canal'' (1915).
The print collections at the ASU Art Museum include some 5,000 prints held in the Jules Heller Print Study Room. A focus of the museum's print collection is dealing with social and political issues; works include pieces by William Hogarth, Honore Daumier, Francisco Goya, Jose Guadalupe Posada, Leopoldo Mendez, and Francesc Torres. The collection includes some 50 prints and paper works by contemporary Cuban artists and 123 lithographs and intaglios by Sue Coe. The print collection also includes examples of Japanese ukiyo-e.
The museum's ceramics collection includes some 3,500 pieces, of which half are displayed at any one time at the Ceramics Research Center. Works include pieces by Peter Vandenberge, Marilyn Levine, Richard Shaw, Lanier Meaders, Clayton Bailey, Tanya Batura, Tip Toland, Henry Varnum Poor, Viola Frey, Robert Arneson, Jack Earl, Michael Lucero, Stephen De Staebler, Darrin Hallowell, Robert David Brady, Nora Naranjo-Morse, Beth Cavener Stichter, Peter Voulkos, Robert Turner, Kenneth Ferguson, Don Reitz, David Shaner, Maria Poveka Martinez and Santana, Fannie Nampeyo, Rick Dillingham, Wayne Higby, Eddie Dominguez, Warren MacKenzie, Karen Karnes, Ted Randall, Val Cushing, William Daley, John Mason, Jun Kaneko, Toshiko Takaezu, Richard DeVore, Edwin Scheier, John Gill, Chris Staley, Anne Hirondelle, Peter Shire, Michael Corney, Richard T. Notkin, Adrian Saxe, Ralph Bacerra, Michael Gross, Akio Takamori, David Regan, Jason Walker, Jerry Rothman, Beatrice Wood, Betty Woodman, Bernard Leach, Michael Cardew, Lucie Rie, Hans Coper, Kanjiro Kawai, and Shoji Hamada.