The '''United States''' will compete at the '''2011 Pan American Games''' in Guadalajara, Mexico from October 14 to 30, 2011.
The chef de mission for the United States for these Pan American Games will be Alan Ashley, the USOC's Chief of Sport Performance.
The United States has qualified a team of 6 athletes, 3 male and 3 female.
The United States has qualified four male and four female athletes.
The United States has qualified a baseball team of twenty athletes to participate.
Both the men's and women's teams of the United States qualified for the basketball tournament automatically.
The United States has qualified a total of six athletes for four of the ten basque pelota events.
The United States has qualified one athlete in the mano singles trinkete competition.
The United States has qualified one athlete in the mano singles 36-meter fronton competition.
The United States has qualified one pair of athletes in the mano doubles 36-meter fronton competition.
The United States has qualified one pair of athletes in the frontenis 30-meter fronton competition.
The United States has qualified one pair of athletes each for the men's and women's tournaments.
The United States has qualified four bowlers, two male and two female. The representatives will be chosen based on their performances at the USBC Masters/USBC Queens, at the US Open of Bowling, and at the Pan American Games bowling trials.http://news.pba.com/post/2011/03/23/ONeill-Barnes-Will-Represent-Team-USA-at-Pan-Am-Games.aspx
Bill O'Neill and Chris Barnes were the top competitors at the qualification trials and had excellent performances at the USBC Masters and the US Open of Bowling. Based on these performances, they were the top two qualified athletes in the qualification system. They will represent the United States at these Pan American Games in men's bowling.
The United States' representatives for the women's bowling competition are to be determined. The qualification will be based on the competitors' performances at the USBC Queens and the US Women's Open of Bowling and on performances at the women's bowling qualification event held during May 2   3. Bowlers Kelly Kulick and Liz Johnson are currently in the lead for the qualification process; the final two selections will be announced after the conclusion of the US Women's Open of Bowling, the last event in the qualification process, at the end of June.
The United States has qualified five athletes to compete in Guadalajara. In the first qualifier, the United States qualified one athlete in the men's super heavyweight category. In the second qualifier, the United States qualified one athlete in the men's light heavyweight category, one athlete in the women's light welterweight category, and one athlete in the women's light heavyweight category. The United States has opportunities to qualify more athletes in the third qualifier.
The United States has qualified a total of five boats to compete in the K1-200, K2-100, K-1 200 Women, K-1 500 Women, and the K-2 500 Women's competition.
The United States has qualified seven athletes to compete at the cycling competition, two male and five female. The United States still has opportunities to qualify more athletes in the various Pan American Cycling Championships.
The United States has qualified three female athletes to compete in the road cycling competition.
The United States has qualified one team of male athletes to compete in the team sprint track cycling competition.
The United States has qualified four athletes, two male and two female, to compete in the mountain biking cycling competition.
The United States has qualified a total of sixteen athletes, eight male and eight female athletes, to compete in the individual and team events for the epee, foil, and sabre of each gender.
The United States has qualified a men's and women's field hockey team to compete in their respective tournaments.
The United States men's team will compete in Pool B of the men's group.
The United States women's team will compete in Pool B of the women's group.
The United States has qualified a total of 24 athletes in 3 events.
The United States has qualified six male and female athletes in artistic gymnastics.
The United States has qualified two athletes to compete in the individual tournament and six athletes to compete in the group tournament.
The United States has qualified two male and female athletes in trampoline gymnastics.
The United States has qualified a men's and women's handball team. The women's handball team qualified after defeating Canada in the Canada versus United States Series. The men's handball team qualified in a last chance qualifying tournament in Guadalajara City after drawing with Uruguay and defeating Guatemala.
The United States has qualified fourteen athletes, seven male and female athletes, to compete in all men's and women's judo competitions.
The United States has qualified three female athletes in the 50kg, 55kg, and 68+kg karate tournaments.
The United States has qualified two male and female pentathletes.
The United States has qualified four male and four female racquetball players.
The United States has qualified two male and female roller skaters.
The United States has qualified a team to participate in rugby sevens.
The United States has qualified nine boats and sixteen athletes to compete in all tournaments. The team was announced on April 18 by the US Sailing Olympic Selection Committee.
The United States has qualified a softball team.
Following is the 2011 USA national softball team roster:
The United States has qualified three male and female athletes to compete in the individual and team tournaments.
The United States has qualified athletes to participate in the various swimming competitions.
The United States has qualified a team and a duet to participate in the synchronized swimming competition.
The United States has qualified a men's and women's team of table tennis athletes, made of three athletes per team. The United States can qualify individual men's athletes through a special qualification tournament.
The United States has qualified eight athletes to compete in all taekwondo events.
The United States has qualified a men's and women's volleyball team. 
The United States has qualified a men's and women's water polo team.
The United States has qualified five male and female athletes to compete.
The United States has qualified six male and five female weightlifters.
The United States has qualified a total of fifteen athletes to compete in wrestling. The United States qualified six male athletes to compete in the 55&nbsp;kg, 66&nbsp;kg, 74&nbsp;kg, 84&nbsp;kg, 96&nbsp;kg, and 120&nbsp;kg freestyle wrestling competitions, six male athletes to compete in the 60&nbsp;kg, 66&nbsp;kg, 74&nbsp;kg, 84&nbsp;kg, 96&nbsp;kg, and 120&nbsp;kg Greco-Roman wrestling competitions, and three female athletes to compete in the 48&nbsp;kg, 55&nbsp;kg, and 63&nbsp;kg freestyle wrestling competitions based on performances at the Pan American Wrestling Championship.