A motif is a rhetorical device that involves the repeated presence of a concept, which heightens its importance in a speech and draws attention to the idea.  Obama's motifs became so recognizable that the main motifs, change and hope, became the themes for the 2008 presidential campaign of every candidate, from Senator Hillary Clinton and Senator John McCain.
Change was Obama's fundamental motif in his campaign for Republican, Democratic, and undecided audiences.  In addition to inspiring his Yes We Can campaign slogan, the ideology of change separated Obama from his opponents.  During his campaign, change was the second most stated concept in Obama's speeches, falling behind the economy.  Change also became a part of Obama's slogan, "Change we can believe in," which appeared on banners, podiums, and posters.
American exceptionalism is a rhetorical device that elicits support from the audience and convinces listeners that the speaker can restore the United States to greatness.  Using American exceptionalism promoted confidence in Obama, his campaign, and the national identity of the United States.  American exceptionalism helped Obama establish a separation between the old administration and his new leadership.
Speakers can praise the United States and its greatness to draw pride from the audience. Below is an example of American exceptionalism from Obama on a campaign stop in Toledo, Ohio on October 13, 2008:
This quote praises America's ability to rise against the odds.  Obama's use of exceptionalism became symbolic of a fight to restore and renew America back to its glory days and avoid the status quo.
American exceptionalism is also used in the form of negation, where the speaker describes what the United States is not.  Negation exceptionalism promotes the greatness of the country by describing negative qualities the country does not embody.  Obama used negation exceptionalism in a health care speech delivered in Newport News, Virginia on October 4, 2008:
This passage presents ideas that are contrary to the superiority and national autonomy of the United States of America, but by negating them, shows what the United States can hope to accomplish.
Voicing is using the voice of another within a speech to create proximity and credibility. Obama quoted famous Americans, such as Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., and personal stories from everyday Americans, which helps the audience connect emotionally with the speech.Capone, A. (2010). Barack Obama's South Carolina speech. Journal of Pragmatics, 42(11), doi: 10.1016/j.pragma.2010.06.011 Voicing is a powerful rhetorical device because the audience can engage in the speech by reacting through chants, cheers, and vocalizations  Voicing changes the definitions of roles so that the speaker is not the only active participant..
In a January 26, 2008 speech in South Carolina, Obama told three stories of a woman struggling to make ends meet, a man who cannot find work, and a woman who is waiting for her son to return from Iraq. Obama was able to borrow the voices of these Americans in his speeches, making himself the speaker of and an audience member to these stories.
Other rhetorical devices Obama used in his campaign speeches were repetition, metaphor, personification, climax, and allusion.