The original group was formed by Gonzaga University students and Glee Club members William Chadbourne Mitchell (from Spokane, Washington);  Mike Kobluk (from Trail, British Columbia, Canada); and Mike Pugh (from Pasco, Washington). They were encouraged by Spokane, Washington Catholic priest Reinard W. Beaver, who invited the three to travel with him to New York City in the summer of 1959 and to try performing in the burgeoning folk-music scene.  
The key people that helped the trio get going were musical arranger Milton Okun and star performer/singer Harry Belafonte. Okun provided a professional polish to their performing skills, which helped them gain both a key booking at New York City's Blue Angel club and radio appearances with Arthur Godfrey and television appearances with Pat Boone.  Belafonte had them appear as back-up singers, with a small featured spotlight, in his May 1960 Carnegie Hall concert, and signed them to his Belafonte Enterprises management firm.
In the summer of 1960, Pugh left the group to return to college. After auditioning over 150 singers, Joe Frazier (from Lebanon, Pennsylvania; not the heavyweight champion boxer) was chosen to replace Pugh.
After releasing mostly conventional folk songs, the trio unleashed the then-daring satire "The John Birch Society" (''Fighting for the right to fight/The right fight for the Right!''), which established their ability to perform more controversial material.  Their departure from Belafonte Enterprises in 1962, followed by their move to Mercury Records in 1963, gave them more freedom to add aggressively political songs to their body of folk, love, and world-music songs.
Mitchell left the trio in 1965 to embark on a solo singing career. Another audition process replaced him with the young (and unknown) singer/songwriter John Denver. The group retained the well-known "Mitchell Trio" name, with Denver writing some of the group's songs.
Frazier's departure from the trio in 1966 brought on replacement David Boise. After a final live release, Kobluk left; Denver and Boise replaced Kobluk with Michael Johnson (who would later go on as a solo artist to record "Bluer Than Blue" among other popular songs) and, because of contractual requirements that prohibited using the "Mitchell" name after the last original member left, became "Denver, Boise and Johnson". Soon, however, the group disbanded. 
Mike Kobluk, Joe Frazier and David Boise later left the music industry, Chad Mitchell released a number of solo albums before retiring from music, and Denver's time with the trio became the springboard to his highly successful solo career. Michael Johnson lives in Nashville and continues to record. Frazier became an Episcopalian priest.
The Mitchell/Kobluk/Frazier trio and John Denver reunited in 1987 for several concerts, some broadcast on PBS. These are the only recordings of all four members singing together.
The Mitchell/Kobluk/Frazier trio reunited again in 2005 for a short program as part of a concert also featuring Tom Paxton and the Kingston Trio's current lineup in Minneapolis, Minnesota.  Mitchell/Kobluk/Frazier reunited again for a one-night performance Oct. 6, 2007 in Spokane, Washington, home of their alma mater, and where Mitchell and Kobluk live about two blocks apart. They continue to tour with artists like Tom Paxton and recently performed for President Obama at a 40th anniversary celebration for fan Rep. Dave Obey in Washington D.C. Concerts in 2009 are part of a 50th Anniversary tour which culminates with a benefit in Big Bear Lake CA in December.
Other featured musicians for the trio through the years included:
The Trio's first recordings for Colpix were similar to the conventional folk songs that were gaining popularity then as an alternative to the early rock-and-roll genre.  It was songs from their first Kapp Records release &mdash; "Mighty Day" (about the 1900 Galveston, Texas hurricane); "Rum By Gum" (about the Temperance/Prohibition movement);  and, "Lizzie Borden" (an irreverent satire countering the common heroizing of the accused axe murderess) &mdash; which began to make the Trio distinct.
Their next Kapp album contained "The John Birch Society". "The Ides of Texas" from their final Kapp release took aim at financier Billie Sol Estes.
While the Mitchell Trio became best known for such songs, they also produced a solid body of work which showed that folk music could be "polished" yet remain close to its roots. They recorded square dance numbers like "Whup Jamboree" and "Hello Susan Brown". They could do rousing gospel music numbers like "You Can Tell The World", "I Feel So Good About It (Sin Bound Train)", and "One Day When I Was Lost (Easter Morn)". They seemed made to do the modern classics of Tom Paxton, such as "The Marvelous Toy", "What Did You Learn In School Today?", and "We Didn't Know". They also sang the work of Woody Guthrie ("The Great Historical Bum (Bragging Song)"), Shel Silverstein ("The Hip Song (It Does Not Pay To Be Hip)", "Three Legged Man"), and Bob Dylan ("Blowin' in the Wind" (they were in fact the first to record it, but because the record company objected to releasing a single with the word "death" in it, Peter, Paul and Mary's became the best known version), "With God On Our Side", "Mr. Tambourine Man"). 
The Mitchell Trio also did the first major recording of John Denver's later hit "For Baby (For Bobbi)", and also handled his "Leaving on a Jet Plane".  Their final album offered a soft, harmonized version of The Beatles' "She Loves You". Kobluk's solo vocal on "The First Time Ever I Saw Your Face" pre-dated the Roberta Flack major hit version by a couple of years.
Johnny Cash cited their version of "Four Strong Winds" as a stylistic influence and included it on his ''Artist's Choice'' album of favorites. The 2003 mockumentary ''A Mighty Wind'' featured The Folksmen, a group described "as a more leftish variation on the Chad Mitchell Trio."