Mitchell was commissioned in the U.S. Army through ROTC at the University of Cincinnati. After seven years in infantry and counterintelligence, he left the Army and became an associate editor of ''Navy Times'', an independent weekly newspaper. In 1989, while at ''Navy Times'', Mitchell published ''Weak Link: The Feminization of the American Military'' (ISBN 0895265559), the first book-length critical analysis of gender integration of the U.S. military. The book received national and international attention, including appearances by Mitchell on ABC   s Nightline, NBC   s Today, CBS   s Face the Nation, CNN   s Larry King Live and Crossfire, and many other television and radio shows. In 1992, Mitchell testified before the Presidential Commission on the Assignment of Women in the Armed Forces.
In 1998, Mitchell published ''Women in the Military: Flirting with Disaster'' (ISBN 0895263769), adding coverage of events since the publication of ''Weak Link'', including the Invasion of Panama, the Gulf War, the Tailhook scandal, and the Aberdeen training scandal. That same year Mitchell also published ''The Scandal of Gender: Early Christian Teaching on the Man and the Woman'' (ISBN 096491414X).
Mitchell charts these traditions graphically using a vertical axis as a scale of kratos/akrateia and a horizontal axis as a scale of archy/anarchy. He places democratic progressivism in the lower left, plutocratic nationalism in the lower right, republication constitutionalism in the upper right, and libertarian individualism in the upper left. The political left is therefore distinguished by its rejection of archy, while the political right is distinguished by its acceptance of archy. 
For Mitchell, anarchy is not the absence of government but the rejection of rank. Thus there can be both anti-government anarchists (Mitchell   s    libertarian individualists   ) and pro-government anarchists (Mitchell's    democratic progressives,    who favor the use of government force against social hierarchies such as patriarchy). Mitchell also distinguishes between left-wing anarchists and right-wing anarchists, whom Mitchell renames    akratists    for their opposition to the government   s use of force. 
In addition to the four main traditions, Mitchell identifies eight distinct political perspectives represented in contemporary American politics:
A potential ninth perspective, in the midst of the eight, is populism, which Mitchell says is vaguely defined and situation dependent, having no fixed character other than opposition to the prevailing power.
In 2010, Mitchell applied ''arche'' to Christian theology and anthropology, refining the concept to distinguish archy from hierarchy. Mitchell characterizes hierarchy as involving dissimilarity, inequality, subjection, and mediation between higher and lower ranks, whereas ''archy'' involves similarity, equality, unity, intimacy, and order based on derivative being or    sourceness.   
Following Greek patristic theology, which identifies the Father as the ''arche'' of both the Son and the Holy Spirit, Mitchell terms relations within the Trinity ''archical'' and not ''hierarchical''. He likewise terms relations within man as naturally archical but    economically    hierarchical on account of the fall. The distinction of gender is also explained as naturally archical but economically hierarchical.
Mitchell is an Orthodox Christian and deacon of the Orthodox Church in America. He is also a member of the Academy of Philosophy and Letters.