The episode was written by Matt Harrigan and Dave Willis, and directed by Pete Michels. It received mostly positive reviews from critics for its storyline and many cultural references. According to Nielsen ratings, it was viewed in 9.29 million homes in its original airing. The episode featured guest performances by Yvette Nicole Brown, Drew Carey, Gary Cole, Christine Lakin and Rachael MacFarlane, along with several recurring guest voice actors for the series.
Reluctant to give up the very addictive energy drink Red Bull, Peter decides to make his own beverage out of kerosene. He collapses from kidney failure, and is told he needs a new kidney. Three weeks later, after undergoing constant dialysis procedures, Peter eventually decides to skip an appointment, causing him to become jaundiced and vomit blood. At the hospital, his wife, Lois volunteers to give up her kidney, but is informed that she is not a match. Peter's dog, Brian also volunteers, and it is discovered that he has the same kidney type as Peter. However, as dog kidneys are weaker than human kidneys, the donation requires both kidneys, and thus Brian's death, in order for the procedure to be a success. Brian decides to go along with the procedure in order to save Peter's life. Reluctant to let Brian leave him, Stewie decides to kidnap Brian, and take him to the local playground, in hopes of staying there the rest of their lives. Brian convinces Stewie to let him go, stating that Stewie needs his father more than he needs his dog. The next day, Brian and Peter prepare to undergo the kidney transfer. However, the family's doctor, Dr. Hartman, reveals that he is also a match, and has decided to donate one of his own kidneys instead, thus saving Brian's life.
Meanwhile, United States President Barack Obama has decided to visit Quahog, and Chris' entire English class is assigned to write an essay about hope. He asks his sister, Meg, for her opinion, and she begins listing her personal opinion on the subject, which Chris plagiarizes. Meg is angered that he has decided to take her words and call them his own, but she is eventually given credit for co-writing the speech, and she and Chris introduce Obama to the school. President Obama then enters the school's auditorium, and begins singing and playing the guitar as students swoon over his performance.
In addition to the regular cast, actress Yvette Nicole Brown, actor, comedian and game show host Drew Carey, actor Gary Cole, actress Christine Lakin and voice actress Rachael MacFarlane, sister of series creator and executive producer Seth MacFarlane, guest starred in the episode. Recurring guest voice actors John G. Brennan, actor Ralph Garman, writer Danny Smith and writer John Viener made minor appearances in the episode.
 Peter also goes on to appear on the American game show ''The Price Is Right'', with actor and comedian Drew Carey appearing as host. He then begins playing the Showcase Showdown game, until the wheel suddenly spins off its axis and into the audience, running over several rows of people. After suffering from Red Bull withdrawal, Peter decides to create his concoction, including kerosene. After drinking it, he suffers from immediate kidney failure, requiring constant dialysis. Deciding to go to The Drunken Clam with Quagmire and Joe, he is reluctant to go to his scheduled dialysis appointment, in order to watch the 1984 CBS series ''Charles in Charge''..
In preparation for a special appearance at their school, James Woods High School, Chris is assigned to write an essay about "hope" to welcome United States President Barack Obama. After reading his essay to the entire school, along with his sister, Meg, President Barack Obama, dressed similarly to Conrad Birdie as portrayed in the film version of the musical, begins singing and playing guitar in the school's auditorium. Obama then performs the song "Honestly Sincere" from the stage musical ''Bye Bye Birdie''.
 In a simultaneous review of the episodes of ''The Simpsons'' and ''The Cleveland Show'' that preceded and followed the show, respectively, ''The A.V. Club'''s Rowan Kaiser wrote, "I spent the entire time expecting the rug to be pulled out and the whole thing revealed to be Seth MacFarlane just trying to manipulate my emotions." Kaiser went on to compliment series creator and executive producer Seth MacFarlane, stating "some of the more recent formal experiments that the show has done, such as the hour-long murder mystery in this season's premiere, indicate that MacFarlane and company agree with the criticism." He concluded his review by writing, "I have to give props to ''Family Guy'' for going outside their wheelhouse without winking excessively at their audience, but I think it may have been a little bit too far to be truly great." Kaiser ultimately gave the episode a B rating, the best rating of the night, beating ''The Cleveland Show'' episode "Ain't Nothin' But Mutton Bustin'" and ''The Simpsons'' episode "Moms I'd Like to Forget". In another positive review of the episode, Jason Hughes of TV Squad praised the episode's "funniest moments," which included the opening sequence involving Peter and the Red Bull, as well as the reference to ''The Price is Right''. Hughes went on to comment that the episode "taught us about the depths and bonds of love that make a family. Whether it's acceptance, hope or sacrifice, there's no limit to what we will do for family." Kate Moon of TV Fanatic also commented positively on the episode, writing in her review of the storyline, "Overall, I found the installment to be refreshing with everyone taking a part in Peter   s dilemma. It was actually sweet and emotional for a change." Moon also praised the scenes involving President Obama, and Stewie's attempt at saving Brian.