In 1995, David Ray Mitchell was brought up on felony charges for Assault and Battery with Intent to Kill. The crime as well as the trial took place in Tulsa, Oklahoma.
According to the victim in this case, who shall henceforth be referred to as the Victim, David Ray Mitchell broke into her home through her kitchen window late at night, proceeded to chase her into her bedroom, where her phone was, and tried to murder her.
David Ray Mitchell, an American of Korean descent, lived in Collinsville, Oklahoma at the time of the crime, which was committed at the Victim   s residence in Tulsa, Oklahoma.
The Victim and David Ray Mitchell were previously friends. The Victim says that David Ray Mitchell had become obsessed with her and, upon breaking into her home, had told her that if she would not have a romantic relationship him, he would first kill her and then himself. The struggle lasted more than three hours.
David Ray Mitchell knew that the Victim was homosexual and that she had no romantic interest in him. According to the Victim, David Ray Mitchell also participated in homosexual activity, i.e. David Ray Mitchell had sex with men. The Victim says she chose to leave this information out of the courtroom.
The Victim   s own sexuality, however, was not excluded from the case. In fact, it became the focal point of the case and to the detriment of the Victim. One of the witnesses in the case, Heather Goree (later known as Heather Goree Mitchell), who was also a practicing homosexual, spoke in court of the Victim   s sexuality, thus lending support to David Ray Mitchell   s defense.
After the Victim underwent intense questioning about her homosexuality, the jury determined that the previous felony charge of Assault and Battery with Intent to Kill should be dropped to a misdemeanor charge of Assault and Battery.
In conclusion, David Ray Mitchell was required to spend five days in jail and pay a fine of $100 for breaking into the Victim   s home and attempting to kill the Victim.
The case was presided over by Judge Jesse S. Harris. The State was represented by Steve Leippert.
The following were the jurors in said case: Deborah Sullivan, Pamela Eddy, Phillip James, Craig Martin, Dorothy Gladd, Ralph Simon, Michael Suggs, Tommy Goad, Jr., Robert Winter, Michael Dickinson, John Dee Cook and Sally Pendergrass.