Internet etiquette, or Netiquette, is a set of rules that were created in order to facilitate the proper conduct while using the Internet.  Netiquette is one of the first areas in which online and digital etiquette was defined.  The term netiquette came about around the same time that the World Wide Web started in 1990., Pregowsk, Michal Piotr,    Rediscovering the netiquette: the role of propagated values and personal patterns in defining self-identity of the Internet user"  Many users of the Internet who began to use it before 1993 consider the etiquette of current users lacking in socially acceptable conduct.  This Eternal September, as it is called, is based on the fact that every September new freshmen would start at universities.  These freshmen would consequently learn during the month of September the proper use of the Internet.  After this, they would know the proper conduct while using the Internet.  However, in the month of September 1993, the Internet gained a large amount of users in a very short period.  This marked the beginning of common Internet usage, and consequently was called the Eternal September because of the improper netiquette of the new users.
Emily Post lists four essential rules for using a cell phone., Post, Emily, "Four Essential Cell Phone Rules"  These are:
These are not the only things that you should consider about talking on your cell phone.  Remember, you don   t always have to answer that phone call! , Post, Emily,    News Flash: You Don   t Always Have to Answer that Phone"
In New York City, students are banned from taking cell phones to school.  This has been a debate for several years, but finally passed legislature in 2008., Medina, Jennifer
Text Messaging, or Texting is a common form of communication in the world today. 
PC World suggests that texters should rarely use texting to conduct important relationship conversations., PC World,    Text Messaging Etiquette: To Text or Not to Text" Many cell phone users find that texting important conversations, such as formal conversations or breaking up with someone, are impolite to do over texting.  Although, these types of situations do occur, however little they may occur.  In a study done by cell phone service provider AT&T, they found that six percent of teens have been broken up with through a text message., AT&T,    Texting Etiquette"
Social Media sites, such as Facebook or MySpace are popular communication tools in this age of technology.  Professor Jenny Preece, a professor of information systems at the University of Maryland, Baltimore County, believes that,    Etiquette online is not just nice to have, it is necessary.   , Preece, p.56  In addition, she says that,    One person   s