The '''''Los Angeles Times'' suburban sections''' or '''zone sections''' were printed between 1952 and 2001 as adjuncts to the main newspaper to cover the news of and sell advertising space in various parts of Southern California that the ''Times'' considered to be in  the prime part of its circulation area. The giant Los Angeles daily had a "more aggressive zoning policy than perhaps any other newspaper" because its local market was so widespread, a writer for ''The New York Times'' opined. ''Access to this link requires a subscription to the newspaper or its website.'' But as two of these and six other specialized sections were eliminated in 1995 because of a downturn in newspaper revenues, ''Times'' editor Shelby Coffey called them simply "a noble experiment." ''Access to this link requires the use of a library card.''
The first zoned section was published on Sundays only for the San Gabriel Valley in April 1952 under the direction of Mike Straszer, who was in charge of all succeeding zoned editions until 1958. ''Access to this link requires the use of a library card.'' An editorial in the San Gabriel Valley section explained that
The next zoned editions were opened in the San Fernando Valley and in the Glendale areas on March 4, 1956. A one-year anniversary layout listed the names of key people working on the San Fernando section as Straszer, Maurice Stoller, Mary Nogueras, Albert Markado, Norman Dash, Richard W. Degnon and Fred Baumberger. By the end of  April 1957, zoned editions were appearing in the San Gabriel Valley (since 1952), Southern Communities (around 1954), Orange County (1954), the San Fernando Valley (1956), Glendale-Verdugo Hills (1956), as well as the newest sections, the Westside (1957) and Centinela-South Bay (1957).
In November 1958, a copy of the Centinela-South Bay section that carried a story about the 50th anniversary of Inglewood, California, was placed in a time capsule beneath the cornerstone of the Inglewood  City Hall "with the expectation it will be opened in the year 2008."
The frequency of the San Fernando Valley section was expanded in April 1960 to twice a week     on Thursdays and Sundays. That same twice-weekly schedule was adopted for the Westside section in April 1961. ''Times'' editor Nick B. Williams wrote about the suburban editions in that year:
A  shake-up in the ''Times'' editorial department in April 1981 resulted in the transfer of H. Durant Osborne, 52, from his job as city editor of the main newspaper to "an administrative role in the Suburban  Community Sections." Osborne was to work under Reece, who remained Suburban Sections editor. The move, among others,  was billed as a way to "intensify coverage." In 1983, Robert Rawitch replaced Art Berman as Suburban Sections editor, and by November 1993, William Rood was the editor of the sections.
In a 1990 investigation of minority recruitment at the ''Los Angeles Times,'' journalism investigative reporter David Shaw found that the zone sections had  become "a training ground of sorts for the main paper" and that that practice had "helped create the paper's poor reputation with minorities" because they had to start in a suburban office rather than downtown.
After the Rodney King riots of April 1992, however, ''Times'' editor Shelby Coffey III and publisher David Laventhol gave the green light to establishing an entirely new kind of zoned section     ''City Times,'' a 28-page tabloid covering the central city neighborhoods "from Hispanic East Los Angeles to Koreatown to mostly black South Central and Southwest Los Angeles." Mary Lou Felton, a 28-year-old Latina who lived in the riot area, was chosen to head the venture editorially. The new section made heavy use of color to distinguish it from the Times' other zoned sections. Sports was covered extensively. Ed Cray wrote in the ''American Journalism Review'':
By 1968, the experience of the weekly zoned editions had generally been positive     but  Orange County, to the south of Los Angeles was a different matter. In that year its population stood at 1.29 million and, according to ''Time'' magazine, ''Times'' publisher Otis Chandler watched the  process with growing dissatisfaction, then decided that the only solution is for a newspaper to grow the way a modern city-community grows. .  .  . an ever-expanding circle of satellite towns, with citizens showing an increased interest in local affairs. To give them the local news they want, Chandler decided there was no substitute for being on the spot. The result appeared last week: the Orange County edition, edited, printed and partly written by a 32-man ''Times'' satellite staff operating entirely in Orange County.
Under the direction of Orange County managing editor Ted Weegar, a separate editorial staff     including a reporter stationed in Sacramento, the state capital, each day took apart the editorial product prepared in Los Angeles and "Orafied"     or localized     the entire newspaper, from front page to sports, especially for Orange County readers. The result was printed in and distributed from a modern, $7 million printing plant in Costa Mesa in Orange County. The cost was estimated to be some $9.5 million a year "to give suburbanites and exurbanites the feeling that they are reading a world-minded paper with a home-town emphasis." ''Times'' publisher Chandler was quoted as saying that satellite publishing, as it was called, "seems to make sense in metropolitan markets, where papers are interested in furthering their economic base, away from the center city." ''Access to this link requires a subscription to the newspaper or its website.''
In April 1978, the ''Times'' began a daily San Diego County edition, with a 26-person news staff, plus advertising and circulation employees.
Traditionalists were opposed to expanding the existing San  Fernando Valley zoned pages into a semi-independent publication with its own focus and its own printing plant. That circumstance had been completed by 1989, when Jeffrey S. Hall, vice president of marketing for the ''Times'' was named to a new position of president of the San Fernando Valley edition, directing business operations there. The editorship remained with Charles Carter, who reported to Suburban Editor Robert Rawitch.  The edition had a circulation of 230,827 daily and 266,373 Sundays. In 1997, Julia C. Wilson was named president of both the San Fernando Valley and Ventura editions, succeeding Jeffrey S. Klein.
On November 6, 1992, the ''Times'' announced it would stop publishing its San Diego County edition and eliminate 500 jobs throughout the company through a voluntary buyout and normal attrition. A ''New York Times'' reporter called the move "the result of an advertising slump in Southern California" which accompanied "the retrenchment of the military and aerospace industries" and said
In January 1994 the zones were downsized again when publication frequency was reduced to once a week from four times in the South Bay and from twice weekly in the San Gabriel and Southeast/Long Beach  sections. "The Westside section, serving the city's most affluent areas, including Beverly Hills and Westwood, will continue to appear twice a week," the ''New York Times'' reported.
By 1999, the suburban sections had been almost entirely supplanted by a new venture, ''Our Times,'' a ''Los Angeles Times'' subsidiary that published separate community-oriented newspapers in Brea, Conejo Valley, the Crenshaw District in Los Angeles, Montebello and Pico Rivera, Irvine, Laguna Hills, Mission Viejo, Santa Clarita, Santa Monica, Sherman Oaks, Simi Valley and Ventura.  But in 2000 the ''Times'' announced it would discontinue publication of its 14 ''Our Times'' community news sections.
Finally, in September 2001 the ''Times'' ended publication of its zoned San Gabriel Valley, South Bay and Westside sections. The cuts "signaled another blow to an ambitious effort by the Times to take on what Publisher John Puerner and Editor John Carroll described as block-by-block community news coverage," according to the trade source NewsInc. The big-city daily would thenceforth leave community coverage up to six smaller newspapers published by a subsidiary, Times Community News.
The ''Times'' did continue publishing five separate, regionally focused editions for wider geographic areas     the Los Angeles metropolis, the San Fernando Valley, Orange County, Ventura County and the Inland Empire of Riverside and San Bernardino counties.
In December 2005, the ''Times'' announced it would close its Chatsworth plant, where the San Fernando Valley and Ventura County editions had been published. The ''Times'' ended printing at its Costa Mesa Orange County plant in June 2010 but kept its editorial and business operations open there.