The '''Tax Relief, Unemployment Insurance Reauthorization, and Job Creation Act of 2010''' (, 124 Stat. 3296, ), was passed by the United States Congress on December 16, 2010 and signed into law by President Barack Obama on December 17, 2010.  
The Act centers on a temporary, two-year reprieve from the sunset provisions of the Economic Growth and Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2001 (EGTRRA) and the Jobs and Growth Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2003 (JGTRRA), together known as the "Bush tax cuts".  Income taxes would have returned to Clinton administration-era rates in 2011 had Congress not passed this law.  The Act also extends some provisions from the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (ARRA or 'the Stimulus'). The act also includes several other tax- and economy-related measures intended to have a new stimulatory effect, mostly notably an extension of unemployment benefits and a one-year reduction in the FICA payroll tax, as part of a compromise agreement between Obama and Congressional Republicans.  The overall monetary impact of the measure has been placed at $858 billion.   
The law was also known, during its earlier formulation in the House of Representatives, as the Middle Class Tax Relief Act of 2010. The package has been referred to as the "Obama-GOP tax deal" as well the "Obama tax cuts".
Key aspects of the law include:
The years leading up to 2010 were filled with speculation and political debate about whether the Bush tax cuts should be extended, and if so, how.  Rolling back the cuts for the wealthiest taxpayers had been  one of the core promises of Obama's 2008 presidential campaign.
The issue came to a head during the lame duck session of the 111th Congress.  At the "Slurpee Summit" of November 30, 2010, President Obama appointed Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner and Office of Management and Budget chief Jack Lew to help Republicans and Democrats hammer out an agreement on extending the Bush tax cuts.  President Obama wanted to extend the tax cuts for taxpayers making less than $250,000 a year.  Congressional Republicans agreed but also wanted to extend the tax cuts for those making over that amount.  Indeed, all 42 Republican senators joined in saying that, until the tax dispute was resolved, they would filibuster to prevent consideration of any other legislation, except for bills to fund the U.S. government.
The Middle Class Tax Relief Act of 2010 originated in the Democratic caucus within the House in early December 2010, and proposed to extend the Bush tax cuts for "middle incomes", meaning those earning under $250,000 for joint filers (and for singles, those earning under $200,000). It would restore the previous, higher rates for those "high income" people above that mark.  A second proposal raised the dividing line to $1 million.  Both proposals were able to pass in the House, but on December 4, 2010, both fell short in the Senate, getting only 53 votes and not the 60 needed for cloture.
On December 6, 2010, President Obama announced that a compromise tax package proposal had been reached with the Republican congressional leadership.  This centered around a temporary, two-year extension of the Bush tax cuts and included additional provisions designed to promote economic growth.  This proposal was identical to what became law.
In announcing the agreement, the president said, "I'm not willing to let working families across this country become collateral damage for political warfare here in Washington.  And I'm not willing to let our economy slip backwards just as we're pulling ourselves out of this devastating recession. ... So, sympathetic as I am to those who prefer a fight over compromise, as much as the political wisdom may dictate fighting over solving problems, it would be the wrong thing to do. ... As for now, I believe this bipartisan plan is the right thing to do.  It   s the right thing to do for jobs.  It   s the right thing to do for the middle class.  It is the right thing to do for business.  And it   s the right thing to do for our economy. It offers us an opportunity that we need to seize."
At a press conference the next day, Obama strongly defended the compromise agreement, after numerous congressional Democrats had strongly objected to aspects of it.  Obama labelled Republicans as "hostage takers" for forcing the situation, but also lashed out at liberal Democratic opponents of the deal as "sanctimonious" purists and compared it to their unhappiness over the lack of a public option in the health care reform legislation the previous year.  His stance led to immediate speculation among pundits that he was engaging in political triangulation, akin to what President Bill Clinton had done following the 1994 Republican Revolution.  The White House denied any such thing was happening.
Administration officials such as Vice President Joe Biden worked to convince the wary Democratic members of Congress to accept the plan, notwithstanding a continuation of lower rates for the highest-income taxpayers.  On December 10, Democratic-caucusing independent Senator Bernie Sanders made a filibuster-like stand against the compromise tax proposal, speaking for over eight hours and mocking the need for the wealthy to own multiple homes.  Overall, the compromise proved widely popular in public opinion polls, with two-thirds support or more among self-described liberals, moderates, and conservatives, and it allowed Obama to portray himself as a consensus-builder not beholden to the liberal wing of his party.
  It was also opposed by several leading potential candidates for the Republican nomination in the 2012 presidential election, including Sarah Palin and Mitt Romney, typically on the grounds that it did not make the Bush tax cuts permanent and that it would overall increase the national deficit.  
The cut of the FICA payroll tax in the agreement was for one year only at a two percent reduction.  This tax holiday was intended as an economic stimulus by Obama and the Democrats, with the value of boosting the disposable income of American families.  It would not worsen the Social Security's financial strength, as the shortfall would be made up from general revenues.  Some Republicans thus criticized the idea for increasing the national deficit.  Some Democrats were also wary of the notion, either because they thought the return to the normal rate one year hence would be characterized as a politically unpalatable "tax hike", or because they featured that reductions in the payroll tax would undermine the basic model that Social Security was based on.
On December 15, the Senate passed the compromise package with an 81   19 vote, with large majorities of both Democrats and Republicans supporting it.  Near midnight of December 16, the House passed it 277   148, with it getting only a modest majority among Democrats and a large majority among Republicans (of the 148 votes against the bill in the House, 112 were cast by Democrats and only 36 by Republicans).  Before that,   an amendment put forward by Democratic Representative Earl Pomeroy and the progressives among the Democratic caucus to raise the estate tax     the ultimate sticking point of the deal for them and the cause of a minor revolt among those against it     had failed on a 194   233 vote.  ''The Washington Post'' called the approved deal "the most significant tax bill in nearly a decade".  
Obama signed the bill into law on December 17, 2010.  Much of the Democratic Congressional leadership was absent from the signing ceremony, indicating their ongoing unhappiness with the law.  Nevertheless, Obama's ability to win passage for the law indicated a renewed strength in his presidency and a possible course he would take during the next Congress.
Final Senate vote:
Final House vote:
The passage of the new law almost at year's end caused a scramble for many parties involved.
  While companies that specialize in payroll processing could adapt to the change quickly, smaller companies that do their own payrolls could take longer.  It was possible that employees would have to wait for up to three paychecks to see the reduction take place.
The IRS said that it needed to reprogram its processing systems for some of the provisions in the law, and that those who like to file their tax returns early would need to wait until at least the middle of February if they itemize deductions or take certain other deductions.  Any refunds coming to taxpayers would be delayed accordingly as well.  Vendors of tax preparation software also had to modify their applications and get the updates to customers; Intuit, the vendor of Turbo Tax said they were ready and would hold affected returns until the IRS was ready to process them.