The film received mostly positive reviews and, on a $50 million budget, was a financial success, bringing in more than $270 million worldwide.
Jerry Maguire (Tom Cruise) is a glossy 35-year-old sports agent working for ''Sports Management International'' (SMI). After suffering a nervous breakdown as a result of stress and a guilty conscience, he writes a mission statement about perceived dishonesty in the sports management business and how he believes that it should be operated. He distributes copies of it, entitled "The Things We Think and Do Not Say: The Future of Our Business". His co-workers are touched by his honesty and greet him with applause, but the management sends Bob Sugar (Jay Mohr), Maguire's protege, to fire him. Jerry and Bob call all of Jerry's clients to try to convince them not to hire the services of the other. Jerry speaks to Arizona Cardinals wide receiver Rod Tidwell (Cuba Gooding, Jr.), one of his clients who is disgruntled with his contract. Tidwell tests Jerry's resolve through a very long telephone conversation, which culminates in the famed "Show Me the Money!" scene. Meanwhile, Bob Sugar secures most of Jerry's previous clients. Frank Cushman (Jerry O'Connell), a superstar football prospect expected to be #1 in the NFL Draft, also stays with Jerry after he makes a visit to Cushman's home. Leaving the office, Jerry announces he will start his own agency and asks if anyone is willing to join him, to which only 26-year-old single mother Dorothy Boyd (Renee Zellweger) agrees. Boyd had previously bumped into Maguire in the airport and told him personally how   she found his "memo".
Jerry travels to the NFL Draft with Cushman and convinces Tidwell to come too, to meet representatives of other NFL teams. Though Tidwell at first feels neglected compared to the superstar Cushman, Bob Sugar contacts Cushman's dad (Beau Bridges) while Jerry is in the lobby with Tidwell and re-signs Cushman to SMI. Jerry is devastated and turns to his fiancee Avery (Kelly Preston) for support, but she rebukes him and he breaks up with her. He then turns to Dorothy, becoming closer to her young son, Ray, and eventually starts a relationship with her. However, Dorothy contemplates moving to San Diego as she has a secure job offer there. Jerry concentrates all his efforts on Tidwell, now his only client, who turns out to be very difficult to satisfy. Over the next several months, the two direct harsh criticism towards each other with Rod claiming that Jerry is not trying hard enough to get him a contract while Jerry claims that Rod is not proving himself worthy of the money for which he asks. Jerry marries Dorothy to help them both stay afloat financially and to keep her from moving away. He is emotionally and physically distant during the marriage, but is clearly invested in becoming a father to Ray. Although Dorothy is in love, she breaks up with him because she believes he does not love her.
Before the start of a Monday Night Football game between the Cardinals and the Dallas Cowboys, Bob Sugar attempts to steal Rod, but is rebuked by Rod and Jerry. The two reconcile soon after. Rod plays well but appears to receive a serious injury when catching a touchdown. He recovers, however, and dances for the crowd, which cheers wildly. Afterwards, Jerry and Rod embrace in front of other athletes and sports agents and show how their relationship has progressed from a strictly business one to a close personal one, which was one of the points Jerry made in his mission statement. Jerry then flies back home to meet Dorothy to tell her that he loves her and wants her in his life (she tells him "You had me at hello"). Rod Tidwell later appears on Roy Firestone's sports show. Unbeknownst to him, Jerry has secured him an $11.2 million contract with the Cardinals that will allow him to finish his pro football career in Arizona. The visibly emotional Tidwell proceeds to thank everyone and extends warm gratitude to Jerry. Jerry speaks with several other pro athletes, some of whom have read his earlier mission statement and respect his work with Tidwell. The film ends with Jerry, Dorothy and Ray walking in the park and stumbling across a Little League baseball game. When the ball lands near them, Ray throws it back; a surprised Jerry then comments on his natural throwing ability (and possible future in sports), much to Dorothy's dismay.
The first feature film appearances in debut Jonathan Lipnicki, Lucy Liu, Drake Bell, and Jeremy Suarez.
Philadelphia Eagles owner Jeffrey Lurie, ESPN draft guru Mel Kiper Jr., former NFL quarterbacks Drew Bledsoe, Troy Aikman, and Warren Moon, German ice skater Katarina Witt, and former Detroit Lions coach Wayne Fontes play themselves in the film.
Other NFL players that make cameos as themselves are Tim McDonald, Johnnie Morton, Rick Mirer, Rob Moore, Ki-Jana Carter, Herman Moore, Art Monk, Kerry Collins, and Dean Biasucci.
Sportscasters Al Michaels, Frank Gifford, Roy Firestone, Mike Tirico, and Dan Dierdorf also make cameos.
Former NBA basketball player Brent Barry is featured in the film as an athlete who wouldn't sign an autograph for a young boy.
Actresses portraying ex-girlfriends of Maguire include Alison Armitage, Emily Procter, and Stacey Williams. Reagan Gomez-Preston also had a minor role in the film as part of the Tidwell family.
Alice in Chains guitarist Jerry Cantrell makes a brief appearance in the film as a copier store clerk.
Indianapolis Colts Owner Jim Irsay makes a cameo as Jerry Maguire's boss.
The film was well received, with a 84% positive reviews on the film-critics aggregate Rotten Tomatoes. Cuba Gooding, Jr. won an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor for his portrayal of Rod Tidwell, the Arizona Cardinals football player who sticks with Maguire. Cruise was also nominated for Best Actor in a Leading Role and the movie marked Renee Zellwegger's breakout role. The film itself was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Picture, and crew members on the film were nominated for Best Screenplay and Best Film Editing awards.
The film debuted at number one. It earned $17,084,296 its opening weekend, and eventually grossed $153,952,592 in North American box office and approximately  $119,600,000 overseas for a $273,552,592 worldwide total, on a budget of $50 million.
In June 2008, AFI revealed its "Ten top Ten"   the best ten films in ten "classic" American film genres   after polling over 1,500 people from the creative community. ''Jerry Maguire'' was acknowledged as the tenth best film in the sports genre. It was also voted by AFI as #100 on its list of 100 Passions. The quotes "Show me the money!" and "You had me at 'hello'" were also ranked by AFI on its list of 100 Movie Quotes, ranked #25 and #52 respectively.
The movie soundtrack includes
The film was scored by director Crowe's wife, Nancy Wilson, who was a member of the rock band Heart.