In 1965, when Steve was 3 years old, he moved to Richardson with his parents - Travis, an electrical engineer, and Patty, a homemaker - and sister, Kathleen, living in a home on Cap Rock Dr. in Canyon Creek. Within a year, they moved to a new home on Flat Creek Dr., adjacent to Canyon Creek Park. Steve attended kindergarten at Kincannon School on Newberry Dr., then entered Canyon Creek Elementary School in 1968 where he attended first through the sixth grades. 
With the addition of a third child, a sister, Sarah, the Mitchell family relocated to McKinney in 1973 where they purchased a turn-of-the century Victorian home several blocks from the town square. After graduating from McKinney High School in 1980, Steve enrolled at North Texas State University     now the University of North Texas     where he received both his bachelor's and master   s of science degrees in Accounting with an emphasis in Tax in 1985. From 1982 through 1986, Steve's father, Travis, served on the McKinney City Council.
Prior to serving on Richardson's City Council, Mitchell participated in a number of civic activities:
Steve Mitchell has served since 2005 on the Richardson City Council and served from 2007-2009 as Mayor.
Mitchell ran for the open seat in Place 6 of the Richardson City Council in 2005, incumbent Carol Wilson having chosen not to run again. In a three-way race, Mitchell received just over 50% of the vote, avoiding a runoff :
In 2007, Mitchell was reelected to the Place 6 seat by a much larger majority:
In addition to being the representative from Place 6 on the City Council, Mitchell served as Mayor from 2007 to 2009.
In 2009, Mitchell was unopposed for Place 6http://results.enr.clarityelections.com/TX/Dallas/10461/15625/en/summary.html:
Mitchell is the Council liaison to
Mitchell served as Mayor of the City of Richardson from 2007-2009.
While Mitchell was mayor, Richardson received its first bond ratings from Standard & Poor   s and Moody   s as AAA from both agencies. While the ratings were the result of years of work, Mayor Mitchell was proud to have this designation occur during his term as mayor as a result of his continuation of the Council   s pro-business policies.
Mitchell has been appointed by Texas Governor Rick Perry to two state-level posts.
The Commission on State Emergency Communications (CSEC) is an agency of the State of Texas charged with oversight of the Statewide 9-1-1 and Poison Control Programs.http://www.911.state.tx.us/browse.php/Commissioners
Appointed by the governor of Texas, the Board of Regents is the governing body of the University of North Texas System, which consists of the University of North Texas (in Denton), the UNT Health Science Center at Fort Worth, and the UNT Dallas Campus.http://untsystem.unt.edu/regents/
Mitchell graduated from the University of North Texas with bachelor   s and master   s degrees in accounting with an emphasis in tax.