Sara received her Bachelor of Science degree in History and English in 1994 from Evangel University, a private Christian university in Springfield, Missouri. Sara spent four years teaching high school in Rosemount, Minnesota before recording her first album, ''Past the Wishing'', in 1998.  Since then, she has released eight more albums and appeared on several others.  Sara has been nominated for three Dove Awards including "''New Artist of the Year''" in 2002 and "''Special Event Album of the Year 2003''" by the Gospel Music Association. She was named one of the best  and the album, ''Add to the Beauty'', was named "''Album of the Year''" for 2005 by ''CCM Magazine''.
Sara Groves started writing songs when she was four years old. She describes her youth as being "lonesome", and she wrote about deep issues while still in junior high school. Eventually, she took a songwriting course, prompted by her husband, and she began to take the art seriously.
In 2001, she appeared on Word Entertainment's ''What a Mom'' album with the song "Generations", and also on Word Entertainment's ''New Music From Our Heart To Yours'' album.
In 2002, she performed with Randy Stonehill on the song "Take Me Back", performed with Joel Hanson on the title song for the album '' '', and performed the song "Child of Love" for the album '' ''.
In 2003, she appeared on the '' '' album with the song "Come Be Who You Are", and the following year's sequel '' '' album, with the song "Jesus Went to the Garden".
Groves was recognized by the Alumni Board from Evangel University in 2004, for her significant achievements in the years since graduation.  
In September 2005, Sara, her husband Troy, her father-in-law, a neighbour, and a Minneapolis ER doctor delivered a tour bus and trailer load of baby supplies to victims of Hurricane Katrina in Slidell, Louisiana.  (
Sara was chosen as the subject of a film released in August 2006,  titled ''Sara Groves - Just Showed Up For My Own Life'', the first installment of a new reality film series called ''Nomad: The Show With No Home'' produced by Fearless Films Inc. Included in this film were video of the Katrina relief effort by Groves in 2005 and a subsequent trip to Rwanda, Africa with Pastor Rick Warren and a group from Saddleback Church to learn about the challenges of reconciliation and economic development 11 years after the mass Rwandan genocide. Bonus features included Sara's live set from the 2006 Jars of Clay Tour, Nomad vignettes for small groups and more.
Sara gave birth to her third child, a girl, on July 13, 2007 and named her Ruby Cate. Sara and her husband, Troy, also have two sons Kirby (born in 2001) and Toby (born in 2003). On October 30, 2007, the first single from the upcoming album ''Tell Me What You Know'', titled "When the Saints", was featured as a free download from Apple's iTunes Store. INO Records released the album ''Tell Me What You Know'' on November 6, 2007. ''Tell Me What You Know'' held the #1 sales spot for Christian music on iTunes for one week and landed at #2 for iTunes album of the year.  Sara produced her father's, Dwight Colbaugh, first album titled ''Beautiful Story''. Groves ended 2007 in the lineup with Andrew Peterson on his ''Behold the Lamb of God Tour'' in November and December 2007.
In 2008, Groves toured throughout the year to promote her new album ''Tell Me What You Know'' and to benefit several Christian ministries. Sara and Troy Groves teamed up with Charlie Peacock, Derek Webb, Sandra McCracken and Brandon Heath in September and October 2008 for the ''Art*Music*Justice Tour'' to benefit both the International Justice Mission and Food For the Hungry.  Sara released her first Christmas album, ''O Holy Night'', in October 2008. The album contains both Christmas standards and newly written material. Groves was in the linup in December 2008 of the ''Love Came Down Tour: A Christmas Pageant'' with Jars of Clay, Sixpence None the Richer and Leeland. She ended 2008 with a free concert at the United States Medical Center for Federal Prisoners in Springfield, Missouri. The USMCFP  is the same prison that Sara's grandparents, Lloyd and Nita Colbaugh, have visited for 39 years and to which they took her as a baby at Christmas-time 1972. Sara said later about this concert, "More than anything I wanted to say something of encouragement, something to remind these men that they are the art of God, especially in this place.  Like always, I left encouraged myself."
Groves' ninth album, ''Fireflies & Songs'', was released on November 17, 2009. On the track "From This One Place," Groves sings about her battles with onstage anxiety attacks.  The album, ''Fireflies and Songs'', was named Album of the Year by ''Christianity Today'' as the "runaway" #1 choice by a panel of ten music critics choosing Christianity Today's Top 12 Albums of 2009.  Groves ended 2009 with her first solo Christmas tour performing songs from her 2008 Holiday release ''O Holy Night''.