The '''MassMutual Center''' is a multi-purpose arena and convention center, in downtown Springfield, Massachusetts, USA. Built in the city's metro center across from Court Square, the facility opened in 1972 as the '''Springfield Civic Center''' and was at the time considered to be the largest arena in the region. It was owned and operated by the City of Springfield for eighteen years, before going into private hands for the following next six years. In 1996, it reverted to city control. A few years later, the Massachusetts Legislature authorized a major renovation of the facility and transferred ownership to the Massachusetts Convention Center Authority (MCCA). The project included a renovation of the 8,000 seat arena and construction of a new 100,000 sq. ft. convention center facing Main Street where a plaza and bank once occupied. In 2005, the Center was renamed when Massachusetts Mutual Life Insurance Company entered into a naming rights agreement for the arena and convention center. Its grand opening occurred on October 1, 2005. It is home to the Springfield Falcons of the American Hockey League and the Springfield Armor of the NBA Development League. It is nicknamed "The Nest", because it is home to the Falcons.
The arena will be hosting the 2012-2014 MAAC Basketball Championships.
In 1997, the City of Springfield transferred ownership of the facility to the Massachusetts Legislature in which they announced plans for a renovation and expansion of the facility. In 1998, the Legislature turned ownership of the building over to the Massachusetts Convention Center Authority (MCCA). In the fall of 2003, the project was publicly announced and demolition of the bank sitting next to the building, along with the facility's plaza and exhibit hall began. In the fall of 2005, the $71 million renovation project was completed. The renovation included new seats, handrails, signage, sound system, HVAC system, plumbing, and electrical to the existing arena. The arena floor was redone with new pipelines for the ice rink and new chillers were installed. The project also included 222 club seats, a bar and lounge, clubroom, an executive suite, along with larger restrooms and 11 newly refurbrished concession stands. A new box office and lobby were also added. The arena was still operational during the two year project which was funded by city and state tax payers and other state funds.
The arena box office is located on Falcons Way. The arena has 3 levels:
With renovations to the existing arena, a brand new state-of-the-art convention center was added. With , it is the largest convention center in Western Massachusetts. It includes two exhibition halls, which total over , 3 ballrooms that total , 5 meeting rooms that total some , and  of pre-function space. Its unique design connects both the convention center and arena to add an additional  of floor space. The convention center is able to host galas, weddings, consumer and trade shows, concerts, conventions, conferences, and many other functions of various sizes.