I have trouble finding an authoritative source for what XBee '''is'''.
For instance,
Sample page containing XBee: http://www.digi.com/products/wireless/point-multipoint/xbee-series1-module.jsp
I want to know what the gray colored non- magnetic metal in the center of the back of the CPU? I would also like to know the gold content ion the pins on the front of a CPU?     Preceding   comment added by   ( ) 04:53, 31 December 2010 (UTC) 
Why are cell phones so expensive compared to other electronics? I have noticed many touchscreen internet and media tablets have for a long time offered everything single thing a cell phone does except phone calls and 2G/3G data and cost $200-300 less. Now, with Google Android there are more and more internet media tablets coming out. Why don't those smaller manufactures just add the 3G antenna/card into those to make them phones? Similar phones are selling for more than double. And with Google Android, frankly the lack "brand name" reputation is largely mitigated.   ( ) 11:24, 31 December 2010 (UTC)
Oh I am also wondering, is Android free for OEM's to install on their devices? Doesn't this significantly reduce the cost of devoloping a phone or internet media table?   ( ) 11:27, 31 December 2010 (UTC)
Is there any video download tool bar for Opera 11 available out there? I have used ant toolbar for IE and Firefox. It was great. Now I am looking for similar tool bar for Opera 11. Thanks--    11:49, 31 December 2010 (UTC)
I would like to extend a Mediawiki install by having either a tab along the top of the article or an edit button that performs the following function: It adds a predefined text string to the article (at the end is fine) and then saves the edit. Ideally this would be a tabbed link at the top to the right of history, watch, etc. , but it can also be a edit toolbar button on the edit page. Could someone point me in the right direction how to do it , ideally in the first way? Thank you. --  ( ) 15:41, 31 December 2010 (UTC)
After the article ''Samuel Garner Wilder'' was moved to Samuel Gardner Wilder the spelling in the URL ( differs from the article title. The redirect page  seems to be ok. The talk page   shows the right spelling instead. In the HTML source text of the article the spelling without ''d'' can be seen in the tags
Hello all, I'm developing a  (I am a noob and it's early-ish stages yet) and I have a question about accessibility - How do I build it in to the website? I'm currenty using a single CSS stylesheet to set the appearance of the site, and then building the content in html, is there any sort of widget I can add to site to do things like increasing the text size, use high-contrast colours etc., or do I need to build this in to the CSS doc? (I'm thinking something like the widget on the  ).
Any tips or good links are much appreciated. Happy new year Wikipedians ;)   ( ) 20:16, 31 December 2010 (UTC)
As a frequenter of many websites, I would like to echo the above advice; please don't use widgets and excessive javascript and weird size changing options etc - it confuses me, slows down my browser and makes me sad :(   ( ) 20:51, 31 December 2010 (UTC)
When I looked into this in the past, I found out that some search engines share their content with other search engines. Is there a list anywhere of the best independent search engines? For example, if the best search engine is Google, what is the next best engine that does not simply use Google's content? The search engine or List of search engines articles does not give such a list. 
Second question, is Dogpile the best metasearch engine? Thanks   ( ) 20:49, 31 December 2010 (UTC)
If I'm searching for some information that is only to be found on an obscure little-visited website, then the best search engine would be the one most likely to find it.   ( ) 14:13, 1 January 2011 (UTC)
Let me put it another way: which search engines use the content from other search engines? For example, the Yahoo! Search article says it is "powered by" Bing. So if you have searched on one of the two already, there would be no point searching on the other one as you would just get the same results. What other search engines are "powered by" other search engines?
And which search engines have the largest database?   ( ) 22:32, 1 January 2011 (UTC)