The '''Power Tower''' is the first high-rise office tower to attempt to meet the strict Passive House energy efficiency building standard.  It was built to house the corporate headquarters of the Austrian utility company Energie AG in Linz, Austria.
In accordance with the Passive House standard the building has no connection to the local district heating system, and requires no fossil fuel inputs to maintain a comfortable interior climate, resulting in much lower carbon dioxide emissions than comparable buildings.  The energy demands of the 74 m tower, located in the Linz train station district, are instead met by a dynamic combination of existing technologies, applied in novel ways.  The building was in part built to demonstrate that extreme energy efficiency is possible even in very high density developments, and garnered a great deal of media attention in Austria and the EU over the course of its construction from 2006 to 2008.
In 2004 Energie AG decided to replace its corporate headquarters, built in the 1930s, with a much more efficient building.  After an architectural competition the Zurich firm Weber/Hofer was chosen to lead the design effort.  In the spring of 2006 construction began on the 3,750 m^2 lot.  The site houses a parking garage, a two story building, and the 19-story office tower.  Construction was completed in the late summer of 2008, and the building now provides offices for 600 employees of 13 different companies.
In addition to its remarkable energy efficiency, the building is an interesting example of modern architectural design in its own right, with a dynamically controlled artistic light installation integrated into its facade.  The yellow strips are composed of LEDs and illuminate the building at night.
The Power Tower minimizes its external energy consumption via several integrated systems.  Overall the building is expected to use 50% less energy than a comparable building built using traditional methods.
The building envelope was specially engineered to allow maximum daylighting while minimizing solar gain, which would normally be excessive and require a great deal of active cooling, given that two thirds of the facade is composed of glazing.  The envelope is nearly airtight and extremely insulating.  The windows are quadruple glazed, and contain integrated operable reflective louvers which allow office occupants to control the solar gain of their individual spaces.  The floors are thermally isolated from each other and very little airflow is permitted between them to avoid creating a convection stack, which would otherwise result in upper floors being much warmer than lower ones.  The south facing facade is largely composed of 700 m^2 of photovoltaic solar panels, which generate roughly 42 megawatt-hours of electricity each year, providing for much of the building's energy demands.
Beneath the building, 46 geothermal wells, each 150 m deep were drilled prior to construction.  Heat is extracted from the Earth and used in conjunction with a ground source heat pump system to provide both heating and cooling services for the building.  In addition cold groundwater is used to efficiently cool the datacenter which is hosted within the building.