What is the name of the sail that hangs under the bowsprit, as seen  ? --''' ''' (''  '''  '''   '''  '''  '') 00:02, 14 January 2011 (UTC)
The articles on positron emission and such don't really explain this well. My understanding is that a proton absorbs a W+ boson and it then turns into a neutron while releasing a positron and an electron neutrino. Is this correct?   ( ) 04:57, 14 January 2011 (UTC)
Thanks, but a proton needs energy in order to turn into a neutron. Where does the energy come from?   ( ) 18:18, 14 January 2011 (UTC)
Even though I don't tithe regularly, I don't like to let God down by depriving His churches this way. While reflecting on this, I decided that a better, 21st-century way to tithe would be to give a gift that will keep on giving long after the initial offering. 
Such a gift would be in the form of residential wind turbines or solar panels. An energy-generating wind-turbine of any form could be well out of my budget range (I'm looking for no more than a $400 investment) so I've decided to find our campus ministry center a solar panel to donate.
Froogle.com won't be too useful when I search for "used solar panel," so that's why I seek your suggestions. I prefer used for the cost savings, but I hope they're still quite useful despite no longer being new. I also hope for a substantial power output from the said panel. The more watts-per-dollar, the better.
I believe that when item donations to churches/ministry centers keep generating them money (or saving them costs), the donor would keep tithing to God even when not actively giving. Therefore, I would call this a form of "passive tithing," a term most of you have never heard of, but would be possible thanks to these environmentally-inclined power generators.     Preceding   comment added by   ( ) 09:14, 14 January 2011 (UTC)  --  ( ) 09:14, 14 January 2011 (UTC)
Do we have an article/s that deal/s with persisting levels of radiation in these cities? I couldn't find the information during a quick flick through some likely articles. --  ( ) 10:43, 14 January 2011 (UTC)
I have searched and searched for information on birds and animals living along the Rhine River, to no avail.  Can you help?     Preceding   comment added by   ( ) 13:38, 14 January 2011 (UTC) 
This is kind of off the wall, but: I heard a comedian state that he wanted to be cremated because he "didn't want to end up as someone's oil" at some point in the future. Now, the unlikeliness of that aside, it got me wondering: how much biomass from ancient life end up as a barrel of crude. Or more simply: How many "dinosaurs" (I know, I know...) are in one gallon of gasoline/petrol?    15:51, 14 January 2011 (UTC)
I asked the question  when there were still leaves oon the trees. I never remember to ask anyone on the college campus where the trees may be located. Or even if it is someone else's land, they have professors who teach students to identify trees. But I can't remember to do it. 
This time of year the fruit or whatever you want to call it is dark brown and just hanging there. The bark makes the trees look like the leg of a deceased person. Those are the only clues I can offer. &nbsp;'''  '''  &nbsp;'''  '''  &nbsp;'''  ''' 20:17, 14 January 2011 (UTC)
For keeping donated blood from clotting, anticoagulants are added to it. However, what happens during a blood transfusion? Does the receiving patient get some anti-anti-coagulant or doesn't it matter?   ( ) 23:15, 14 January 2011 (UTC)