Note:  If you are seeing this page as a result of an attempt to re-nominate an article for deletion, you must manually edit the AfD nomination links in order to create a new discussion page using the name format of  .  When you create the new discussion page, please provide a link to this old discussion in your nomination. -->
The result was    '''delete'''. -- ''' ''' ( ) 17:41, 25 January 2011 (UTC)
This article is vanispam. Look carefully to see the forest through the trees.
Author bases claims on own work:
Author makes mountains out of molehills looking for notability. For instance, footnote 5, sourcing a statement from the lead about the many publications, reads "See references 19 to 35 below." Those references are ''at best'' pointers to primary evidence, and some of them quite shallow, as a sampling shows:
I could go on, but I won't. There are no secondary sources that establish the author's notability. There seems to be one single mention of the author, in a Livemint-associated blog,  (where he is denounced as a xenophobe). The two books listed in the LoC are self-published; see  and . This article is puffery and, worse, spam, attempting to create notability for and author and his works which were subsequently cited in contentious articles such as Environment of Delhi and Ethnic groups in Delhi.   ( ) 16:25, 18 January 2011 (UTC)
I checked and found that there is a reference to him on Yahoo News too. This is the number one online news portal. Additionally, the references to contributions in overseas journals are accurate. He has also contributed to the Hindu, south India's top paper, the Hindustan Times, north's India's top paper and to the Illustrated Weekly of India, the top journal of yesteryears. Overall this is fair proof of notability. So many Indian journalists have sketches on the Wikipedia; but few among them have contributed to overseas publications and few have been alluded to in Yahoo New or the Christian Science Monitor--this latter is among the top three journals of the USA.
Some of the editorial comment shows poor literacy. Thus the first line right at the top of the page says: "Look carefully to see the forest through the trees". This is hilarious! How can you see through a tree? Will you cut a hole in the trunk! There is no such expression, but if you do want to use it anyway, it should be rather 'look carefully to see the trees through the forest'.
I could go on.     Preceding   comment added by   ( ) 16:49, 22 January 2011 (UTC) 
The comment about the illiterate use of English by the self-appointed editor is absolutely correct. The correct expression is 'mistaking the woods for the trees' and it refers to a failure to distinguish general issues from specific details. His focus is precisely on small details, so is yours; and his claim is that small details are falsified. The expression is not used in instances of alleged fraud--which is exactly what his charge is.
Another instance of poor English is the expression 'walled garden'. Most gardens are walled, e.g. the Mughals Gardens in Delhi. Nor is the new information technology meaning applicable here. So what does the masked creature from the animal kingdom mean? Nothing! He is just trying to sound more sophisticated than he is. Anyhow, we'll let that pass; illiteracy is widespread.
For the CSM link click the note 11 and then go to page two. As for Yahoo News, retrieval is more complicated because they have archived the story. I am writing to Yahoo to see how it may be retrieved. Other links such as those referring to Gulf News and Minnesota Post both work and demonstrate how the references are accurate. Again read till the end of the report.
It is obvious that these semi-educated vandals are motivated by personal animus and have neither the ability nor the integrity to judge another individual's work.     Preceding   comment added by   ( ) 05:55, 24 January 2011 (UTC) 