Prompted by the increasing trend of portable electronics devices to rely on standard USB ports to charge batteries and the increasing number of dedicated USB chargers being produced, the USB Implementers Forum in March, 2007 released revision 1.0 of the USB Battery Charging Specification (with updates in 2009 (1.1) and 2010 (1.2)).  The specification defines, "...limits as well as detection, control and reporting mechanisms to permit  devices to draw current in excess of the USB 2.0 specification for charging and/or powering up from dedicated  chargers, hosts, hubs and charging downstream ports."
In June 2009, many of the world's largest mobile phone manufacturers signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU), agreeing to make most new data-enabled cell phones marketed in the European Union compatible with a common External Power Supply (EPS).  All signatories agreed to develop a common specification for the EPS "to allow for full compatibility and safety of chargers and mobile phones."  As of 2011, 14 mobile phone manufacturers and technology providers have signed the MoU     the original 10 signatories, Apple, LG, Motorola, NEC, Nokia, Qualcomm, RIM, Samsung, Sony Ericsson, and Texas Instruments as well as Atmel, Emblaze Mobile, Huawei Technologies and TCT Mobile (Alcatel).  
In October 2009, the European Commission issued a standardisation mandate to CEN, CENELEC and ETSI on a common Charging Capability for Mobile Telephones.  In response to this mandate, CENELEC created a task force to develop the interoperability specifications of the common External Power Supply.  The resulting technical specifications were published in December 2010 as EN 62684:2010,    Interoperability specifications of common external power supply (EPS) for use with data-enabled mobile telephones."  In March 2011, the USB Implementers Forum agreed to allow CENELEC "...to make reference to USB technology in its European Standard EN62684:2010 and...to grant download access to USB technical specifications free of charge and at any time to manufacturers implementing this European Standard."
Unlike some other common power supply standards (e.g. the OMTP Common Charging Solution's CPS specification) which mandate a charger with a USB-A socket and a detachable cable, the EU common External Power Supply (EPS) specification allows for chargers with either (a) a USB-A socket and detachable (USB-A connector to Micro USB-B connector) cable or (b) no socket and a 'captive' cable terminated with a Micro USB-B connector.  The MoU which defines the common External Power Supply (EPS) as well as the related EU standardisation mandate both allow for the use of the common External Power Supply also with phones not equipped with a Micro USB receptacle.  "... 4.2.1...if a manufacturer makes available an Adaptor from the Micro-USB connector of a Common EPS to a specific non-Micro-USB socket in the Mobile Phone, it shall constitute compliance to this article" and, "...An Adaptor can also be a detachable cable."
The common EPS initiative was generally well received although at least one European consumer group bemoaned the voluntary nature and narrow scope of the initiative (EU only, hand-held data-enabled mobile phones only) and the fact that, unlike the OMTP's CPS, the EU's EPS specification does not set aggressive energy efficiency (no-load consumption) requirements.
In February 2009, the GSM Association (GSMA), together with 6 mobile phone manufacturers and technology providers and 11 mobile service providers, announced their commitment to implementing a cross-industry standard for a common / universal charging solution for new mobile phones and chargers.  The aim of the GSMA initiative is, "...to ensure that the mobile industry adopts a common format for mobile phone charger connections and energy-efficient chargers...".  Universal Charging Solution (UCS) chargers are to use Micro-USB as the common universal charging interface and have a 4-star or higher efficiency rating (standby energy use    0.15W).  
OMTP (the Open Mobile Terminal Platform industry forum) specified the requirements of the GSMA's Universal Charging Solution and published V1.0 of these requirements under the title "Common Charging and Local Data Connectivity" in February, 2009 (final revision 1.1 published in 2010).  This document specifies the three components of a Common Charging Solution (CCS): a Charging and Local Data Connector (CLD) on the "terminal" (e.g. mobile phone) consisting of a USB Micro-B or USB Micro-AB socket; a Common Power Supply (CPS) with a USB-A socket; and a detachable USB-A to USB Micro-B cable to connect the power supply with the mobile phone.  As of early 2011, an additional 10 service providers and one additional mobile phone manufacturer have joined the agreement.
In April, 2009, the industry trade group CTIA announced its support of the Universal Charging Solution.  The International Telecommunication Union (ITU) announced in October 2009 that it had also embraced the Universal Charging Solution standard - based on input from the GSMA - as its "energy-efficient one-charger-fits-all new mobile phone solution."
In December 2006, the Chinese Ministry of Industry and Information Technology (MII) released a new CCSA (China Communications Standards Association) standard, "Technical Requirements and Test Method of Charger and Interface for Mobile Telecommunication Terminal Equipment" (CCSA YD/T 1591-2006, later updated to YD/T 1591-2009).  The standard describes the electromechanical requirements for a common mobile device battery charger equipped with a USB-A socket providing 5V DC power.  All new mobile phones requesting network access approval in China from June 2007 are required to support charging from the new common chargers.  The original 2006 regulation is flexible regarding the interface on the mobile phone itself, allowing for the use of adapter cables if the mobile device is not equipped with a standard USB connector.   Among other things, the 2009 update adds references to USB On-The-Go (OTG) support and the use of USB Micro B, USB Micro AB, USB Mini B, USB Mini 10 pin and cylindrical ("barrel") type connectors on the terminal (phone) for charging.
In March 2001, the Korean Telecommunications Technology Association (TTA) released the "Standard on I/O Connection Interface of Digital Cellular Phone" TTAS.KO-06.0028 (later updated in 2002 (/R2), and in 2007 (/R4)).  The standard describes the electromechanical interface specifications for cellular phone charging, wired data communication, analog audio, etc.  Two related test and certification standards were also published (TTAS.KO-06.0029 and TTAS.KO-06.0030).  The main feature of the standard is the specification of a 24 pin connector / socket for mobile phones to handle connections for power input (battery charging) and output, data communication (USB and other digital signals), analog audio inputs and outputs (for hands-free microphone, earphone) and other signals.  The 2007 revision of the standard  (TTAS.KO-06.0028/R3) specified a smaller 20 pin connector to succeed the 24 pin connector and added analog (composite) video output support, among other changes.  Chargers with the new 20 pin connectors started appearing in 2008 and domestic Korean phone manufacturers were urged to include 24 to 20 pin adapters with new phones sold to enable the charging of new phones with the older 24 pin chargers.