EIC operates very similarly to Kiva. In the case of Kiva, lenders provide funds with zero return expected to developing world entrepreneurs to invest in their businesses (typical loans are for things like seeds for farming). EIC does this as well, but specifically focuses on purchasing renewable energy systems like solar photovoltaic panels.
What makes EIC particularly unique in the microfinance non-profit sector is that they have created a model to measure the greenhouse gas emission reductions that are created by their loans.  The EIC model helps provide funding to developing world entrepreneurs for energy solutions and also helps to channel additional funding into mitigating climate change.
The following list of primarily renewable energy technologies:
Biodigesters convert organic wastes such as food waste, human waste and animal waste into nutrient rich liquid fertilizer and biogas (thus a renewable fuel made up primarily of methane). A biodigester is made up of a bag or tank that holds the organic 'wastes' over a period in which bacteria breaks down the organic matter and produces biogas. Biogas is used as a replacement for kerosene, firewood, or any other combustible fuel source used in the developing world such as cow dung. Biodegesters thus produce renewable energy, cut down on odors and pathogens in organic materials, reduce surface and groundwater contamination, improve indoor air quality and provide a source of high quality organic fertilizer as a byproduct   that has been shown to improve crop yields and decrease fertilizer costs.(citation needed)
Clean burning stoves improve the fuel utilization over common stoves. There are several types but the ones funded often burn propane instead of less efficient fuels such as wood, charcoal, or dung. This is somewhat controversial as currently this allows for economic savings although clearly there is a potential to have negative effects of becoming dependent on a non-renewable energy source, which in many cases needs to be imported. Less controversial, is a clean burning stove that uses  wood, charcoal, or dung, but burns more efficiently. These stoves funded by EIC are designed to increase the airflow to the fuel source, creating a better flame and reducing the amount of fuel required to provide a given amount of heat to the target (e.g. it takes less fuel wood to cook dinner). Both types of clean burning stoves reduce the costs associated with fuel use and improve the indoor air quality within the homes of the users.
The LED lamps combine a small solar photovoltaic panel with a rechargeable battery and an array of LED lights into an effective lighting system, which is used to replace dangerous (indoor air quality, GHG emitting, and fire hazard) kerosene lamps. LED lights are known to be very efficient, which prolongs illumination time on the charging made available by the PV.
A typical solar photovoltaic home system funded by EIC consists of a small solar panel (both pole or roof mounted) connected to a charge controller and a small battery. The stored solar electricity can be used both in the day and after dark to power lights and an electrical socket for other electrical equipment (e.g. cell phone charger, OLPC, radio, TV, or computer).
EIC creates carbon offsets from emission reductions that have occurred over the loan term and only once the loan term has finished. In this way, lenders and those that make donations to retire carbon credits can be sure that all emission reductions have already happened.
They do this by providing a detailed questionnaires before, during and after the loan, and in-depth field surveys conducted by both by EIC and independent auditing firms in order to sell the carbon offsets. The particularly clever part is that loaners may then buy the carbon credits and get a tax credit from EIC.
In order to overcome the initial investment barrier that many people have when considering microfinance EIC developed the "Nanoloan" concept. For most microfinance institutions (e.g. Kiva) the minimum loan is $25 and the average time until repayment is about 18 months. This can put a lot of well-intentioned people off of the concept. EIC Nanoloans are a limited run of $5 loans, specifically designed to be repaid in just 60 days. The object of offering nanoloans is to introduce new lenders to the entire microlending process fast.
EIC has been covered extensively in the green alternative press including The Huffington Post, Mother Nature Network, GreenBiz, the Next Billion  and the standard press such as CNN.