The '''Palestine Papers''', representing publication of information hidden from public records and containing a cache of nearly 1,700 files, are the largest news leak in the history of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. They were released in January 2011  by Al-Jazeera. Thousands of pages of diplomatic correspondence detailing the inner workings of the Israeli-Palestinian peace process, documents   memos, e-mails, maps, minutes from private meetings, accounts of high level exchanges, strategy papers and even power point presentations   dating from 1999 to 2010, were released between January 23 and 26, 2011.
There are 1,684 total documents, including:
The documents were obtained by Al-Jazeera and shared in advance of publication with ''The Guardian'' in an effort to ensure the wider availability of their content. ''The Guardian'' has authenticated the bulk of the papers independently, but has not sought or been given access to the sources of the documents. Al-Jazeera, which is publishing the papers in full on their website, has redacted minimal parts of the papers in order to protect their sources' identities.  Gershon Baskin, codirector of Israel Palestinian Center for Research, said "I'm 100 percent sure that it   s a former disgruntled employed" member of the Negotiations Support Unit headed by Palestinian chief negotiator Saeb Erekat.  Israel's Channel 10 news show also named the source of the leak as a former member of the NSU.
Akiva Eldar, writing in ''Haaretz'', said that the documents are more important than those released by Wikileaks because they deal with current issues regarding permanent borders in the West Bank and East Jerusalem.
According to one of the documents, the Palestinian Authority was prepared to concede all Israeli settlements in and around East Jerusalem, as well as the Armenian Quarter, with the exception of Har Homa. The Temple Mount would be temporarily administrated by a joint body consisting of the Palestinian Authority, Israel, Egypt, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, and the United States until a permanent solution was reached. Palestinian negotiator Saeb Erekat confirmed that such a proposal had indeed been made, but said that it had been proposed by Israel and rejected by the Palestinians, who continued demanding all of East Jerusalem.
According to the Palestine Papers, Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmert proposed that East Jerusalem be divided between Israel and the Palestinian Authority according to the Clinton Parameters.
At a meeting in Jerusalem in November 2007, according to the documents, Tzipi Livni became visibly angry when asked about the demographic composition of the future Israeli state.  She was quoted as saying "Israel the state of the Jewish people -- and I would like to emphasize the meaning of    its people    is the Jewish people   with Jerusalem the united and undivided capital of Israel and of the Jewish people for 3007 years".  The Palestinians team then protested her position on Jerusalem.  She responded by saying "Now I have to say, before we continue, in order to continue we have to put out Jerusalem from your statement and from our place. We have enough differences, without putting another one out there".  Making the discussion of the borders of Jerusalem a none starter on the subject of borders.
Later in the discussion, Tzipi Livni told Ahmed Qurei that "I understand the sentiments of the Palestinians when they see the settlements being built. The meaning from the Palestinian perspective is that Israel takes more land, that the Palestinian state will be impossible, the Israel policy is to take more and more land day after day and that at the end of the day we'll say that it is impossible, we already have the land and cannot create the state".  She indicated that the position was not the policy of her current coalition but of other parties.  The Palestinian negotiators protested the idea that it settlement activity had been halted as well as pointed out that the issue of settlements also included settlement expansion and activity from the private sector.  Tzipi Livini responded to that by stating "When the government has  the tender in the past it means that the private sector won the tender and then it has the rights on the land. They are entitled to work on the land that they purchased".
According to the documents, in a meeting with Livni in Jerusalem, Qurei proposed that Israel annex all settlements along the border except for the large cities and towns of Giv'at Ze'ev, Ma'ale Adumim, Ariel, and Efrat. The documents indicate Livni rejected Qurei's demands that Israel cede these settlements. Qurei reportedly suggested to Livni that these settlements be placed under Palestinian sovereignty, but Livni told him "you know this is not realistic". According to the documents, Condoleezza Rice similarly told Qurei that "I don't think that any Israeli leader is going to cede Ma'ale Adumim", to which Qurei replied "or any Palestinian". Rice then told him "Then you won't have a state!"
According to the Palestine Papers, Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmert and Mahmoud Abbas held a series of peace proposal meetings during the middle of 2008 to September 16, 2008 in which the infamous "Napkin Map" incident occurred. During the first of these meeting, according to the records of the Palestine Papers, the Palestinian Authority proposed an unprecedented land swap. Offering Israel the opportunity to annex all of its illegal settlements in East Jerusalem. Israel, however, offered nothing in return in concessions at that meeting.http://english.aljazeera.net/palestinepapers/2011/01/2011122114239940577.html
During the next attempts to finalize borders, Ehud Olmert offered his own map in which Israel would annex more than 10% of the West Bank.  The land in Ehud Olmert's map included the four illegal settlement blocks of Gush Etzion (with Efrat), Ma'ale Adumim, Giv'at Ze'ev, and Ariel, in addition to all illegal Israeli settlements in East Jerusalem (Har Homa). In exchange for those lands, Ehud Olmert's proposed map offered 5.5% of Israeli land as part of the swap. The land offered consisted of lightly populated farmland, which would be divided between Gaza and The West Bank. When Mahmoud Abbas asked to keep a copy of the map for further consideration, Ehud Olmert refused to comply. Mahmoud Abbas was forced to sketch Ehud Olmert's map by hand on a napkin to have a copy for further consideration. This map was then later referred to as the Napkin Map.
The third and final meeting occurred on September 16, 2008.  It was during at the tail end of Ehud Olmert's political career as he planned on not running again due to various scandals. During that meeting, Mahmoud Abbas was prepared by the NSU to clarify many questions regarding Ehud Olmert's peace plan. In which Abbas was quoted as asking questions such as "How do you see it addressing our interests, especially as Ariel, Maale Adumim, Givat Zeev, Har Homa and Efrat clearly prejudice contiguity, water aquifers, and the viability of Palestine?" as well as others about the value of the land that they would receive in such a swap in terms of value and size.
The NSU also insisted on Ehud Olmert to provide them with a copy of the map which was again denied. In the end, however, Mahmoud Abbas asked for a few days to consider the offer. A day after this meeting Ehud Olmert was replaced as Prime minister by Tzipi Livni whom was soon replaced as prime minister by Benjamin Netanyahu. Benjamin Netanyahu refused to start negotiations with Mahmoud Abbas and a revised map he had created as well as refused to restart negotiations based on the more demanding and aggressive map created by Ehud Olmert.
Yankie Galenty, a media adviser for Ehud Olmert, affirmed the complete authenticity of the documents in an interview.  In regards to refugees, he stated that "Olmert, from day one, did not deceive Abu Mazen and told him that Israel will not allow the return of refugees and not one refugee will return to the land of Israel."
Other officials in the Israeli government have asked for a limited right of return numbering between five to ten thousand, out of a total of five million refugees, who would be carefully picked by Israel and allowed to stay under "humanitarian conditions". This has been a part of several concessions asked by both sides to, in essence, circumvent and nullify the Palestinian right of return.
According to the second night of the Al-Jazeera broadcast, Palestinians and Israelis eventually agreed that Israel would accept 10,000 refugees.
According to the papers, when the Israelis demanded that the Palestinians recognize Israel as a Jewish state, Saeb Erekat said "call it what you want... it's their issue, not mine".
US secretary of state during the Bush administration, Condoleezza Rice, proposed settling displaced Palestinians in Argentina and Chile as an alternative to letting them return to former homes in Israel and the occupied territories during a meeting.
Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas denied the authenticity of the Papers, saying that he had kept the Arab League updated on all details of the negotiations with Israel. Abbas said the Palestinians' alleged concessions on Jerusalem and refugees were Israeli positions during the talks, and that it was a "mix up".
 He resigned from his position on 12 February citing the release of the papers. Under pressure from the papers, the PLO called for a presidential and parliamentary elections in the second-half of 2011. Erekat said that the "Palestinian Authority would never give up any of our rights. If we did indeed offer Israel the Jewish and Armenian Quarters of Jerusalem, and the biggest Yerushalayim as they claim, then why did Israel not sign a final status agreement? Is it not strange that we would offer all these concessions which Israel demands, yet there is still no peace deal?"
Yasser Abed Rabbo, giving the PA's first official response, accused ''Al Jazeera'' and the Government of Qatar of attacking the Palestinian Authority, having a hostile attitude towards the PA since the days of former president Yasser Arafat. Abed Rabbo was quoted saying that the Al-Jazera leaks are "a distortion of the truth". Abed Rabbo accused the Emir of Qatar, Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa al-Thani, of giving Al Jazeera the "green light" to start the campaign, and called on the Emir to "extend the climate of transparency in his own state and reveal his true relations with Israel and Iran".
Mahmoud al-Zahar, a senior Hamas official in Gaza, stated that the Palestinian Authority officials should be ashamed of themselves.
Ahmed Qurei, former Prime Minister of the Palestinian Authority and chief Palestinian negotiator in the 2008 talks, said that "many parts of the documents were fabricated, as part of the incitement against the Palestinian Authority and the Palestinian leadership."
Nasser Gawi, a lead organizer for demonstrations at Sheikh Jarrah where he had been recently evicted by settlers from his home, was quoted as saying "Erekat must have become more Zionist than Zionist. He has no mandate to give up Sheikh Jarrah or an inch of Palestine." 
Israeli Foreign Minister Avigdor Lieberman said that "even the most left-wing government of Olmert and Livni did not manage to reach a peace agreement, despite the many concessions." He also promoted his plan for peace, which would allocate 45% to 50% of the West Bank for the creation of a Palestinian state.
Livni said that "the  process did not fail and was not exhausted. It did not end, but was not allowed to ripen until an agreement was reached because of elections in Israel and this government's choice not to continue the negotiations."
A ''Guardian'' editorial stated, "It is hard to tell who appears worst: the Palestinian leaders, who are weak, craven and eager to shower their counterparts with compliments; the Israelis, who are polite in word but contemptuous in deed; or the Americans, whose neutrality consists of bullying the weak and holding the hand of the strong. Together they conspire to build a puppet state in Palestine, at best authoritarian, at worst a surrogate for an occupying force. To obtain even this form of bondage, the Palestinians have to flog the family silver. Saeb Erekat, the PLO chief negotiator, is reduced at one point to pleading for a fig leaf: 'What good am I if I'm the joke of my wife, if I'm so weak,' he told Barack Obama's Middle East envoy George Mitchell."
Ziyad Clot, a lawyer of Palestinian descent involved in 2008 Annapolis negotiations exposed himself as the source of the leaks.