Ricardo began his athletic training with boxing lessons at age 12. His older brother Phil was already studying BJJ at Maxercise and Rick occasionally attended classes at Maxercise with him. It wasn   t until age 16 that he began his Brazilian Jiu Jitsu classes regularly, attending class several times a week and cleaning the school to pay for his tuition. Soon, Rick began to compete in in-house tournaments with favorable results. Rick and Phil decided to study the martial art at the Gracie Academy in California and spent much of that time dedicating themselves to their teacher training. Learning directly from Grand Master Helio Gracie as well as other prominent members of the Gracie family, Rick began to take his own practice to the next level.  In 1999, Rick traveled out of the country for the first time - to Brazil for the Mundials. He won the silver medal in the Blue Belt division to start what would be a successful and impressive professional career. Highlights of his record include :
Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu World Championships
USA vs Brazil Championship
Pan American Jiu-Jitsu Championships
American National Jiu-Jitsu Championships
Major Tournament Accomplishments:
2004 Pro Am Gracie Nationals Brown Belt Heavyweight - Champion
2004 Grapplers Quest NA Championships No-Gi Heavyweight - Champion
2004 Copa Atlantica Brown Belt Heavyweight - Champion
2004 Arnold/Gracie World Championship Brown Belt Open - 3rd Place
2004 Arnold/Gracie World Championship Brown Belt Heavyweight - Champion
2004 Grapplers Quest Beast of the East No-Gi Light Heavyweight - Champion
2002 Arnold/Gracie World Championship Purple Belt Open - Champion
2002 Arnold/Gracie World Championship Purple Belt Heavyweight - Champion
2001 Mat Madness Proving Grounds - 3rd Place
2001 NAGA Garden State Championship Purple Belt - Champion
2001 NAGA Garden State Championships No-Gi - Champion
1997 Annual Gracie Jiu-Jitsu Tournament - Gold Medalist
1996 Annual Gracie Jiu-Jitsu Tournament - Gold Medalist
In 2002, Phil and Rick opened Balance Studios, the only Relson Gracie affiliate in Philadelphia. After injuring his knee in 2004 and knee surgery in 2005, Rick modified a standard guard position, the butterfly guard, so that he could train while protecting his knee. He created the    Broken butterfly    guard which was showcased in an issue of Tap-Out Magazine. Ricardo received his black belt from Relson Gracie in December 2005  and is one of only 28 people to receive this honor from Relson who is notorious for being very hard on promotions.
Rick and Phil have trained professional athletes and MMA fighters including Philadelphia Eagles Tra Thomas  and Winston Justice, UFC fighters Frankie Edgar and Waylon Lowe, Bellator fighter Tim Carpenter. Team Balance World and Pan-Am Champions include Rick Macauley, Dan Haney, Timmy Hart,  Shaun Smith, Guy Winters, Ken Primola, Noah Spear. Rick and Phil continue to teach adult and children's  seminars, regular classes and programs for local police officers and FBI agents. Rick has been featured in several Magazine articles including    Growing Up Gracie    in MMA Worldwide magazine and as an author in Philadelphia Magazine (    The Jiu Jitsu Lifestyle    ).
References
External Links: