Armstrong earned First Class Honours in Politics, Philosophy, and Economics from Oxford University.
Armstrong joined the BBC in 1971, after he was spotted by the then head of religious programming John Lang. He quickly moved from radio into television, founding well-known series like ''Everyman'', ''Songs of Praise'', and ''Global Report'', as well as writing and producing one-off series and programmes including ''The Sea of Faith'', which led to the formation of ''The Sea of Faith'' movement. 
Armstrong was innovative in his approach to religious programming, insisting that, rather than viewing the world through the lens of faith, the programmes (''Everyman'' and ''Heart of the Matter'') would bring a journalist's eye to bear on the world's faith communities.
Inspired by the original Domesday Book, Peter Armstrong wondered if it would be possible to harness technology to recreate the philosophy of the Domesday Book, but applied to modern Britain. The resulting BBC Domesday Project, bought together millions of UK citizens to produce an interactive record of the nation. He went on to create the  award-winning Interactive Television Unit, and became its chair when it floated as the MultiMedia Corporation.
In 1995, Armstrong co-founded oneworld.net, the first internet portal devoted to global justice and development. Oneworld.net's central purpose was to act as a newswire for issues related to social justice     to  aggregate and highlight the content of development NGOs such as Oxfam and Christian Aid. Oneworld joined Yahoo!'s world news platform in 2001 alongside newswires such as AP and Reuters. Sarah Wright, Yahoo! News Editor, said "OneWorld journalists provide a unique and valuable resource to Yahoo by providing context for international headlines and voices from the front lines of international development."
In 2004, Armstrong received a Lifetime Achievement BAFTA at the Interactive Awards, the second person after Tim Berners Lee, the inventor of the World Wide Web.
BAFTA Recognition for Peter Armstrong|accessdate=2011-01-30}}