In 1944 at a Trossachs Camp meeting a meeting was called to discuss the location and operation of a bible school that would serve the churches in the ACOP, which at the time was called the    Full Gospel Missions Fellowship   . At this meeting five men were appointed to carry out the work of starting a bible college for the fellowship. The five men on this Committee were Glen McLean, Lorne Pritchard, Ron Burnside, Elmer Powers, and Harold Hollands.
These five men build the foundation for the Full Gospel Bible Institute (FGBI) that opened its doors on November 6, 1944 welcoming six students. Eston was chosen as the location for the Bible School after a number of locations were considered. Some of these were Pangman SK, Trossachs SK, and Eston SK.    G. S. McLean   s presence at Eston and the local churches willingness to donate a site at Eston may have been factors that tipped the scales.    
Situated in the far south-east corner of the small farming community, Eston College began with an old farm house and use of the Eston Full Gospel Church on the other side of town. The student body grew quickly and by the second term of 1944-45 school year there were 18 students registered. During the early years G. S. McLean was the Principle with Rev. Wilfred B. Mitchell and his wife serving as teachers, the registrar, and the secretary. The early years depended upon adjunct faculty such as Lorne Pritchard, Ern Baxter, and Albert Marshall. The bible education received in these early years set a precedent for the future of FGBI.
In a meeting in Eston on October 8, 1953 the governing bodies of FGBI and the Apostolic Missionary Training Institute (AMTI) met for the final time to complete the merger of the two bible schools. The two church fellowships of the ACOP and the Evangelical Churches of Pentecost were already undergoing talks of a merger and it was deemed unnecessary to have two bible schools. It was decided that AMTI would close down and the students would be transferred to FGBI.
G. S. McLean served at the president of FGBI for 39 years and saw the small prairie bible school grow from 6 students in its inaugural year to a peak that stands to this day of 187 students in 1976. During this time FGBI also saw its campus develop and other departments open within the institution. Notably FGBI Press, Summer Institute of Missions, the A. D. Marshall Library, The Bible and Science Department, and was host to numerous conferences and gatherings.
In April 1983 the Board of Directors of FGBI appointed Rev. Alan Mortensen as president and Willard Mitchell as Vice President. Although G. S. McLean retired as president he became Chancellor of the Full Gospel Bible Institute until his death in 2000. Alan Mortensen would lead FGBI through the next 12 years seeing growth and change take place as time progressed through the eighties and nineties. During Alan Mortensen   s tenure as president there was a devastating fire that destroyed the chapel which led to further campus development, there were new ministry opportunities that were made available, a flag was adopted for the institution, and growth was to take place after an enrolment low in 1986 with 97 students.
In 1997 the College Board of Directors appointed Todd Atkinson, a young Oxford graduate, as President on FGBI. During Atkinson   s time at FGBI there was significant campus development and a newly recognized desire to see the School move toward accreditation so it could offer degrees and transferable credit.
In 1999 Lauren Miller was appointed president. During the 10 years that Lauren Miller was president FGBI changed its name to The Full Gospel Bible College in October 2005, and then again to Eston College in May 2007. The college started to grant Bachelor of Biblical Studies Degrees in 2000 offering diploma upgrades to previous graduates (see academics) and currently enrolled students a 4 year bachelors program. Miller guided the college through the eight year accreditation process with the Association for Biblical Higher Education with the college receiving full accreditation in May 2007.,, Eston College, Eston College
Brian Fuller was appointed president in 2008. During the three years since he has seen significant changes take place at Eston College. Two of these changes include a renewed focus on discipleship; a new program being offered called GO Discipleship.
There have been five presidents of Eston College 
Eston College offers a variety of programs all with a focus on biblical studies and theology. At the conclusion of the eight year accreditation process the Association for Biblical Higher Education gave Eston College accredited status.
Eston College offers a Certificate, Associate Diploma, Diploma in, and Bachelor of, Biblical Studies, as well as Bachelor of Arts degrees in Christian Studies and Interdisciplinary Studies. The college also teaches English as a Second Language and offers a program that provides students with accredited classes in tandem with outreach and Christian ministry opportunities., Eston College