Cape Cleveland was named by Captain James Cook in 1770, either in honour of a John Clevland the Secretary to the Admiralty around that time, or after Cleveland, England where he was born.
The lighthouse was designed by F.D.G. Stanley, Queensland's Colonial Architect of the time. It was the thirteenth lighthouse constructed by the Government of Queensland and the fourteenth in total in Queensland, Cape Moreton Light being constructed by the New South Wales Government. It was built in the unique Queensland method of constructing a timber frame and cladding it with non-structural iron plates or iron sheets. Originally, the light also served as a rear light, but the range was since been discontinued. Like other lighthouses at that time it used a clockwork mechanism with weights, which had to be wound periodically. Due to its short height () the mechanism had to be wound every 75 minutes, which was a big strain on the lighthouse keepers.
A telephone line to Townsville was installed in 1924. In 1926 the lens was replaced and the light source was converted to an acetylene gas lamp with an intensity of 50,000&nbsp;cd. During World War II the lighthouse served as an observation post for the nearby Townsville which was a large allied base. An observation platform, a radar hut and a powerhouse were constructed at the post during the war, though only ruins remain.
In 1953 the two residences, as well as other sheds and building, were replaced. In 1956 the lens was replaced again. In the 1980s a new power house was constructed.. In 19 September 1987 the light was converted to solar power and in December 1987 the lightstation was demanned. The solar power was upgraded to its current setup in 12 July 1994.
The current light characteristic is a flash every 7.5 second, red or white depending on the sector. White flashes, with an intensity of 48,430&nbsp;cd, visible for , are shown on 286  -321   and 342  -259  . Red flashes, with an intensity of 10,170&nbsp;cd, visible for , are shown on 259  -286   (over Four Foot Rock).  Otherwise, the light is obscured. The apparatus is a VRB-25, turning at 1.333&nbsp;rpm and the light source is a 12&nbsp;Volt 35&nbsp;Watt Halogen lamp. 
Unlike other stations, the Cape Cleveland Light structures are built in a nonlinear fashion, to fit the contours of the site. They include the lighthouse, two residences, and assorted buildings.
The circular tower is  from base to lantern. It is built of an internal timber frame, clad with riveted galvanized iron plates, painted white. The tower is topped by an iron lantern room with a copper cupola, painted red. The lantern room is surrounded by a cantilevered iron balcony, supported on brackets, with simple iron railing. The tower's solar panels are mounted on the balcony.
The two 1953 cottages are timber framed, clad with timber weatherboards and trimmed with timber battens, painted pale green, white and dark green. The hip roofs are clad with corrugated fibro cement with stainless steel gutters and downpipes. They have timber frame doors and timber sash windows with metal window screens. The structures are raised on concrete piers. Over the years the cottages have deteriorated in condition.
Other structures include the old and new power houses, a garage, a workshop/store, a helipad, a flagpole, rainwater tanks, a solar powerhouse for hot water, weather recording equipment in a Stevenson screen, and remnants of a Tramway and a winch house for the now removed flying fox. The concrete foundations of the World War II observation post and radar hut also remain. All structures are in a dilapidated condition.
The old World War II power house is a bunker-like structure, built of reinforced concrete with a small extension to the east, which was at some point used as a henhouse. The main section roof is covered with asphalt, and the extension has a pitched galvanised iron gable roof. One rectangular opening is in the main section and one in the extension. The garage and the workshop are timber framed and fibro clad, with a gable roofs of corrugated fibro cement with metal gutters and downpipes. They have timber doors, timber floors and timber-framed louvre windows.
Both the light and the site are operated by the Australian Maritime Safety Authority and are closed to the public. The site is only accessible by boat or helicopter.