Founded as '''Societa anonima Carrozzeria Pinin Farina''' in 1930 by automobile designer and builder Battista "Pinin" Farina, Pininfarina has been employed by a wide variety of high-end automobile manufacturers, including Ferrari, Maserati, Rolls-Royce, Cadillac, Jaguar, Volvo, Alfa Romeo, and Lancia. It also has designed trams in France, high-speed trains in Holland, and trolleys in the USA. Since the 1980s Pininfarina has been consulted on industrial and interior design.
Pininfarina was run by Battista's grandson Andrea Pininfarina until his death in 2008. Andrea's younger brother Paolo Pininfarina was appointed as successor.
The Pininfarina Group employs more than 3,000 people in subsidiary company offices throughout Europe, as well as in Morocco and China. Pininfarina is registered and publicly traded on the Borsa Italiana (Milan Stock Exchange).
The company was founded as Societa anonima Carrozzeria Pinin Farina in 1930 by automobile designer and builder Battista "Pinin" Farina.
Pininfarina was run by Battista's grandson Andrea Pininfarina until his death in 2008. Andrea's younger brother Paolo Pininfarina was then appointed as successor.
After World War II, a number of automotive manufacturers were interested in working with Pininfarina, whose highly innovative  Cisitalia 202 design had attracted wide attention.
The subsequent cooperation with Nash Motors resulted in high-volume production of Pininfarina designs and provided a major entree into the United States market. In 1952, Pininfarina visited the U.S. for the unveiling of his design for the Nash Ambassador and Statesman lines, which, although they did carry some details of Pininfarina's design, were largely designed by Nash's then-new in-house styling staff when the original Farina-designed model proved unsuited to American tastes. The Nash-Healey sports car body was, however, completely designed and assembled in limited numbers from 1952 to 1954 at Pininfarina's Turin facilities. Nash heavily advertised its link to the famous Italian designer, much as Studebaker promoted its longtime association with Raymond Loewy. As a result of Nash's marketing efforts, Pininfarina became well-known in the United States. Pininfarina also built the bodies for the limited-series Cadillac Eldorado Brougham for General Motors in 1959 and 1960, assembled them and sent them back to the U.S. There were 99 Broughams built in 1959 and 101 in 1960. 
A similar arrangement was repeated in the late 1980s when Pininfarina designed (and partially assembled) the Cadillac Allante. The car's bodies were assembled and painted in Italy before being flown to Detroit for final vehicle assembly.
Pininfarina Sverige AB in Uddevalla, Sweden, was established in 2003 as a joint venture (JV) between Volvo Cars and Pininfarina. The JV is owned 60% by Pininfarina and 40% by Volvo.
The C70 model   the first car built by the joint venture   was launched on 13 April 2006, sharing the Volvo P1 platform used in the S40. This vehicle, designed by John Kinsey, is a coupe convertible featuring a three piece retractable metal hardtop that can raise or lower in less than 30 seconds. The new C70 replaces both the current cabriolet/convertible and the coupe absent from Volvo's lineup since 2003. For the first time, the C70 will be offered with a normally-aspirated gasoline engine, as well as diesel engines with variable geometry turbocharger and common-rail direct injection.
The Pininfarina now designs, manufactures, assembles and test prototypes and cars set on behalf of other companies.
In addition to production vehicles, Pininfarina creates prototype, show, and custom cars for auto manufacturers, as well as private clients. Most prototypes   such as the Ferrari Mythos   have served solely as concept cars, although several have become production models, including the Ferrari 612 Scaglietti and Ferrari F50.
A recent privately-commissioned custom example was the Ferrari P4/5 of 2006, a one-car rebody (changing the exterior design) of the Enzo Ferrari according to the client's specifications. Its design began in September 2005 with sketches by Jason Castriota moving through computer aided sculpture and stringent wind tunnel testing. More than 200 components were designed especially for the car though the engine, drivetrain and many other components are simply modified from the original Enzo Ferrari. The Vehicle Identification Number (VIN) is unchanged from the Enzo it was derived from. The P4/5 was publicly revealed on August 18, 2006 at the Pebble Beach Concours d'Elegance and shown again at the Paris Motor Show in late September. Another recent prototype is the Pininfarina Nido, a two seater sub-compact that could possibly make airbags obsolete.
The Pininfarina B0 solar-electric concept, designed with Bollore was shown at the 2008 Paris Motor Show featuring a range between charges of more than  with an electronically limited  top speed, and an estimated acceleration to  in 6.3 seconds. The car has solar panels on the roof and on the nose, while its battery pack is said to last up to . .
The company plans to reveal a new Alfa Romeo Spider Concept at the Geneva Motor Show on 2 March 2010.
Pininfarina has an area dedicated to the new electric car Pininfarina Bollore. Batteries are produced by the french Bollore Group.
Pininfarina, has introduced its own electric vehicle concept, the Pininfarina B0 (pronounced "B Zero"). The four-seat hatchback features a solid-state lithium-polymer battery, supercapacitors, and a roof- integrated solar panel to achieve a range of . Developed in partnership with the Bolore Group, the vehicle is slated for limited production in 2009. 
Pininfarina also works with other companies such as SimpleTech for product design.
Other Pininfarina product designs include the 2006 Winter Olympics torch, cauldron and medals, as well as major appliance collections for Gorenje.
Pininfarina was a design contractor for the development of Coca Cola Freestyle.
Pininfarina Extra, founded in 1986, is the Pininfarina Group design company which does not work in the transport sector. Examples include: