How do I show my facebook wall first instead of my info when my friends look at my page? --  ( ) 03:19, 4 February 2011 (UTC)
I've used Yahoo Mail for nearly a decade. One of the problems lately has been e-mail I send winding up in other people's spam folders. Even an e-mail I sent to myself wound up in my own spam folder. Even e-mails from actual Yahoo employees are sometimes marked as spam in by inbox. But what I'm concerned about is not false positives from the spam filter on my own account, but rather e-mail messages I send to others being falsely labeled as spam by their e-mail programs.
I'm wondering if this would be less likely to happen if I were to use Gmail instead of Yahoo Mail. I don't know -- perhaps there's a history of spammers using Yahoo Mail accounts, and that's led to legitimate messages from yahoo.com addresses getting labeled as spam sometimes. Would my e-mail be less likely to wind up in other people's spam folders if I switch to Gmail? --   ( ) 03:38, 4 February 2011 (UTC)
When it is connected, it doesn't load the battery, but it only draws energy from it (not from the charger). When it is disconnected, it loads the battery. So, my only way of using it is loading the battery when it's off and then using the battery load. What's wrong?     Preceding   comment added by   ( ) 10:20, 4 February 2011 (UTC) 
I have similar problem, and it was because of malfunctioning power supply. (It also might be because of damaged mainboard in laptop). -  ( ) 11:23, 4 February 2011 (UTC)
Once in a while I need to check the raw HTTP requests and responses exchanged by a number of programs. An HTTP proxy would be a good tool for collecting samples of message exchanges if it can record the requests and responses in full. Is there free software that will do the job? It doesn't need to do anything beyond being in the middle of a client and a server, and save the exchanges for checking. A simple and lightweight tool would be better than a powerful but complicated one. It would be ideal if the tool is available for both Windows and Linux platforms, but it would be OK if it's not. Many thanks.     Preceding   comment added by   ( ) 10:37, 4 February 2011 (UTC) 
I would like some ideas for queries to solve this problem: You have two tables. Users contains a user_id field and a last_login_date field. Login contains a user_id field so you can match up all of the logins for each user. It also has a date field. The goal is to write a single query that places the last login.date into users.last_login_date per user. I feel this is a reasonable exam question, but I'm hesitant that since I already know one possible answer, I'm falsely assuming it is reasonable. --    13:27, 4 February 2011 (UTC)
Hi,
Thanks!      Preceding   comment added by   (       ) 15:12, 4 February 2011 (UTC) 
I just got a new computer and I noticed that the monitor was originally using a normal VGA cord, but connected to my PC with a VGA to DVI adapter. I figured the image quality would improve if I got a DVI cable, and I'm using it now, but everything looks exactly the same. Am I missing something here? Is there something else I need to do to improve quality? I'm running at 1366x768 which seems to be the max. It won't go any higher with either the VGA or DVA cord.   ( ) 23:09, 4 February 2011 (UTC)