Eco Marine Power was founded in July 2010 in Fukuoka, Japan by Ohori Capital.  The company aims to provide green solutions for vessels and ships. The company is currently looking to develop a system that can be used on larger vessels such as bulk carriers and cruise liners.
Eco Marine Power specializes in providing systems that draw electricity for powering vessels from more than one source. Hybrid marine power solutions provided by the company combine wind and solar energy, biofuels and more environmentally friendly diesel engines and generators. The company provides systems in two basic categories:
This system uses an electronic motor to send power to the driveshaft directly. It does not use a gearbox and so reduces energy consumption. It also allows for vessels to operate in all-electric mode, which greatly reduces noise levels, and to operate on only solar and wind power.
This system combines an electric drive with a    traditional    diesel engine to help reduce fuel consumption. The electric motors will be used, for example, at times when the vessel requires a lower amount of fuel consumption in order to reduce its carbon footprint and reduce costs.
In July 2010, Eco Marine Power started a project to create a system that can be used on large vessels that utilizes wind power and solar energy. The system will be designed for installation on existing vessels and will require minimal maintenance from ships    crews.  A prototype of the system is scheduled for release in early 2012, at which point it will be tested and evaluated on the ocean before receiving a full commercial release.
In January 2011, the company unveiled a detailed design for its new Tonbo ship, which can hold 250 people and is aimed at the tourist vessel market.  The ship uses lithium batteries that are charged from solar panels on its roof, and also includes an on board biofuel generator. The Tonbo   s solar panels can be raised and lowered, allowing the ship to travel in areas with bridges.  The energy management system on the ship is designed to provide a healthy return on investment.
Eco Marine Power Works with numerous companies to deliver its solutions.
Eco Marine Power uses the expertise of the Sapa Group for assistance on the design of advanced marine grade aluminium solutions.
Eco Marine Power uses technologies supplied by KEI Systems for valves and computer systems within its vessels.
In partnership with Ohori Capital, Eco Marine Power is promoting environmentally friendly marine power solutions in Japan, and aims to see the technologies take a more prominent place in the Japanese market.