The Hanukkah bush is a bone of contention between those Jews who see it, especially in its "menorah look-alike" manifestations, as a distinctly Jewish plant badge; and those Jews who regard it as an assimilationist variation of a Christmas tree     especially when it is indistinguishable from the latter. The latter group are concerned about Jews who appear to inch their way away from Jewish and into Christian theological traditions. 
As celebrated in North America, Hanukkah often syncretizes some of the secular Christmas customs. One of these is the Christmas tree. Not all Jews perceive Christmas trees in the same way. Anita Diamant angrily states, "When  looks at a Christmas tree, he or she may be seeing two thousand years of virulent persecution by Christians against Jews." Ironically, there is nothing Christian about Christmas trees, except the tenuous association of the pre-Christian winter festival tradition with the modern holiday     which, in the United States, was made a secular legal holiday before most Protestant Americans observed it as a religious holiday. The celebration of Christmas was one of the first casualties of the Protestant Reformation, to the extent that Christmas celebration of any type, beyond a church service, was a criminal offence in colonial Massachusetts; and Christmas was an ordinary working day in Scotland until 1967, when the Church of Scotland (which is Presbyterian) finally withdrew its objections to the holiday. A few Protestant denominations (notably, Jehovah's Witnesses and the Church of Christ) still decline to observe Christmas, either as a religious or a secular holiday.
Hanukkah bushes are generally discouraged today by most rabbis, but some Reform, Reconstructionist and more liberal Conservative rabbis do not object, even to Christmas trees. In answer to the question "Is it OK for a Jewish family to have a Christmas tree," Rabbi Ron Isaacs writing in 2003 says: 
In a 1959 appearance on the Ed Sullivan show, actress Gertrude Berg described her father's substitution of a "Chanukah bush" in place of a Christmas tree. 
Another family's dynamic is described by Edward Cohen, in a memoir about Jewish life in 1950s Mississippi:
The phrase "Hanukkah bush" is not used seriously. It is generally understood to be a thin verbal pretense, a shorthand reminder that "we have a decorated tree for the holiday season but we do not celebrate Christmas.Peter W. Williams writes:
It often has the flavor of a joking apology or excuse, particularly to other Jews, for having been caught celebrating a custom that is agreeable but not quite proper. Thus, we read in a novel:
Susan Sussman's 1983 children's book, ''There's No Such Thing as a Chanukah Bush, Sandy Goldstein,'' explores the difficulties felt, not only by Jewish families in a predominantly Christian society, but the sometimes sharper tensions between Jewish families that do and do not have holiday trees. In the story, a wise grandfather resolves the situation by taking Robin, the have-not child, to a Christmas party given by his union chapter&mdash; a party he helped to organize. Thus, the book draws a distinction between ''sharing'' the Christmas holiday (which it approves) and ''observing'' it (which it questions). Robin's concluding thought is that maybe her friend "needed a Chanukah bush" because she lacked "friends who shared with you." A television adaptation of the book won an Emmy award in 1998.
A December, 1974 ''New York Times'' ad by Saks Fifth Avenue offers an array of holiday merchandise including a "happy bagel" ornament, "painted and preserved with shellac, ready to hang on a Christmas tree, Chanukah bush, or around your neck, 3.50."
In a 1981 contretemps over a Nativity scene in the South Dakota capitol, a side issue involved a Christmas tree which had been decorated with seventeen Stars of David. The stars had been made by students at the Pierre Indian school. Governor William J. Janklow said that the tree was not the "Hanukkah bush" he had jocularly talked of contributing. The stars were redistributed among other Christmas trees in the display, to avoid giving offense to some Jews by implying that the state endorsed Hanukkah bushes.
Obviously a Hanukkah bush would not bear decorations having explicit Christian associations (such as an ornament with a picture of the Magi). However, this is not a conspicuous omission because most U.S. traditional Christmas tree ornaments, such as colored balls and tinsel, have no such associations as even some online artificial Christmas tree retailers sell artificial Hanukkah bushes and star of David tree toppers.
A Hanukkah bush is not to be mistaken with an actual Christmas tree which Russian Jews frequently use when celebrating ''Novi God'', . the celebration of the New Year, and devoid of religious meaning. The celebrations are not signs of assimilation as often thought, but a tradition reflecting the secular Russian holiday (with the actual Christian Orthodox Christmas celebrated by Russian Christians in the beginning of January).