The '''University of San Francisco''' ('''USF'''), is a private, Jesuit/Catholic university located in San Francisco, California. Founded in 1855, USF was established as the first university in San Francisco. It is the second oldest institution for higher learning in California and the tenth-oldest university of the Association of Jesuit Colleges and Universities. USF is the eighth largest Jesuit university in the United States.
USF's main campus is located on a  setting between the Golden Gate Bridge and Golden Gate Park. USF's nickname is "The Hilltop," appropriately named since the campus is located at the peak of one of San Francisco's major hills. USF's close historical ties with the City and County of San Francisco are reflected in the University's motto, ''Pro Urbe et Universitate'' (For the City and University).
USF's Jesuit-Catholic identity is rooted in the symbolic vision of St. Ignatius of Loyola, the founder of the Jesuit order. Jesuits are characterized by a dedication to both "the life of the mind and the encounter with the world," a mission distinguished by their intellectual and humanitarian activities     notably in the fields of higher education, human rights, and social justice.
USF's inclusive founding mission attracts students and faculty from diverse religious traditions and a broad range of convictions. However, the Jesuit call to justice is evident in work across religious boundaries in community service, reflection retreats, and immersion programs both on campus and abroad.
USF's 8,772-member student body is composed of students from seventy-five countries, all fifty states (including Washington, D.C., Puerto Rico and Guam), and is ranked in the top 15 national universities for student diversity and international student enrollment. The University is known for its public service efforts (McCarthy Center), its world-renowned Center for the Pacific Rim (Asian and American Studies) and its nationally recognized graduate programs in the fields of law, education, business, nursing, and environmental management.
Founded in 1855 as Saint Ignatius Academy by the Italian Jesuits Rev. Anthony Maraschi, Rev. Joseph Bixio, and Rev. Michael Accolti, USF started in a building along Market Street in what later became downtown San Francisco. St. Ignatius Academy received its charter on April 30, 1859 from the State of California signed by governor John B. Weller (the document survived the 1906 fire and earthquake) and changed its name to St. Ignatius College. The original curriculum included Greek, Spanish, Latin, English, French, Italian, algebra, arithmetic, history, geography, elocution, and bookkeeping. Father Maraschi, was not only the college's first president, but also a professor, the college's treasurer, and first pastor of Saint Ignatius Church.
A new building was constructed in 1862 to replace the first frame building.
In June 1863, the university awarded its first bachelor of arts degree.
In 1880, the college moved from Market Street to a new site on the corner of Hayes Street and Van Ness Avenue (currently occupied by the Davies Symphony Hall).  The third St. Ignatius College received little to moderate damage in the 1906 San Francisco earthquake, but was completely destroyed in the ensuing fire.  The campus moved west, to the corner of Hayes and Shrader Streets, close to Golden Gate Park, where it occupied a hastily constructed structure known as The Shirt Factory (for its resemblance to similar manufacturing buildings of the era) for the next 20+ years. The college moved to its present site on the south slope of Lone Mountain in 1927. The college was built on the site of the former Odd Fellows, Mount Olivet and Masonic Cemeteries. In 1913, the city enacted a law prohibiting more burials in the City and County of San Francisco. The remains were transferred to Colma, California
To celebrate its diamond jubilee in 1930, St. Ignatius College changed its name to the University of San Francisco. According to USF history professor Father John B. Mc Gloin, S.J., the change from college to university was sought by long-time San Francisco Mayor James Rolph Jr.. at the time, running for Governor of California.
A male-only school for most of its history, USF became fully coeducational in 1964. In 1969, the high school division, already wholly separate from the university, moved to the western part of San Francisco and became St. Ignatius College Preparatory.  In 1978, the university acquired Lone Mountain College  Today USF is organized into five academic divisions with 8,772 students and 506 faculty members.
In the name of academic freedom the Jesuit university invites speakers who espouse views at odds with Catholic doctrine.
Conservative Catholics sometimes criticize this practice.
In 2004, Bishop Allen Henry Vigneron of the Diocese of Oakland forbade the ''Catholic Voice'' newspaper to print an advertisement for a seminar called "Imaging the Future Church," sponsored by a group of Catholic lay people who have called for church reforms. Also in 2004, the Cardinal Newman Society protested the university's selection of Mayor Gavin Newsom as speaker for the business school's annual commencement ceremony, for his views on abortion and gay-rights.
October 2005 marked the 150th anniversary of the university's founding.
The Richard A. Gleeson, S.J. Library is located in the center of the lower campus of University of San Francisco. As of 2005, the library held more than 680,000 books, 130,000 journals, 2,200 periodical subscriptions and 900,000 other materials including microforms, government documents, CD-ROMS, videos and audios.Ziajka, Alan. ''Legacy & Promise: 150 years of Jesuit education at the University of San Francisco''. San Francisco: University of San Francisco, Association of Jesuit University Presses, 2005. The building includes the Geschke Learning Resource Center, the library, The Thacher Gallery, The Donohue Rare Book Room and the William Monihan, S.J. Atrium.
Construction on the building began on May 15, 1949 and was completed on December 3, 1950. At the dedication of the building, USF President William Dunne, S.J. delivered an address commemorating the building as the "first unit in the overall plan for a Greater University of San Francisco." The Geschke Learning Resource Center addition was constructed in 1997. Named for USF Board of Trustees chairmen Charles and his wife Nancy Geschke, it was the first new building constructed on the campus since 1973.
The William Monihan, S.J. Atrium, a  open-space study area open to students twenty four hours a day, was included in the addition. An inscription explains the dedication of the space to Fr. Monihan;    Reverend William J. Monihan, S.J. 1914-1996. Jesuit, University Librarian, Bibliophile, San Franciscan, Caring Friend to Many.    Fr. Monihan also was key in the development of the Donohue Rare Book Room, which contains the university   s extraordinarily special collections including rare books, prints and literary and historical manuscripts.
This building houses the Thacher Gallery, a gift of Mary and Carter Thacher. Each year the gallery presents exhibitions diverse in subject and material, including an annual student showcase.    The first exhibit was mounted in the winter of 1998 and the gallery continues to feature up to five exhibits a year with art from students as well as local and international artists.
The Koret Center is named after Joseph and Susan Koret of the Koret Foundation, a San Francisco philanthropic group that was the primary donor to the construction of the center. The Koret Center sports an Olympic-sized swimming pool, four basketball courts, seven volleyball courts, one racquetball courts, numerous cardiovascular machines, a  weight room with an array of high-performance resistance-training machines and free weights, dance studio, aerobics studio, combatives room, student lounge with a flatscreen plasma television and ping pong and billiards tables, equipment rental desk, and fully equipped men's and women's locker rooms. There are many free weekly classes, such as spinning, yoga, pilates, "abs & glutes," and self-defense, and for extra fees, the Koret Center offers personal training, massages, CPR classes, and swimming lessons. The Koret Center is also home to the USF intramural sports department, and hosts games for intramural basketball, volleyball, and indoor soccer. The building has photovoltaic panels that, along with the panels on other buildings around campus, contribute 16 percent of the lower campus' peak electricity needs.
The University of San Francisco provides on-campus housing for freshmen and sophomores, with independent living options for upper-division students.  All residence halls, except for Fulton House and Fulton House Cottage, are secured with a 24-hour front desk.
Fueled by memories of the 1970s energy crisis, the University of San Francisco has made an effort to encourage an environmentally conscious student body as well as making changes towards a more sustainable campus. Throughout the university   s campus, students and faculty are involved in multiple clubs and organizations that are dedicated to minimizing the campus   s environmental impact including The Green Team, Back to da Roots, Envision, The Garden Project and Trust the Tap. These groups have brought several changes to the campus including the consumption of fair trade coffee, the creation of organic gardens, composting and the encouragement of re-usable containers for tap water.
In the Fall of 2007, the Garden Project (a Living Learning Community) was formed based around the creating and maintaining of the Campus    first Organic Garden. Initially headed by Media Studies Professor, Filmmaker, and Organic Gardner Melinda Stone and Architecture Professor Seth Watchel, the Garden houses fruits, vegetables, and herbs with the help and continuous care provided by students and community members, alike.
  In addition to energy-saving windows, high-efficiency lighting, energy efficient skylights, and insulated outer walls,  the University has spent $375,000 on solar panels for the recently renovated Kalmanovitz Hall. Combined with Cowell Hall, Gleeson Library, Koret Health and Recreation Center, and the University Center, the added solar panels to Kalmanovitz Hall has boosted USF   s energy production from 71 kilowatt hours to nearly 420 kilowatt hours. USF   s carbon footprint has subsequently been reduced by 330 tons a year, says Everette Ersery, the assistant director of facilities. Ersery was quoted in the USF Magazine saying    it has significantly reduced our carbon footprint and electrical bill, while reducing the amount of energy we and PG&E use.    The solar panels produce 16 percent of the lower campus   s energy needs.  The assistant vice president of facilities management said that solar heated rooftop water pipes heat 50 percent of the water used in residence halls.
University of San Francisco ranked fifth out of 200 schools in a nationwide recycling competition in the category of targeted material- Service Organics. The University has also established a composting program that began in September 2008. The new program composts food waste from the kitchen and cafeteria. Through the composting program the University of San Francisco has managed to prevent about 36 tons of material per month from being thrown out.
University of San Francisco is chartered as a non-profit organization and is governed by a privately-appointed board of trustees, along with the University President, the University Chancellor, the University Provost and Vice-presidents, and the Deans. The board consists of a maximum of 45 voting members who serve three year terms and is currently chaired by Claudio M. Chiuchiarelli. The trustees serve without compensation. The board of trustees delegates its power by appointing a President to serve as the chief executive of the university.  The current president (since 2000) is Rev. Stephen A. Privett, S. J.
The President, according to USF Bylaws, is specifically responsible for articulating and advancing the Jesuit Catholic character of the university. USF possesses an endowment of $225 million (as of August 2008)
USF's academics are organized into five schools which offer courses of study at the graduate and undergraduate level, with two more being primarily focused on graduate education, while offering select opportunities for undergraduate students. USF offers over 50 degrees in several departments. The university also operates four regional campuses in Sacramento, San Ramon, Santa Rosa, and Cupertino. USF is accredited by the Western Association of Schools and Colleges, and the School of Business and Professional Studies (BPS) is accredited by the AACSB. 
Undergraduate tuition at USF is $37,040 for the 2011-2012 school year.  The University is organized as follows:
Undergraduate and '''Graduate''' Schools
In 2010-11, U.S. News & World Report's College and University rankings scored USF as a top tier (Tier I), National University.  USF is known for its emphasis on service learning and its public service efforts through its Leo T. McCarthy Center for Public Service and the Common Good.  These values are reflected in the university's core curriculum and various clubs and academic programs, such as the student-developed campaign funding site whosfundingwhom.org and USF's Performing Arts and Social Justice major, which is the only undergraduate program of its kind in the nation.  The Fromm Institute for Lifelong Learning offers noncredit courses with no assignments or grades for adults age 50 and over.
 USF is ranked 15th in the Nation for Diverse Student Population, 11th in the nation for Best College Town.Make your World Better, Explore USF.  San Francisco, CA: University of San Francisco Office of Publications, 2008. and in the top 100 national universities by their benefit to society.Make your World Better, Explore USF. San Francisco, CA: University of San Francisco Office of Publications, 2008. The Undergraduate Business Program is in the Top 100 nationwide. USF is deemed one of only 60 universities with the status of an    Engaged University   . The University also received recognition for its community involvement when it was awarded the Fr. Alfred Boeddeker Award by the St. Anthony Foundation in 2007. The award was given in recognition of "the strong relationship" between USF and St. Anthony's as well as the active involvement of the USF Faculty and Students with several St. Anthony's projectsUnknown: "USF Honored for Commitment to Service". USF Magazine, page 5. Fall 07. Retrieved on 2008-12-05
 In 2005, the MBA Entrepreneurship Program is ranked 25th in the nation. In 2009, USNWR ranked USF's School of Nursing 54th in the country.
The School of Law maintains its own exchange programs with Trinity College in Dublin, Ireland and Charles University in Prague, Czech Republic. Relevant international coursework includes the study of European Community Law, International Business Transactions, and European Constitutionalism. The latter has been taught by Vojtech Cepl, the principal drafter of the post-communist Constitution of the Czech Republic.
USF has hosted an Army ROTC program and an Air Force ROTC program since 1936.  ROTC is an elective curriculum taken along with the required college classes and can also pay for a cadet's college tuition. ROTC currently operates on campus under the command of the Military Science Department.
The University of San Francisco is home to over 90 clubs and organizations.  The wide variety of clubs includes academic/professional, governance, cultural, service, social, political, athletic and special interest. The missions and goals of USF's student clubs and organizations are to provide programs and services that support students' leadership development and promote student engagement in co-curricular activities., 2008-2009.
Associated Students of the University of San Francisco (ASUSF) Senate is the student body governance organization responsible for organizing major campus events, voicing student concern and reviewing the ASUSF budget.
USF's professional and academic organizations include chapters of many national and international groups including the Lambda Iota Tau English Honor Society Sigma Tau Delta, Jesuit Honor Society Alpha Sigma Nu, the National Society of Collegiate Scholars, National Political Science Honor Society Pi Sigma Alpha, Biological Honor Society Tri Beta, Accounting and Finance Honor Society Beta Alpha Psi and Psychology Honor Society Psi Chi. Professional organizations include the Family Business Association, USF Pre-Dental Society, Hospitality Management Association, the Nursing Students Association and the Entrepreneurship Club.
Religious and spiritual organizations on campus include the Muslim Student Union, the USF chapter of InterVarsity Christian Fellowship and the USF  .
USF leisure and hobby organizations include a chapter of national organization Best Buddies as well as Outdoors and Environmental Education Club, USF Queer Alliance, San Quentin TRUST Alliance, Knitting for Neighbors, Back to the Roots, Surf and Skate Club, and the Animation Comics and Video Games (ACV) Club.
Cultural and multicultural organizations around campus serve international students, Indian students, Black students, Latin American students and Hawaiian Students. There are also groups specifically for women of color and Latina women.
Social justice clubs on campus include chapters of Amnesty International, School of the Americas Watch, Up 'til Dawn and Invisible Children. There is also a Politics Society, Philosophy Club, Women in Media Club and Women in Science Club.
The San Francisco Foghorn is the official student weekly newspaper of the University of San Francisco and is sponsored by the Associated Students of the University of San Francisco (ASUSF). The Foghorn was founded in 1926, and was first called "The Ignatian".  In the 1930s, members of The Ignation changed its name to "San Francisco Foghorn" to reflect the University's decision to change its name from St.Ignatius College to University of San Francisco.  The Foghorn has played a significant role on campus throughout the years, and has some notable alumni   from the likes of Pierre Salinger, editor of the San Francisco Chronicle and Press Secretary for President John F. Kennedy,Ziajka, Alan. "Legacy & Promise: 150 Years of Jesuit Education at USF Assoc. of Jesuit UP"  to well known author and historian Kevin Starr, who was a one-time California Lieutenant Governor.  The Foghorn gained national recognition in 1961, when the American Newspaper Publishers Association awarded it with a "Pacemaker Award".  The Foghorn has been honored by the Associated Collegiate Press which deemed it "College Paper of the Year" in 1998.
USF has a radio station, KUSF which broadcasts online. The station had broadcasted on radio frequency 90.3 FM since 1977, until the station's license was sold by the University on January 18, 2011. The University announced that they had sold KUSF's license to a Southern California based classical radio station for $3.75 million; the next day, a protest was held by student and community DJs and supporters against the newly proposed online-only format. KUSF has garnered international attention for its diverse musical programming, which varies from rock to hip hop to world music.  KUSF is the recipient of numerous awards, including many public service awards for the station's long-running weekly community service series. USF's other radio station, KDNZ, is student-run and-programmed.
The University of San Francisco has one television station, USFtv , which is broadcast on Channel 35 in the dormitories and around campus. The station was founded in 2006, and is entirely student-run.  The station features a variety of content, including news, sports, cultural programming.  In 2008 USFtv students collaborated with Wyclef Jean to create a music video for his song "If I Was President."
USF has numerous student clubs for performing arts including a theater group (College Players), improvisational team (Awkward Silence), choir (ASUSF voices), contemporary mass ensemble and dance program that entails social justice.
The College Players, founded in 1863, is the oldest student-run theater group west of the Mississippi and the second oldest in the United States.  Their annual production of The Vagina Monologues, distributes 100 percent of the show's proceeds to women charities around the Bay Area.
ASUSF voices is a collaboration between the associated students of USF and the Performing Arts Department. It contains a variety of choral ensembles including jazz and other popular vocal styles.
The USF Contemporary Mass Ensemble is a group of collective USF alumni, either vocal or instrumental, that perform during Mass every Sunday in St. Ignatius Church.
The USF dance program is affiliated with the Performing Arts and Social Justice Major.  Students can enroll in tradition and modern dance classes.  Students are allowed to participate in the USF Dance Ensemble, which provides the opportunity for students to work with professional and student choreographers.
There are currently thirteen fraternities on campus: Chi Upsilon Zeta (social justice fraternity), Alpha Epsilon Pi, Alpha Phi Omega, Alpha Sigma Nu, Beta Alpha Psi,  Delta Lambda Phi Interest Group, Delta Sigma Pi, Lambda Theta Phi, Omicron Theta Chi, Psi Chi, Sigma Alpha Epsilon, Theta Alpha Kappa, and Tri-Beta. USF also has four sororities: Delta Zeta, Lambda Sigma Gamma, Omicron Theta Chi, Delta Sigma Theta, and Tri-Gamma. All of the sororities and fraternities that wish to be recognized by the University must participate in Greek Council. The purpose of Greek Council is to aid in the development of the university   s recognized Greek organizations and their individual members. Every year chapters participate in some of the same activities such as; mixers and socials, Thanksgiving potluck, Christmas clothing drive, Homecoming, USF Idol, and Greek Games.
The University of San Francisco enrolled 5,278 undergraduates, 2,518 graduate students, and 738 law students in Fall 2007. Women made up 61.9% of the student body and students originated from all fifty states and sixty-nine foreign countries. 43.5% of students are Roman Catholic, 6.8% are Protestant, 6.3% are irreligious, 2.2% are Jewish, 2.1% are Buddhist, and 0.8% are Hindu and Muslim respectively. 82.4% of students matriculated after their first year, the 4-year graduation rate is 49%, and the 6-year graduation rate is 65%.
In the 1800s, USF's diversity (then St. Ignatius College) was mostly a reflection of the diversity inherent in San Francisco. For example, when German and French migrants came to San Francisco, the population of European students in USF increased as well.  USF's student population diversity has increased throughout the last century. Filipinos started attending the university in the 1920s, after the United State's annexation of Philippines. In 1960s, Mexicans, African Americans, Chinese , Norwegians came to USF. The 1970s marked the start of students from Hong Kong, Japan and Indonesia, coming to USF.  In 1964, 473 women enrolled as full-time undergraduates marking the first time women attended USF.
A school census of Fall 1993 undergraduate freshmen indicated 42.66% Whites, 23% Asian Americans, 11% International students, 10% Hispanic/Latinos. 5% African Americans, 0.34% Native Americans and 8% of students in the census chose not to specify. Enrollment in Fall 1993 was a total of 7,662 students, 62.5% of whom were undergraduates. In 2002, a plan was developed by the university to increase the diversity of the USF student population.  This plan was enacted by university officials, who also enlisted the help of USF alumni to "assemble a mix of students that will help USF achieve its vision: to educate leaders who will fashion a more humane and just world." In 2002, 64.4% of undergraduates were female and 35.6% were male. The plan sought to address concerns of the gender ratio and increase the percentage of international students at USF from 9.4% to around 15%. A statement made by USF President, Stephen A. Privett, S.J. (2000 to present) in an interview by ''USF Magazine'' highlighted the importance the university placed on the diversity of its student population. The USF President also clarified the scope of diversity to include "ethnicity, gender and life experiences." In December 2006, USF was awarded a $500,000 grant by the Lumina Foundation for Education to examine "how best to recruit and retain low-income, first-generation, and ethnic minority students at Jesuit universities."
  The result was consistent with past surveys conducted on graduating students, where over the period from May 1997 to December 1999, the result ranged from 78% to 84% for students valued the mentioned differences and 63% to 72% for those who "felt their appreciation of differences increased while at USF." In 2004, a survey by UCLA's Higher Education Research Institute indicated that 80% of USF students "considered it essential or very important that their undergraduate experience" developed their personal values. This statistic was higher than the national average sampling of 67%.
The University of San Francisco actively recruits and enrolls over 700 international students from over 70 countries, including: Kenya, Nigeria, Ethiopia, China, Indonesia, Taiwan, Thailand, India, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Brazil, Argentina, Chile, Canada, Mexico, Russia, Moldova, Kazakhstan, France, Norway, Austria, United Kingdom, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Israel, Australia, and New Zealand, among others.  USF also hosts J-1 exchange and Intensive English Program student participants.
The University of San Francisco attracted 783 international students (9.0% of the student body) in 2007. International students have a dedicated orientation period and a variety of internationally-oriented student groups like the International Student Association, Global Living Community, an International Advisory Council, and an International Network Program. USF sponsors an annual International Education Week with an international fair featuring consulates in the San Francisco area, storytelling opportunities, educational speakers, and a performance event called Culturescape.
According to U.S. News & World Report, USF is classified as a more selective university.  As of 2006, nine admissions counselors were in charge of selecting students for entry. In an article published in a Fall 2006 issue of the , Sandoval, an admissions counselor revealed certain factors that the university used to filter its applicants. The factors mentioned were: high school GPAs, involvement in extra curricular activities, languages spoken, "first in family to go to college", letters of recommendation, test scores and in particular, the students' essays. Sandoval also mentioned in the article that the best essays were "specific, genuine, honest, and personal. "
In Fall 2008, 67% of freshman undergraduates who applied were admitted.Connie, Betterton, and Bernstein Stan, comps. "University of San Francisco." College Handbook 2009. New York: College Board, The, 2008. USF enrolled 4,869 undergraduate students. The admitted freshman class had an average combined SAT score of 1270, an average composite ACT score of 25, and an average high school GPA of 3.5.
For the 2006-2007 academic year, 66.0% of USF's undergraduates received some form of financial aid, 52.6% received institutional aid/grants, and 21.0% received federal Pell Grant support. For the same year, 64.2% of graduate students received some form of financial aid.
The increase of financial aid given by the university to students have generally exceed the rate of growth of USF's tuition fees. Over 10 years from 1993 to 2003, annual tuition fees grew by 65% but financial aid experienced 160% growth. Annual tuition in '93/94 was $13,200 and total financial aid was $12.9 million. By '02/03, annual tuition had increased to $21,700 but financial aid experienced a larger increase to $33.6 million.  However, in a USF student guide published by The College Prowler in 2006 , USF students rated high tuition fees as one of "the ten worst things about USF."
USF's dining options span multiple locations around the campus:
USF competes in the NCAA's Division I and is a charter member of the West Coast Conference, along with local rivals Santa Clara University and Saint Mary's College of California. Sports offered are men   s and women   s basketball, cross country, golf, soccer, tennis, track and field, as well as men   s baseball and women's volleyball.  USF has won 12 NCAA championships, 1 NIT championships, and 42 WCC championships. USF   s mascot is the Don and its colors are green and gold.
Athletics at USF dates back to its founding in 1855, when founder Anthony Maraschi, S.J. organized ball games as recreation for the first students. However, intercollegiate competition only dates back to 1907, when then-St. Ignatius College began playing organized baseball, basketball, and rugby against other local colleges and high schools. Rivalries with neighboring Santa Clara University and Saint Mary's College of California have their origins in this early period.
The 1951 University of San Francisco Dons football team went undefeated, with a record of 9-0, and the team produced ten future NFL players (Ollie Matson, Gino Marchetti, Bob St. Clair, Dick Stanfel, Ed Brown, Lou Stephens, Burl Toler, Joe Scudero, Roy Barni, Mike Mergen, Merrill Peacock, and Ralph Thomas). Five became NFL Pro-Bowlers, and Gino Marchetti, Ollie Matson, and Bob St. Clair later were inducted into the NFL Hall of Fame   a record for one college team. The team also had another first; Burl Toler became the first African American official in the NFL.Lukacs, John D. /Waiting for the Perfect Ending./ _USA Today_. Final Edition, 24 June 2003. Sports 8C.
Even the future NFL Commissioner, Pete Rozelle, played a role as the Dons' Athletic Publicist. At the height of their success, the team experienced one of the greatest snubs in college football history.
Due to the team having two African-American star players, Ollie Matson and Burl Toler, they were not invited to play in any of the college football bowl games hosted by the SEC (Southern Conference). This  resulted in the team being invited to the Orange Bowl without Toler and Matson. Outraged, the team refused the invitation saying,        No, we   re not going to leave    em at home,    said guard Dick Columbini.    We   re going to play with    em or we   re not going to play      . As a result of the team's refusal to play in the Orange Bowl, the USF Athletic Department was forced to drop its football program in 1952, due to a deficit in department funds.
USF is best known for its men's basketball program. The men's team won three national championships: the 1949 NIT Championship, with Don Lofgran as MVP, and the 1955 and 1956 NCAA National Championships, going undefeated in the 1956 season. Led by NBA Hall of Famers Bill Russell and K.C. Jones, the 1956 Dons became the first undefeated team to win a national championship, winning a then-record 60 games in a row from 1954 to 1956 before losing an exhibition game to the USA Men's Olympic Basketball team. Also of note, the 1954-1955 USF basketball teams became the first major college or university basketball team to win a national title with three African American starters (Russell, Jones, and Hal Perry).
On December 26, 2007, the university hired 798-win coach Eddie Sutton to replace Jessie Evans. Sutton got his 800th career win as a college basketball head coach when the Dons beat Pepperdine, 85-82.
On April 18, 2008, USF announced the hiring of Rex Walters, former coach of Florida Atlantic University, as the new men's basketball coach, succeeding Eddie Sutton. Walters is an NBA veteran, originally the 16th overall pick by the New Jersey Nets in the 1993 NBA Draft.
The soccer program began at USF in 1931, from the beginning it has been a successful program, winning five titles from 1932   1936, much of this was because of the All-American team captain Gus Donoghue who later returned to the University as the head coach in 1946, he won several titles, including a co-championship with Penn State in 1949. After his retirement in 1960 the programs successes went on under alumnus, All American and Holocaust survivor Stephen Negoesco, who played under Donoghue in the 50's. He  coached the team from 1962 to 2000 and led the team to 540 wins and four national championships (1966, 1975, 1976, 1980). Negoesco was later inducted into the National Soccer Hall of Fame in 2003 after having won more victories with his team than any other coach in the history of intercollegiate soccer competition in the United States. Under Negoesco's successor, alumnus Erik Visser, the men's team earned the 2004, 2005 and 2008 WCC titles.
Notable alumni include the following:
Notable faculty members include Academy Award nominee Sam Green, director of ''The Weather Underground'' and Biology professor Paul Chien, known for his research in physiology and ecology.  Also, the University has awarded a number of people with honorary degrees.  Some of the recipients include the 14th Dalai Lama, former South Korean president Kim Dae-Jung, former Philippine president Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, Iranian human rights activist Shirin Ebadi, and President of Ireland Mary McAleese.