The only daughter of Admiral Donald Hayes, Lisa is the first officer of the Super Dimensional Fortress One, serving under Captain Henry J. Gloval, and with fellow bridge officers Claudia Grant, Kim Young, Sammy Porter, and Vanessa Leeds (the later three sometimes referred to as "The Bridge Bunnies").
Lisa Hayes is the third character featured in the show's love triangle between Rick Hunter and Lynn Minmay. Lisa is depicted as the near polar-opposite of Minmei. Rather than being a flighty, emotional, and somewhat self-centered teenager, Lisa is mature, no-nonsense, and a strong individual. However, at the same time, Lisa is secretly very insecure, and her tough exterior seems little more than a front to protect herself emotionally.
In February 2009, Lisa takes her position as First Officer with the rank of lieutenant commander aboard the SDF-1 as it prepares to launch approximately 10 years after it crashed on Earth. However, the sudden arrival of the Zentraedi in Earth orbit marks the beginning of the First Robotech War. In the initial battle, Lisa played a major role in the survival of the SDF-1, as it fought against Zentraedi forces. After a miscalculated fold maneuver transported the SDF-1 and Macross City past the orbit of Pluto, Lisa time and again saved the ship with her quick thinking and actions, as well as her continuous attention to detail and duty as First Officer. During a battle near Saturn, Lisa created the Daedelaus Maneuver as a means of attacking and destroying an enemy Zentraedi vessel. 
When the SDF-1 was trapped on Mars by gravity mines, Lisa set the power generators of Sara Base to overload. The ensuing explosion took out the gravity mines, allowing the fortress to take off. Lisa doesn't expect to survive this operation, but she is rescued by Rick Hunter, whom she still regards as immature and brash. The rescue earns Rick a medal and he is promoted to Group leader, much to the initial dislike of Lisa.Robotech, episode 7: Bye-bye Mars (summary available at  at Robotech.com)
Lisa proves her physical, as well as emotional, strength when she, along with Rick Hunter and Ben Dixon, are captured by the enemy Zentraedi and interrogated by Supreme Commander Dolza, Breetai and Exedore. Lisa, suspicious as to why Dolza doesn't just order his massive fleet to attack the SDF-1, yells that Dolza doesn't have the power to attack and that the SDF-1 is far superior to his "bucket of bolts." Dolza, infuriated, slams his hand on the table with enough force to cause the captives to lose their balance. Dolza then extends his hand and grasps Lisa, lifting her up in front of her face. He orders her to tell him by what process humans become human-size. Lisa, defiant, refuses to respond, and Dolza tightens his grip around her until she screams in pain. Rick, fearing that Dolza will kill Lisa, yells at him to stop squeezing her and explains that humans are born, at their current size, when a man and woman love each other. When Breetai asks how "this love" is often expressed, Rick responds that it is often done by kissing one another. Demanding a demonstration, Dolza suggests that Rick and Ben kiss one another, but Rick refuses. As Dolza threatens to crush all of them if he doesn't see a demonstration, Lisa says she will demonstrate. After Dolza returns her to the table, Lisa orders Rick to kiss her, an action which shocks Dolza and the other Zentraedi present. This kiss, ironically, is the start of Rick and Lisa's difficult romance and the beginning of the love triangle between Rick, Lisa and Lynn Minmei.Robotech, episode 11: First Contact (summary available at  at Robotech.com After being rescued, Lisa shakes off the event and immediately returns to duty, but she cannot help the feelings she is now developing for Rick, and soon becomes jealous of his obsession with Minmei. Lisa and Rick's personal relationship would continue to mature, and would eventually progress into an uneasy friendship. Rick is initially uncomfortable around Lisa, not only because she is a superior officer but also because she is five years older than him. Rick remains fixated on Minmei, hanging her posters in his home, much to the dislike of Lisa. Yet despite Rick's feelings, Minmei's music career and her cousin Lynn Kyle, make their romance more and more difficult.
Before the battle against Dolza's grand fleet, Lisa returns to Earth to meet with her father and finds herself prohibited from returning to the SDF-1. During this time she is promoted to the rank of a full commander. Lisa is working as an operations/communications officer at the underground Alaska base when the battle begins. Although the base survives the initial bombardment, which devastates 95% of the surface, the base is hit hard by secondary hits, trapping Lisa deep inside the heavily damaged base. Rick, in his damaged but flyable Veritech fighter, leaves the battle in space after picking up Lisa's distress call. Rick flies deep into the base, despite the danger of energy blasts and structural collapses and reaches Lisa. The two run to each others arms and hug before jumping back into Rick's fighter. The two barely escape and fly together in each other's arms to safe location and watch the SDF-1 land after its victory..Robotech, episode 27: Force of Arms (summary available at  at Robotech.com
In 2012, following the defeat of the Zentraedi fleet, Lisa settles down in New Macross City and works toward rebuilding Earth after the devastation from the war. However, Lisa continues to struggle with the feelings she has for Rick which are not returned as Rick continues to pursue Minmay, despite everything that he and Lisa have been through together. Lisa is frustrated that even though Rick knows how she feels about him, he continues to fixate on Minmay despite the fact that she barely spends any time with him. In early 2013, while sitting at an outdoor cafe, she contemplates the love triangle between the three of them when she overhears two men talking about how women were "dealt all the aces" when it comes to relationships, to which Lisa says to herself "that's all you know...here's one woman who would trade every ace in the deck for one Rick Hunter." Lisa then spots her friends, Max Sterling and Miriya Parina Sterling, happily walking together while pushing a baby carriage. The Sterlings stop for a moment and Max, proudly smiling, reaches into the carriage and lifts little Dana Sterling, their new baby, into his arms while Miriya watches with joy. Max then makes a funny face and Dana smiles in response. Lisa thinks to herself ''"they look so happy, I can just imagine how it must be. If only Rick could understand"'' and momentarily, in Lisa's mind, Max wears Rick's face and Miriya wears Lisa's. Lisa's thoughts are then interrupted when she hears Minmay's music on a portable radio being carried by two soldiers nearby. One of the soldiers states that he would give a month's pay just to meet her. Lisa gets up and walks away, thinking to herself ''"There doesn't seem to be any way I can escape you Minmei. I guess some women really were dealt all the aces."''Robotech, Episode 28: Reconstruction Blues (summary available at  at Robotech.com 
In June 2013, Lisa, newly promoted to the rank of captain, along with Rick, Max, Miriya and Claudia participate in an operation under Breetai to capture the last remaining Zentraedi Satellite Factory in deep space. During the mission, Lisa tries to talk to Rick about their troubled relationship but they are interrupted when Breetai's ship defolds near the factory. As a diversionary tactic, Breetai suggests that Rick and Lisa kiss on screen in from of the hostile Zentraedi (who have had no exposure to human emotions) to disorient them long enough for the rest of the plan to be executed. Rick initially refuses but Lisa forces him to kiss her, much to his dislike.Robotech, Episode 30: Viva Miriya (summary available at  at Robotech.com 
In the fall of 2013, when Rick rescues Minmei and Kyle after they are kidnapped by Khyron, Minmei runs to Rick's arms and the two embrace while Lisa, visibly upset, watches with anger and sadness. Lisa then decides that Rick will never be able to be with her due to his feelings for Minmei, and she gives up and decides to resign her military career.Robotech, Episode 32: Broken Heart (summary available at  at Robotech.com 
In January 2014, Lisa would earn command of the Super Dimensional Fortress Two. Unfortunately, this command would be short-lived, as the SDF-2 would be destroyed in a suicide run by Zentraedi renegade Khyron. The SDF-1 was also destroyed in this battle. Lisa is the only member of the Bridge crew to survive - Admiral Henry J. Gloval, Commander Claudia Grant, Lt. Vanessa Leeds, Lt. Sammy Porter and Lt. Kim Young die at their posts. Lisa only survives because Admiral Gloval pushes her into the only remaining functional escape pod.Robotech, Episode 36: To the Stars (summary available at  at Robotech.com 
Following Khryon's final attack, Rick and Minmei's relationship is ended as Minmei begs Rick not to leave her during the battle. Rick tries to explain that his job as a soldier requires him to fight, something which Minmei cannot understand or accept and Rick must tear himself away from her to join the battle. At the end of the battle, Rick realizes that he could never be with Minmei and that Lisa, who shares his commitment to the military and the defense of Earth, is the one he loves. Minmei, although sad, accepts that she and Rick can never be together due to his dedication to his military career and her dedication to her music career. Rick and Lisa, finally together, spend the next eight years overseeing the rebuilding of Earth and the construction of the SDF-3. Despite the long and rocky start, Rick and Lisa form a strong and lasting romance that lasts for the rest of the Robotech Saga. In '' '', (set in 2043-2044) the two are still in love, despite all the challenges they have faced during the last three decades.
In December 2022, Lisa, now at age 37 and an Admiral of the fleet, takes command of the SDF-3, flagship of the Robotech Expeditionary Force (REF) to which is about to depart after eight years under construction. The mission's primary goal is to find the Robotech Masters and forge a peace in order to prevent another catastrophic war on Earth. On the day before the SDF-3 launches, Lisa and Rick are finally married in a huge wedding ceremony attended by all of their friends onboard the Zentraedi Factory Satellite. The wedding ceremony can be seen in '' ''. Lisa's one-time rival for Rick's affections, Lynn Minmei, eventually makes peace with the officer well enough to volunteer to sing at her wedding. Dana Sterling, now aged 10, serves as a flower girl and Bowie Grant, Claudia Grant's nephew, serves as the ring bearer. Breetai, the former ruthless Zentraedi warlord turned ally, (who has now been micronized) gives away the bride, while Max Sterling is the best man. The wedding is the happiest day of their lives even though their honeymoon lasts only a few hours as they must be ready for the SDF-3 to launch early the next morning. Although they hope the mission will be over quickly, events will keep the SDF-3 away from Earth for the next 22 years.
In the Wildstorm comic '' '', set in 2043, Lisa is still the Admiral of the fleet and, despite now being 58, is expecting her first child, something which Lisa has wanted for three decades; since she first saw how happy and proud Max Sterling and Miriya Parina Sterling were after the birth of their daughter Dana Sterling in 2012. The comic opens with the discovery that General T. R. Edwards has betrayed the REF to the Invid Regent and the REF Ghost Squadron has joined him. After realizing what has happened, Lisa, in command of the SDF-3, tries to stop Edwards    and the Regent   s ships from escaping. Lisa maneuvers the SDF-3 to fire its main cannon but the Regent's supercarrier is able to fire first. The SDF-3 takes a direct hit, shredding the forward part of the ship and causing extensive damage. Lisa is severely injured in the attack and medics race to stabilize her. With the SDF-3 crippled, Lisa is transferred to Tirol to continue her recovery. A few days later, Rick is informed by Dr. Jean Grant that Lisa will survive. As Rick states that Lisa was planning to resign her commission due to her pregnancy, Dr. Grant, with a sad look, is forced to tell Rick that Lisa   s injuries were so severe that she has suffered a miscarriage. The loss of their unborn child takes its toll on both Lisa and Rick. The REF is unable to pursue Edwards and spends the next year rebuilding the SDF-3 and refitting the cruiser ''Tokugawa''. Even one year later, Lisa remains in a wheelchair and has braces on her legs; while her husband's once black hair has turned gray and his face has considerably aged.
During her recovery, Rick takes command of the REF, and along with Vince Grant, eventually manage to find and defeat Edwards before he can create his own Invid army. Following Edwards' defeat, Rick orders the preparation of a full scale assault on Earth with all available REF forces. Lisa now fully recovered, reflects on the irony that the REF was able to free many worlds from Invid occupation yet failed to protect Earth itself, which has now been under Invid occupation for almost 13 years. Lisa, like Rick, is reluctant to use the newly acquired Neutron-S warheads against the Invid should the attack fail since the missiles will, in addition to destroying the Invid, wipe out most (or possibly all) life on Earth. However, she accepts Rick's decision that the missiles will only be used as a last resort. Lisa then implies that she is resigning her position, stating to Rick that "One Admiral Hunter is enough for the fleet."
In the movie '' '', Lisa is aboard the SDF-3 during the disastrous test-firing of a Neutron-S warhead that creates a new black hole that cripples the SDF-3, despite the fact that the detonation occurred 800 million kilometers (500 million miles) away. However, Rick orders Vince Grant, who has just folded in aboard the cruiser Icarus, to fold back to Earth immediately to warn the fleet, which is already engaged in combat with the Invid forces occupying Earth, that the Neutron-S warheads cannot be used under any circumstances as their true power is now apparent. Although Grant is able to rescue the science vessel ''Deukalion'', his attempts to rescue the SDF-3 fail when they come under attack from unknown hostile forces, which are later revealed to be the Haydonites, former allies which have now turned on the REF. The fate of the Hunters and the SDF-3 are still unknown, but it is stated that at the end of the movie that the SDF-3 may not have been destroyed, and the ''Ark Angel'' is dispatched to search for them. It is believed by fans that Lisa and Rick's fate may be decided in a future Robotech installment.