Do NOT re-add a map of countries permitting dual nationality to this article without prior discussion.
All such maps currently on Commons are extremely out of date and tend to oversimplify extremely complex overlapping sets of international laws.
Individual countries follow their own rationales in establishing their criteria for citizenship. Each country has different requirements for citizenship, as well as different policies regarding dual citizenship. These laws sometimes leave gaps where the acquisition of other citizenships does not render the original citizenship invalid, creating a possible situation for an individual to hold two or more nationalities. Common reasons to bestow citizenship are:
Once citizenship is bestowed, the bestowing country may or may not consider a voluntary renunciation of citizenship to be valid. In the case of naturalisation, some countries require applicants of naturalisation to renounce their former citizenship. This renunciation may not be recognised in other countries. Technically the person in question still possesses both citizenships. For example, the UK honours renunciation only if done with its competent authorities, and consequently citizens naturalised in the US remain British citizens in the eyes of the British government even though they are required by US authorities to renounce allegiance to any foreign power.
The Republic of Ireland frames its citizenship laws as relating to "the island of Ireland", thereby extending them to Northern Ireland, which is part of the United Kingdom. Therefore, anyone born in Northern Ireland who meets the requirements for being an Irish citizen through birth on the island of Ireland (or a child born outside of Ireland but with a qualifying parent) may exercise an entitlement to Irish citizenship by acting in such a way that only an Irish citizen is entitled to do (such as applying for an Irish passport). Conversely, that such a person has not acted in this way does not necessarily mean that they are not an Irish citizen. See Irish nationality law and British nationality law. People born in Northern Ireland are British citizens on the same basis as people born elsewhere in the United Kingdom. People born in Northern Ireland can hold either a British Passport or an Irish Passport, or both if they so choose.
Some countries consider multiple citizenship undesirable and take measures to prevent it. This may take the following forms:
In popular discourse, reference to countries that "recognise" multiple citizenship may refer only to the lack of any specific statute forbidding multiple citizenship (leaving aside the difficulties of enforcing such statutes).
However, it is possible to become a citizen of multiple countries ''even if'' some or all of these countries forbid dual or multiple citizenship. For example, Germany and Austria usually do not allow dual citizenship except for persons who obtain more than one citizenship at the time of birth or are members of the EU and more exceptions. Germans and Austrians can apply for a permit to keep their citizenship (''Beibehaltungsgenehmigung'') before taking a second one (e.g., Arnold Schwarzenegger holds Austrian and U.S. citizenship). Spain allows dual citizenship with some Latin-American countries (Argentina, Bolivia, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, Paraguay, Peru and Uruguay), Andorra, Portugal, the Philippines and Equatorial Guinea. Spain does not require citizens of these countries who wish to naturalise to renounce their existing citizenship.
Some countries consider multiple citizenship desirable as it increases opportunities for their citizens to compete globally, and/or have taken active steps towards permitting multiple citizenship in recent years (e.g., Switzerland since 1 January 1992 and Australia since 4 April 2002). India has introduced a form of overseas citizenship, which stops just short of full dual citizenship and is in all aspects, like Permanent Residency.
There exists a provision for an alternative form of Indian nationality, the holders of which are to be known as Overseas Citizens of India (OCI). The Constitution of India does not permit dual citizenship or dual nationality, except for minors where the second nationality was involuntarily acquired. Indian authorities have interpreted this to mean a person cannot have another country's passport while simultaneously holding an Indian one. This is even the case for a child claimed by another country as its citizen, who may be required by the laws of this country to use the corresponding passports for foreign travel (e.g., a child born in the United States to Indian parents). Indian courts have given the executive branch wide discretion over this matter. Overseas Citizenship of India is not a full citizenship of India and thus, does not amount to dual citizenship or dual nationality. E.g., the OCI cannot vote, stand for elections, or take up government posts. Moreover, people who have acquired Citizenship in Pakistan or Bangladesh are not eligible for Overseas Citizenship.
Some have questioned whether allowing dual citizenship impedes cultural assimilation, increases "disconnectedness" from the political process, and degrades national identity/cohesiveness. The rise in tension between mainstream and migrant communities is cited as evidence of the need to maintain a strong national identity and culture. They assert that the fact that a second citizenship can be obtained without giving anything up (e.g. the loss of public benefits, welfare, healthcare, retirement funds, and job opportunities in the country of origin in exchange for citizenship in a new country) both trivializes what it means to be a citizen and nullifies the consequential, transformational, and psychological change that occurs in an individual when they go through the naturalization process.  In effect, the self-centered taking of an additional citizenship contradicts what it means to be a citizen in that it becomes a convenient and painless means of attaining improved economic opportunity without any real consequences and can just as easily be discarded when it is no longer beneficial. Proponents argue that dual citizenship can actually encourage political activity providing an avenue for immigrants who are unwilling to forsake their country of origin either out of loyalty or due to a feeling of separation from the mainstream society because of language, culture, religion, or ethnicity.
A 2007 US study confirmed the negative effect of dual citizenship in the United States on assimilation and political connectedness for first generation Latino immigrants finding that dual nationals are:
Concern over the effect of multiple citizenship on national cohesiveness is generally more acute in the United States. The reason for this is twofold:
The degree of angst over the effects of dual citizenship seemingly corresponds to a country's model for managing immigration and ethnic diversity: 
People with multiple citizenship may be viewed as having dual loyalty, having the potential to act contrary to a government's interests, and this may lead to difficulties in acquiring government employment where security clearance may be required.
Dual citizenship is associated with two categories of security concerns in the United States: foreign influence and foreign preference. Contrary to common misconceptions, dual citizenship in itself is not the major problem in obtaining or retaining security clearance in the United States. As a matter of fact, if a security clearance applicant's dual citizenship is "based solely on parents' citizenship or birth in a foreign country", that can be a mitigating condition.
However, ''exercising'' (taking advantage of the entitlements of) a non-U.S. citizenship can cause problems.  For example, possession and/or use of a foreign passport is a condition disqualifying from security clearance and "''... is not mitigated by reasons of personal convenience, safety, requirements of foreign law, or the identity of the foreign country''" as is explicitly clarified in a Department of Defense policy memorandum which defines a guideline requiring that "''... any clearance be denied or revoked unless the applicant surrenders the foreign passport or obtains official permission for its use from the appropriate agency of the United States Government''".
This guideline has been followed in  by the United States Department of Defense (DoD)  (DOHA) office of  (ISCR), which decides cases involving security clearances for Contractor personnel doing classified work for all DoD components. In one such case, an administrative judge ruled that it is not clearly consistent with U.S. national interest to grant a request for a security clearance to an applicant who was a dual national of the U.S. and Ireland.
  In 1999, the U.S. Attorney General's office issued an official opinion that a statutory provision that required the Justice Department to employ only "citizen of the United States" did not bar it from employing dual citizens.
One small controversy did arise in 2005 when Michaelle Jean was appointed the Governor General of Canada (official representative of the Queen).  Although Jean no longer holds citizenship in her native Haiti, her marriage to French-born filmmaker Jean-Daniel Lafond allowed her to obtain French citizenship several years before her appointment. Article 23-8
Former Canadian Prime Minister John Turner was born in the United Kingdom and retains his dual citizenship to this day.  Stephane Dion, former head of the Liberal Party of Canada and the previous leader of the official opposition, holds dual citizenship with France as a result of his mother's nationality; Dion has, however, indicated a willingness to renounce French citizenship if a significant number of Canadians view it negatively, in order not to hamper his party's prospects in a future election.
The Constitution of Australia, in Section 44(i), explicitly forbids people who hold foreign citizenship from sitting in the parliament of Australia. A court case (see ''Sue v Hill'')  determined that Britain is a foreign power for purposes of this section of the constitution despite Australia and Britain holding a common nationality at the time of Australian federation, and ruling that Senator-elect Heather Hill had not been duly elected to the national parliament because at the time of her election she was a subject or citizen of a foreign power.
Both the  Estonian president Toomas Hendrik Ilves and the former Lithuanian president Valdas Adamkus had been naturalized U.S. citizens prior to assuming their offices. Both have renounced their U.S. citizenships: Ilves in 1993 and Adamkus in 1998. This was necessary because neither individual's new country permits retention of a former citizenship. Adamkus was a high-ranking official in the Environmental Protection Agency, a federal government department, during his time in the United States.
In some cases, multiple citizenship can create additional tax liability.  Countries that impose tax will generally use a combination of three factors when determining if a person is subject to taxation:
Most countries use residency and/or source when determining if a person should be subject to taxation.  A few countries, such as the Philippines
A person with multiple citizenship may have a tax liability to his country of residence and also to one or more of his countries of citizenship; or worse, if he was unaware that one of his citizenships created a tax liability, then that country may consider him to be a tax evader.  Many countries and territories have contracted tax treaties or agreements for avoiding double taxation.  Still, there are cases in which a person with multiple citizenship will owe tax solely on the basis of holding one of those citizenships.
For example, a person who holds both Australian and United States citizenship, lives and works in Australia.  He would be subject to Australian taxation, because Australia taxes its residents, and he would be subject to US taxation because he holds US citizenship.  In general, he would be allowed to subtract the Australian income tax he paid from the US tax that would be due.  Plus, the US will allow some parts of foreign income to be exempt from taxation; for instance, in 2006 the foreign earned income exclusion allowed up to US$82,400 of foreign salaried income to be exempt from income tax.  This exemption, plus the credit for foreign taxes paid mentioned above, often results in no US taxes being owed, although a US tax return would still have to be filed.  In instances where the Australian tax was less than the US tax, and if there was income that could not be exempted from US tax, the US would expect any tax due to be paid.
The United States Internal Revenue Service has excluded some regulations, e.g. Alternative Minimum Tax (AMT) from tax treaties that protect double taxation.  In its current format even if U.S. citizens are paying income taxes at a rate of 56%, far above the maximum U.S. marginal tax rate, the citizen can be subject to U.S. taxes because the calculation of AMT does not allow full deduction for taxes paid to a foreign country.  Other regulations such as the post date of foreign mailed tax returns are not recognized and can result in penalties for late filing if they arrive at the IRS later than the filing date.
Many countries, even those that permit multiple citizenship, do not explicitly recognise multiple citizenship under their laws: individuals are treated either as citizens of that country or not, and their citizenship with respect to other countries is considered to have no bearing. This can mean (e.g., in Iran, Mexico, many Arab countries, and former Soviet republics) that consular officials abroad may not have access to their citizens if they also hold local citizenship.  Some countries provide access for consular officials as a matter of courtesy, but do not accept any obligation to do so under international consular agreements.  The right of countries to act in this fashion is protected via the Master Nationality Rule.
A multiple citizen who travels to a country that claims him or her as a citizen may be required to enter or leave the country on that country's passport. For example in terms of the South African Citizenships Act it is an offence for a major (aged 18 years and older) South African citizen with dual citizenship to enter or depart the Republic of South Africa making use of the passport of another country.  He or she may also be required to fulfill requirements ordinarily required of its resident citizens, including compulsory military service or exit permits.