At the beginning of each chapter Lusane provides a narrative of an African-American's "White House Story" ranging from an escaped slave once belonging to George Washington to the First Lady Michelle Obama. Topics discussed included in the book are the Founding Fathers, the abolitionist movement, slave owning presidents, Reconstruction, Jim Crow Laws and the 1960s Civil Rights Movement.  
Sub-headed: Black People, White Houses. The introduction discusses ideas and themes that are visited throughout the course of the book in sections titled ''African-Americans and the Promise of the White House'', ''The Struggle over Historical Perspective'', ''Race, the Presidency and Grand Crises'', ''Black Challenges to the White House'' and ''Obama and the Future of Black History''. 
Sub-headed: Founding Documents, Founding Fathers and the Preservation of Slavery. 
Prelude: Oney   s White House Story
The chapter begins with the story of Ona "Oney" Maria Judge who was enslaved to President George Washington, but escaped. Despite Washington's vigorous effort to capture her, Oney successfully kept her freedom. The rest of the chapter discusses the principles and key documents that defined the founding of the nation and role of slavery in that process. The chapter argues that a fundamental reason that slave-holding states joined the revolution against England was an agreement between them and the northern states that slavery would be preserved in the post-revolutionary period. Four of the first five occupants of the White House were central to this contract.
Prelude: Hercules    White House Story
The chapter begins with the story of Hercules who served as the long-time, enslaved chief cook for President Washington during his time in Philadelphia. Although Washington believed Hercules to be more loyal than most of his other slaves, on the evening of the Washington   s move back to Virginia following the end of his presidency, Hercules escaped. Although he tried, Washington was never able to find Hercules. The chapter discusses the racial politics of Washington during the time of his presidency, when he and the president   s house resided in Philadelphia. Ironically, the city was the center of the nation   s abolition movement.
Prelude: Peter   s White House Story
The chapter begins with the story of Peter (and other) enslaved black carpenters who worked on building the presidential residence (to be officially named the White House in 1901). They were part of a large army of slaves who helped build the White House, the US Capitol and other historic federal buildings. The rest of the chapter provides rich details of the involvement of African Americans in the design and building of the nation   s capital, a little known fact of American history.
Prelude: Paul Jennings   s White House Story
The chapter begins with the story of Paul Jennings who was enslaved to President James Madison, and who would later write one of the first books about working in the White House. Jennings was present when the White House had to be evacuated in 1814 during the war with the British. He would later befriend Dolley Madison after her husband   s death and provide her with some financial assistance.  She also became involved in the largest slave escape attempt in Washington, DC during the slavery era. The rest of the chapter focuses on White House responses to the growing crisis of slavery by presidents who themselves were slaveholders. The chapter also discusses Thomas    Blind Tom    Greene Bethune Wiggins, the first African American to perform professionally at the White House. 
Sub-headed: Rebellion, Reconstruction and Retrenchment
Prelude: Elizabeth Keckly   s White House Story
The chapter begins with the story of former slave, activist, and businesswoman Elizabeth Keckly who became a close confidant to Mary Todd Lincoln and who often spoke with President Lincoln, as well. Keckly was the first person sought by Mary when the president was shot, and they remained close until a falling out after Keckly published a memoir of her experiences at the White House. The rest of the chapter examines the intense period of the Civil War and its immediate aftermath including Reconstruction and its demise. It is in this period that the first meeting between a president and black leaders occurs opening the door for individuals such as Frederick Douglass and Sojourner Truth to personally lobby President Lincoln and his successors on behalf of the black community.
Prelude: Booker T. Washington   s White House Story
The chapter begins with the stories of James Benjamin Parker and Booker T. Washington. Parker, an African American, played a key role in subduing the assassin of President McKinley, the event that propelled Theodore Roosevelt into the presidency. The effort by a black man to stop the assassination was celebrated in the black community including noted leader Booker T. Washington. Only weeks after Roosevelt became president, he invited Washington to dinner, an act that caused a huge backlash that ultimately resulted in a 30 year ban on invitations to African Americans. It was the day after this    infamous    dinner that Roosevelt issued a declaration officially naming the president   s residence as the    White House.    The rest of the chapter details the struggle by African Americans in the Jim Crow era to win civil, political and human rights, in part, by appeals to the White House, most of which were universally rejected.
Sub-headed: The White House and Black Mobilization
Prelude: Abraham Bolden   s White House Story
The chapter begins with the story of Abraham Bolden, who became the first black Secret Service agent to work at the White House. For a brief period, he worked on President Kennedy   s protection detail, but due to the unrelenting racism within the Secret Service, he returned to his home office in Chicago. Later, he raised uncomfortable questions within the Service about the Kennedy assassination that he wanted to make public. The subsequent controversy led to Bolden being framed and sent to prison as the Secret Service and other government officials sought to quiet his allegations, which would have exposed a broader plan to assassinate Fidel Castro. The rest of the chapter examines the black activism of the 1960s and beyond, and its impact on the White House of Presidents Johnson through George W. Bush. In this period, African Americans are increasingly visible in the cabinets and staff of the presidents. The presence of jazz at the White House is also detailed.
Sub-headed: The Campaigns to Make the White House Black 
Prelude: Marcus Garvey   s White House Story
The chapter begins with the story of Marcus Garvey and his effort to establish a    Black House    in Washington, DC. In 1920, Garvey   s organization, the Universal Negro Improvement Association, not only selected a black president, J.W.H. Eason, to represent all African Americans, but also sought to create a Black House in Washington. Eason would later break with the Garvey movement, and the residence was never established in Washington. The rest of the chapter focuses on the long effort by African Americans to run for U.S. president inside the major parties as well as outside as independents and third party candidates. Fictional black presidents as portrayed in novels, on television, and in film are also discussed.
Sub-headed: The Obamas in the White House
Prelude: Michelle Obama   s White House Story
The chapter begins with the genealogical history of Michelle Obama, tracing her family evolution through slavery, the Jim Crow era, and in the post-segregation period. Her story reflects that of millions of African Americans who fought their way up the social and economic ladder through hard work, education, and refusal to yield to bigotry and discrimination. The rest of the chapter traces the emergence of Barack Obama as a political figure, his presidential campaign, and his first 21 months in office. The chapter offers an early critique of the politics of race as they have manifested thus far in his presidency.
Following its 2010 publication ''The Black History of the White House'' has received much attention from the political community. To acknowledge the work, author Clarence Lusane was invited to the White House by President Barack Obama to speak with staff in March 2011. 