The recommendation to establish a lighthouse on North Reef was made by a select parliamentary committee in 1864. The site was then a small sandbank on a coral reef. The proposal called for a cast iron cylindrical tower,  in diameter and  tall, which would rest on the coral, penetrating the sand. A hollow base would be formed by pouring concrete into the cylinder, which would also serve as a fresh water tank, and the residence will surround it. Tenders were called in January 1876, and the winning offer was for   7,964 by Walker and Company of Maryborough. Construction was to be completed in by July 1877 but delays, first in approval of the money and then in construction, delayed the completion until November 1878.
The base of the tower,  in diameter and  high, was constructed of bolted cast iron segments. Both the tower and the dwellings were constructed of timber frame, clad in galvanized iron. The original optical apparatus was a second order lens. 
Conditions at the lighthouse were harsh. The location is remote, the quarters were cramped, and the shifting sands sometimes left the lighthouse surrounded by water. The lighthouse keepers chosen were therefore only single, unmarried men. 
The light source was upgraded twice, in 1923 and in 1929. In 1977 the light was converted to electricity and it was demanned in January 1978. The final upgrade was on 28 September 1987 when the light was converted to solar power and six solar panels were installed on the roof of the quarters, facing north.
The apparatus is a VRB-25, rotating at 2&nbsp;rpm, and the light source is a 12&nbsp;Volt 35&nbsp;Watt Halogen lamp with an intensity of 35,050&nbsp;cd.
As mentioned above, the lighthouse base is made of bolted cast iron segments,  in diameter and  high. The tower is  from the base to the lantern, conical in shape, with four intermediate floor levels. It is built of an internal timber frame, clad with galvanised wrought iron plates, painted white. On top of the tower is a Chance Brothers  diameter lantern, housing the VRB-25 beacon. The dome of the lantern is painted red.
The lighthouse keepers' residence surrounds the base of the tower. They comprise a ring of eight rooms, three bed rooms, 
The site and the light are operated by the Australian Maritime Safety Authority. The island is accessible by boat, but both the site and the light are closed to the public.