Note:  If you are seeing this page as a result of an attempt to re-nominate an article for deletion, you must manually edit the AfD nomination links in order to create a new discussion page using the name format of  .  When you create the new discussion page, please provide a link to this old discussion in your nomination. -->
The result was    '''delete'''. -- ''' ''' ( ) 00:41, 7 March 2011 (UTC)
Although there are a small number of individuals in this family tree with articles, there is nothing to indicate that the family as a whole is notable. This article seems to be contrary to   and   #2 (Genealogical entries). The article is inadequately referenced. I'm sure there is a place for family history on the internet, but Wikipedia does not appear to be the appropriate vehicle here.   ( ) 18:47, 27 February 2011 (UTC)
The article is based on printed works published by the publishing house of a History Museum in Romania, who also carries out research on historic subjects. They are not family history websites.
First a consensus should be reached on if and what kind of trees are acceptable to wikipedia - personally I am against the distinction between aristocratic and non-aristocratic families, after all we live in a democracy, whether Biruitorul likes it or not. If no trees or only trees for royalty are acceptable, there is nothing else to discuss. Second, assuming trees are acceptable, it should be decided what criteria we have for the notability of a family. It could be if a certain number of members are notable, there could be other criteria. A consensus should be reached if in these cases only the links between notable persons should be presented, or trees which are as complete as possible. At the end, after reaching a conclusion on these issues, in case a certain tree meets the requirements, we can discuss if that particular tree is properly referenced. Some of these issues have been raised by Orlady, who suggests among other things, that a reduced version of the tree could be kept. But how does Tarc know the family is notable or not if we have not yet a consensus on what a notable family is? The family tree has been published by the most reputable living Romanian genealogist, professor at the University of Bucharest. What is the difference between the view of a University professor who spends time researching the tree of a family and the view of Tarc who considers it not worth while? Can this become a systematic discussion of the issues and not a succession of sweeping statements?   ( ) 07:23, 6 March 2011 (UTC)