The novel begins with its main character, Andrea Sachs, stuck in midtown Manhattan traffic, trying to remember how to use a manual transmission. She is driving a Porsche roadster that belongs to her boss, ''Runway'' magazine editor Miranda Priestly. Sachs must deliver the roadster from the repair shop to Miranda's apartment in time for Miranda's family to go to the Hamptons for the weekend. While she is attempting to do this, Miranda calls Sachs on her cell phone and excoriates Sachs for not doing her job properly. Miranda also tells Sachs to pick up her pet French bulldog (Persian kitten in British edition) from the veterinarian's office. Trying to comply, Andrea ruins some of the expensive designer clothing she is wearing. She wishes Miranda would die. But if that did happen, she reminds herself, she would lose the pleasure of killing Miranda with her own hands.
Sachs had recently graduated Brown with a degree in English when she left her home in Avon, Connecticut for New York City. There she moved in with her longtime friend Lily, now doing graduate studies in Russian at Columbia. Sachs, a longtime reader of ''The New Yorker'', blankets the magazine publishing industry with her resume, hoping to land enough experience somewhere to eventually get her a job at the prestigious weekly. She gets a surprise interview at the Elias-Clark group and is hired on as Miranda's junior assistant. While she knows little of Miranda, she is told repeatedly that "a million girls would die for your job".
People at the magazine are afraid of finding themselves alone in an elevator with Miranda, or making critical remarks about her even to their close friends. Andrea dubs this attitude the ''Runway'' Paranoid Turnaround, as whenever one of her co-workers makes the slightest negative comment about Miranda, they immediately follow it up with a "turnaround" positive comment, due to their fear of their boss finding out about their attitude and firing them.
All the same, Andrea is told that if she manages to work for Miranda for a year, she can have her select pick of jobs within the magazine industry, so she valiantly struggles onward. Even in the present, the perks are generous     between ''Runway'''s notorious "closet" of designer clothes ostensibly "on loan" for photo shoots but rarely returned and often "borrowed" by the staff and the general obsequiousness she encounters as Miranda Priestly's personal assistant, she is able to acquire enough free designer clothing to fit in better with the rest of the fashionable ''Runway'' staff. Eventually, she develops an appreciation for it and stops incurring Miranda's displeasure. She gets a Bang and Olufsen phone for free when Miranda does not want it, and learns that Elias-Clark's policies regarding expense accounts are rather lax, to the benefit of herself and her friends.
She also goes to parties with celebrities. At one of them she meets Christian Collinsworth, a Yale graduate who has been identified as the hot (in more ways than one), up-and-coming writer of their generation. They become attracted to each other, complicating her relationship with Alex.
Sachs's job begins to affect her health; she starts to lose weight because she can't bring herself to eat. After years of being tall and fairly thin, Sachs finds herself the fat, lumpy dwarf of ''Runway'''s office. Eventually, Sachs begins to rationalize her not eating by thinking thoughts like ''"Missing one meal won't hurt, and anyway, $2000 pants don't look so hot on a fat girl."'' She realizes that she has begun to adopt the ''Runway'' attitude for her own.
While working for Miranda, she receives a letter from a teenager, telling Miranda that she loves her magazine and spends all her money on trying to look like the models, but still hates herself because "my butt is huge" and "I'm too fat". The teenager begs Miranda to send her a dress to wear to her prom, but ends by telling her that, even if she throws the letter in the trash can, she will still love her. Andrea begins to doubt the true value of her job, as it is primarily encouraging the woman who makes teenagers all over America hate themselves as much as this one. However, she keeps going, thinking that it will all be worthwhile when she gets a job at ''The New Yorker''.
The 14-hour days she puts in almost routinely leave her little free time to spend with Alex and Lily. Lily increasingly turns to alcohol and picking up dubious men to relieve the pressures of graduate school. Sachs's relationship with her family also suffers. Her parents complain that she doesn't visit her older sister, who is expecting her first child. Sachs stays absorbed in her own world as Lily's problems spiral out of control. Matters finally come to a head when Emily gets mononucleosis and Andrea must travel to Paris with Miranda. Andrea agrees, although this will mean canceling her trip for Alex's homecoming weekend.
In Paris, she has a surprise encounter with Christian. Later that night, Miranda finally lets down her guard a little bit and asks Andrea what she has learned, and where she would like to work afterwards. She promises to place phone calls to people she knows at ''The New Yorker'' on Andrea's behalf once her year is up, and tells her she can actually do some small written pieces for ''Runway''.
But back at the hotel, Andrea gets urgent calls from Alex and her parents asking her to call them. She does so and learns that Lily is comatose in the hospital after driving drunk and wrecking a car.
Though Andrea is receiving pressure from her family and Alex to return home, she tells Miranda she will honor the commitment. Miranda is greatly pleased, and tells her that her future in magazine publishing is looking bright. At the Paris fashion show for Christian Dior, however, a livid Miranda phones her with yet another impossible demand. After she hangs up, Andrea stares at her phone, trying to think how to accommodate Miranda. Then, Andrea finally realizes that her family and friends are more important than her job, and realizes that she is becoming more and more like Miranda. On the spot, Andrea flips out her cell phone and tells her family that she is coming home. Miranda disapproves, but Andrea tells Miranda publicly " , Miranda. ''Fuck you''". She is fired on the spot, but returns home to reconnect with her friends and family. Her romantic relationship with Alex is beyond repair, but they remain friends. Lily recovers and fares well in court for her DUI charge, receiving only community service.
In the last chapter the reader learns that the fallout from her standup to Miranda made her a minor celebrity when the incident made '''Page Six'''. Afraid she had been blacklisted for good from publishing, she stays in Connecticut for a while and works on short fiction. ''Seventeen'' buys one of her stories, and Andrea begins a friendly and professional relationship with Loretta, one of the editors of the teen magazine, who also happened to work for ''Runway'' prior to her tenure there. She returns to New York and gives herself a comfortable financial cushion by selling all the designer clothing she took to Paris with her to consignment shops. She saves a pair of Dolce and Gabbana denim jeans for herself, gave a quilted Chanel purse to her mother, and a Diane von Furstenberg wrap dress to the teenager who wrote to Miranda.
At the novel's end, she is returning to the building to discuss a position at one of the company's magazines. She sees a girl who she realizes is in fact, Miranda's new junior assistant, who is loaded with Miranda's coffee, shopping bags, newspapers, and her beaded clutch, and she remembers that that used to be her. The doorman tips Andrea a wink.
In publicity materials Weisberger states that Priestly's demands are partially fictional and partially a composite of actual experiences she and her friends had in their first jobs. Some reviewers state that Anna Wintour, head of ''Vogue'', was the inspiration for Priestly.Smith, Kyle; June 30, 2006;  ''The New York Post''; retrieved May 26, 2009
Kate Betts, a former editor of ''Harper's Bazaar'' who also worked for Wintour at one point, spared no barb in the ''Times Book Review'', stressing the author's ingratitude at the unique opportunity of working at ''Vogue'': "f Andrea doesn't ever realize why she should care about Miranda Priestly, why should we care about Andrea, or prize the text for anything more than the cheap frisson of the context?"Betts, Kate; April 13, 2003; ""; ''The New York Times Book Review''; retrieved February 7, 2007. Janet Maslin, in the daily paper, : "a mean-spirited ''Gotcha!'' of a book, one that offers little indication that the author could interestingly sustain a gossip-free narrative ..." 
Maslin avoided naming both the magazine where Weisberger actually worked and the woman she allegedly modeled her main character on. The ''Times'' continued this practice when the film was released ). Betts, a former Conde Nast editor, was  (In Weisberger's second novel, ''Everyone Worth Knowing'', two characters are speculating on the identity of a popular anonymous online gossip columnist. One candidate is "that former fashion editor who goes around writing mean book reviews").
Critics who favored the book admitted it had problems, as any first novel might, but  as a "fun, frivolous read".
No Conde Nast Publications reviewed or otherwise mentioned ''The Devil Wears Prada''.
In addition to the United States, the book is sold in Albania, Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Israel, Italy, Japan, Korea, Latvia, Lithuania, Malaysia, Mexico, the Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Russia, Serbia, Singapore, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey, the United Kingdom and Vietnam.
The film version was released on June 30, 2006 by 20th Century Fox. It was produced by Wendy Finerman (''Forrest Gump''), freely adapted for the screen by Aline Brosh McKenna and directed by David Frankel. Anne Hathaway played Andrea, Meryl Streep earned critical praise and a Golden Globe as Miranda, and Emily Blunt played Emily.
Production took place during fall 2005, on location in New York and Paris. Weisberger herself made a very brief non-speaking cameo appearance as the twins' nanny.
It was very successful, taking in over $300 million worldwide, making it the highest-grossing film for both lead actresses up to that date. In September, Weisberger and Frankel jointly accepted the first-ever Quill ''Variety'' Blockbuster Book to Film Award.
On October 12, 2006, Fox Television Network announced that they have acquired the rights to a  of the series based on the book, which would have started airing in 2007. However the project was not picked up by FOX after they announced their 2007-2008 television season schedule in May 2007 and there is no word on whether this adaptation will go forward.