The '''Hongkong Electric Company''' (                        ) is one of Hong Kong's two main electricity generators. The other is China Light & Power. It is a subsidiary of Power Assets Holdings Limited, which was known as Hongkong Electric Holdings Limited until February 2011.
Following a meeting of the Executive Council to discuss land reclamation, Bendyshe Layton suggested to Sir Catchick Paul Chater that Hong Kong  acquire an electricity generator.
During the Japanese invasion of Hong Kong in December 1941, a number of staff at the North Point power plant held the Japanese at bay in an epic defence. Casualties from the battle included the plant's manager Vincent Sorby, who died in a prison camp of wounds received during the attack.
A second power plant was built in North Point in 1919 and a third at Ap Lei Chau in 1968 which was decommissioned in 1989.  Since 1990 all HEC's electric generators have been situated at the Lamma Power Station.
Hongkong Land (HKL), which owned a 34% stake in the company, underwent a restructuring in January 1985 whereby it was forced to sell its stake in the company for HK$3 billion to reduce debt levelsChito Santiago, , Hong Kong Standard, October 17, 1985
The company is now controlled by Li Ka-shing's Cheung Kong Holdings as part of listed company Power Assets Holdings Limited, which before February 2011 was known as "Hongkong Electric Holdings Limited".
Lamma Power Station is a  either (coal-fired, or combined cycle when used alongside natural gas).  Built in 1982 as a  coal fired station it was upgraded to  in 1987 and to  by 1989http://www.fundinguniverse.com/company-histories/Hongkong-Electric-Holdings-Ltd-Company-History.html
Lamma Winds operates a Nordex standard N50  wind turbine with a rotor diameter of . Completed in 2006, the turbine is of stall-regulated, "horizontal axis" design and is mounted up-wind.
In July 2010, the company commissioned the largest commercial-scale solar power system in Hong Kong. Based on amorphous silicon thin film photovoltaic (TFPV), the requisite solar panels are located on the rooftops of the main building of Lamma Power Station. Power generated is fed directly to Hong Kong Electric's 380V electrical grid via inverters, distribution boards and power transmission cables. All panels are set to face south to maximise power output and are inclined at an angle of 22 degrees.
Most of the older power stations were closed as residential development began to surround them. As HEC was owned by a land developer, these properties were in turn re-developed into housing estates.
Wan Chai Power station was a  coal-fired power station opened in 1890 and decommissioned in 1922. Built in the colonial architecture style, it was later demolished and is now the site of Art Deco residential flats at 31, Wing Fung Street.
The North Point Power Stations were a series of power stations built between 1919 and 1966. The site is now home to the City Garden residential flats and Maxim Mall.
Opened in 1968, Ap Lei Chau Power Station was a  oil-fired generating station. The plant was decommissioned and its generator  moved to Lamma Power Station between 1984   1989; HEC office tower and building is now surrounded by the South Horizons housing estate, 34 towers built by Hutchison Whampoa.