I'm performing problems with Commons: few hours ago it ran strangely slowly and now it is impossible to me to join it. When i try to join Commons the page is automatically "blanked" and substituted by a message that says ''Impossible to come back to Wikimedia. The site is having problems'' or similar things. Is it a general problem? --''' - ''' 01:50, 28 February 2011 (UTC)
See  . ---'''''   &nbsp; &nbsp;'''''  12:27, 28 February 2011 (UTC)
I added some links for my website to various wiki pages under the external links section in each case. My site is based on reorganizing biblical verses to find hidden meanings. It is topical and accurate and relevant. Why are my links always deleted? For example, my site is about the identity of the suffering servant of Isaiah 53. Link would be    http://thesufferingservant.com/index.php?p=1_40        I added this link to wiki page      http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Isaiah_53      It was deleted every time. Can you please help me understand this?      Thanks for your help.     Preceding   comment added by   ( ) 01:59, 28 February 2011 (UTC) 
Hi, 
I just found the article for the movie Ramona and Beezus was vandalized, and this IP 71.211.76.37 was the last one to make the edit.  Thought you want to know.--  ( ) 04:57, 28 February 2011 (UTC)
Is there an application or something for Wikipedia to suggest categories based on the articles content? Like it makes it easier without --  ( ) 05:29, 28 February 2011 (UTC)
I've been using hot cat myself actually, what I was actually talking about was if there was a way to have something scan the article automatically without using human input and do it automatically?--  ( ) 00:47, 1 March 2011 (UTC)
Hi, I'm new here and I have a question.
When we assess if an article should be kept, is notability '''the''' deciding factor. As in, hypothetically speaking, say if my dog died and got lots of media coverage even though it is obviously not notable, should it be made into an article? 
Thank you.   ( ) 07:35, 28 February 2011 (UTC)
See  . ---'''''   &nbsp; &nbsp;'''''  12:23, 28 February 2011 (UTC)
I wanted to add something to the page about "notable media appearances of the Ford trimotor", and I'm not sufficiently familiar with your setup to do it the way you intended.
A Ford trimotor appears in Chapter 1 of ''Flash Gordon'' (Universal, 1936).
Sincerely,
David A. Laibow
In spite of I have got several types of Ol Chiki and Avesta fonts installed in my computer, I cannot read the (anyway rare) words of santhali and avesta languages in wikipedia's articles. What kind of font files are being used in Wikipedia and Wiktionary? Thank you in advance for any indications.     Preceding   comment added by   ( ) 10:30, 28 February 2011 (UTC) 
Dear Gadget850:
Hear is an example from santhali: 
I see it at Ol Chiki script as well. You can add the Code2000 font to support this. -'''''   &nbsp; &nbsp;'''''  18:28, 28 February 2011 (UTC)
It is interesting. I had already added this font (and Code2001 as well,) 'seems to be in vain because there aren't any Ol Chiki symbols in the assortment. I try to add this font again. Thank you very much for the help.      Preceding   comment added by   (       ) 15:51, 1 March 2011 (UTC) 
I deleted my font and added again from your link. It works!! I really don't know what may have been the trouble. Thank you very much, I try to find Unicode compliant Avesta font now.      Preceding   comment added by   (       ) 15:04, 2 March 2011 (UTC) 
The first thing I need help on is where I should be seeking help.
I am trying to make sense of the the route of the Taunton end of the Grand Western Canal.  Old Ordnance Survey maps suggest it came into the town across Roughmoor and met the Tone in French Weir.  The Wikipedia article on the Grand Western Canal suggests that the Grand Western actually linked direct to the Bridgwater and Taunton Canal. The article on the Bridgwater and Taunton Canal suggests that the link with the Grand Western was made by going up the Tone and building a short stretch of canal at French Weir.  Both plans however show the link being made with the Bridgwater and Taunton Canal.  In addition the Map reference given for the Taunton Boat Lift appears odd.  It resolves to 81 St Augustine Street which is on the right bank of the Tone whereas all the other canal works are on the left bank of the Tone.
Is this a question for here, the reference desk or the talk page of the article?
Hi,
The Mental Health Foundation and the Foundation for People with Learning Disabilities have both recently changed their logos. I know how to upload images to use on wikipedia but I'm wondering if there are different rules regarding a logo change? ie whether I'm meant to replace an existing image or not - and whether I need to provide different evidence regarding the new logos as they replace existing images used on the respective pages for each organisation.
Hope someone can help!
Thanks
Paul Bridgewater      Preceding   comment added by   (       ) 12:06, 28 February 2011 (UTC) 
I work for the Ann Arbor Public Schools at Roberto Clemente Student Development Center. I recently created a page for our school and it was deleted.  Can you please tell me why, it was not an advertisement.  
Teresa Madyun      Preceding   comment added by   (       ) 13:18, 28 February 2011 (UTC) 
Why does the copyright section of the images of Scottish banknotes (  for example) incorrectly list them as being under Crown copyright? They are actually the copyright of the issuing bank, not the Crown.     Preceding   comment added by   ( ) 19:22, 28 February 2011 (UTC) 
HELP! I've had problems before posting on pages where the text mysteriously deletes (see previous posts from earlier this month), but I just posted to a project page and I can't revert the accidental delete :( . Sorry everyone! Would someone '''please''' be able to tell me how to fix this problem? I can't edit '''anything''' at the moment, and it's been an ongoing problem for months.   ( ) 20:04, 28 February 2011 (UTC)
There is an incorrect link on the page for the Lakeland Central School District in New York.  Under elementary schools, Thomas Jefferson Elementary School links to a school in Virginia not to the one it should in NY.  I can not find a way to correct it.  The correct link is 
Last week, I was able to use the following url to obtain information about a scaled version of Barack Obama's portrait:
I expect the  element to contain a thumburl attribute which provides a link to the scaled version of File:Official portrait of Barack Obama.jpg
Today, all such queries fail to include any thumbnail information. I am not getting any sort of error message, and the API query has not changed. I have been unable to find any information regarding any type of change that could explain this change in behavior.
Can anyone explain this to me?     Preceding   comment added by   ( ) 20:47, 28 February 2011 (UTC) 
Robert E. Lee High School (Jacksonville, Florida), the Avondale or Riverside? section is a copy-vio of http://www.publicschoolreview.com/school_ov/school_id/17768#Editor, as stated in http://www.publicschoolreview.com/useragree.php , numbers 12, 20, and possible 21.   ( ) 21:29, 28 February 2011 (UTC)
Hi there, I'm new to the editing pages of Wikipedia and I have a question for Billy Hathorn.
I noticed he posted some very interesting information about my great-uncle, the actor James Burke.
I'm hoping to ask him a few more questions as I'm currently working on our family tree.
How do I contact editors directly?
Thanks,
Tyler
I would like to replace the logo on our company page with the correct logo - I cannot figure out how to do it...thanks      Preceding   comment added by   (       ) 22:55, 28 February 2011 (UTC) 