As of early 2010, Ooyala was providing video technology and services to deliver online video for over 500 companies, including News International, Yahoo! Japan, TechCrunch and GigaOM. The company has over 125 employees across its offices in Mountain View, California, New York, Los Angeles, London, Sydney, Guadalajara and Tokyo.
Like many Web technology companies, Ooyala   s origins lie in Silicon Valley. While working at Google in January 2007, Bismarck Lepe came up with the idea of using computer vision techniques to deliver targeted advertising on TV shows recorded on Tivo. The idea is said to have come to Lepe in the middle of the night, after he was working to develop new monetization techniques for YouTube. 
Bismarck immediately contacted his brother, Belsasar Lepe, and friend, Sean Knapp, to discuss his idea. At the time, both were also Google employees. Belsasar was working part-time while completing his computer science degree at Stanford University, while Knapp was a full-time engineer. All three attended Stanford as undergraduates.
The company was initially focused on applying computer vision techniques to create clickable video. As the company grew, it has expanded its scope to develop technologies that improve the quality and speed at which online video is delivered; allow Web publishers to measure, monetize and optimize their video content; and enable viewers to enjoy a personalized video experience. 
Since 2007, Ooyala has grown from a single-office startup to one with eight offices, 125 employees and customers in over 20 different countries. Over 50% of Ooyala   s business now comes from International markets. 
Jay Fulcher, formerly of Agile, Peoplesoft, and SAP, joined Ooyala as the company   s CEO in August 2009.
In its first round of funding, Ooyala raised money from a number of angel investors and businesspeople, including: Scott Flanders, CEO of Playboy Enterprises; Tim Koogle, Former CEO of Yahoo!; and Oliver Grace, Kip Hagopian, Fred Warren, and Ron Conway. 
Eight months later, Ooyala raised an additional $8.5 million from Sierra Ventures. Two more successful rounds of fund-raising followed, through 2011.
Through September 2010, Ooyala had raised $42 million from Sage Venture Partners, Sierra Ventures, Rembrandt Ventures, CID Group (a Shanghai-based private equity fund), Hitochu and Panasonic.
The three founders selected Ooyala.com after Knapp   s girlfriend at the time suggested the word Ooyala, which means    cradle    in the Southern Indian language of Telugu. The team like the name   s double    Os,    which reminded them of the name of their former employer, Google. The founders also liked the imagery evoked by a cradle, as they saw themselves as building a company that was to cradle a new form of video technology.
Ooyala provides technology solutions that enable Web sites publish, manage, monetize, and analyze online video content. 
Ooyala   s main technology platform is modular and provides real-time analysis capability to its customers. 
Early on, Ooyala adopted Amazon Web Services and, in 2007, won its first startup competition. Since then, the company has built up its own operations and, in 2010, deployed one of the first large-scale Cassandra clusters for its analytics and video transcoding services.
According to the company   s Web site, Ooyala   s technologies help customers manage, publish, analyze and monetize online video content.
One of Ooyala   s first customers was the Times Group of India. Ooyala customers include Disney, News Corp, TechCrunch and The Telgeraph.
In February 2011, Ooyala announced a multi-year parntership with Yahoo! Japan.
Ooyala works with a number of partners, including Adobe, Microsoft, NTT, YuMe, Tremor Media, Akamai, Level3 and Google.
Video of Interview with Bismark Lepe with Claudine Beaumont of the Telegraph  