The '''Solar-Powered Aircraft Developments Solar One''' is a British mid-wing, experimental, solar-powered aircraft that was designed by David Williams and produced by Solar-Powered Aircraft Developments under the direction of Freddie To and first flown on 13 June 1979. It was the third solar-powered aircraft to fly, after the unmanned AstroFlight Sunrise and the manned Mauro Solar Riser.
Freddie To was a member of the Kremer prize committee who started a project to produce a human-powered aircraft to compete for the prize. The resulting aircraft, at , proved too heavy for human-powered flight and so was converted to solar power instead. A nose-mounted pod powerplant was installed consisting of four  permanent magnet 36 volt DC, 12 amp Bosch electric motors, powered by 750 solar cells of 3 inch diameter and a  Nickel-cadmium battery pack of 24 cells with a 25 amp hour capacity, connected in series. The motors are connected by a 3:1 bicycle chain reduction drive to a  wooden two-bladed propeller, which turns at a maximum of 1,100 rpm, decreasing with battery discharge. The engines are controlled with a simple on/off switch. For flight the aircraft used its on-board solar cells to recharge the battery array on the ground and then the batteries provided power for flight as the aircraft had insufficient solar cells for sustained flight. This shortcoming was not a design feature, but a problem of the cost of the solar cells as the limited project budget of   16,000 did not allow the purchase of sufficient cells. The 750 installed solar cells cost   6,000 and were the most expensive part of the aircraft.
The Solar One is constructed of a wooden structure covered with heat-shrunk Solarfilm model aircraft covering. The wing was built in three sections, a centre section and two outer wing panels to simply storage and transport. The wing spar is a laminated spruce girder box-spar design. The tail surfaces are quickly removable for storage.
The installed batteries provide for a climb of eight minutes plus a two-minute cruise allowance.
The aircraft's first flight occurred at Lasham Airfield, Hampshire, United Kingdom and covered just under . The pilot was Ken Stewart and the aircraft lifted off at  and reached  and  in height. A second flight on the same day by Bill Maidment achieved a speed of . All flights were made on battery power that had been recharged on the ground from the installed solar cells.
An intended flight across the English Channel was abandoned when the aircraft did not reach intended endurance targets.