Mitchell learned basic photography from his father and by avid reading of photography magazines. He has earned his living from photography since he was fifteen years old. Also at age 15, his first nationally published photograph, a portrait of his oil painting instructor, appeared in ''The Complete Photographer''. Jack Mitchell Photographer. Retrieved March 20, 2011.
In 1950, four years after completion of duty as a public relations photographer for the U.S. Army in Florence and Venice, Italy, Mitchell moved from Florida to New York City. Modern dance pioneer Ted Shawn suggested that he concentrate his work on photographing dance and dancers. The recommendation proved fortuitous as that work provided the portal for his continuing success working with major creative and performing artists of all disciplines.
From 1960 to 1970, Jack Mitchell was the official photographer for the American Ballet Theater, taking all the photographs for their souvenir program books. He also produced souvenir book photography for the Boston Ballet, Les Grands Ballets Canadiens, Pennsylvania Ballet, Houston Ballet, the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater, and the San Francisco Ballet. His book for the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater is published under the title ''Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater: Jack Mitchell Photographs''. He has photographed most of the world's leading dance companies for ''The New York Times'' and for ''Dance Magazine''. In fact, the July 2003 issue of ''Dance Magazine'' marked Mitchell's 168th cover photograph for that publication.
His photographs of performing and creative artists have also appeared on the covers of and in ''Rolling Stone'', ''The New York Times Magazine'', ''People'', ''Newsweek'',''Time'', ''Life'', ''Vogue'', ''Elle'', ''Harpers Bazaar'', ''Vanity Fair'', ''Madame Figaro'', ''Stern'' and virtually every domestic and international publication featuring photographs of arts personalities.
Mitchell is also the author of ''Icons & Idols: A Photographer's Chronicle of the Arts, 1960-1995'', which has been called    a stunning exhibition of 137 black and white photographs featuring icons of American culture, including Alvin Ailey, Samuel Barber, Mikhail Baryshnikov, Leonard Bernstein, Alfred Hitchcock, Christopher Isherwood, Philip Glass, Martha Graham, Jasper Johns, Jack Nicholson, Beverly Sills, Meryl Streep, Twyla Tharp, Andy Warhol, and others.    
Mitchell's portrait of musicians John Lennon and Yoko Ono was used on the cover of the circulation record-setting December 1980 Lennon Memorial edition of ''People Magazine''. Of that photograph, John Yau, writing for the Atlantic Center for the Arts, wrote: 
Mitchell himself, on the occasion of the twenty-fifth anniversary of Lennon's murder, wrote an account of the photo session for ''The New York Times'' and recounted: 
Filmmaker Craig Highberger's documentary on Mitchell's life and work, called ''Jack Mitchell: My Life Is Black And White'', features hundreds of Mitchell's iconic photographs and includes interviews with many of his famous subjects, including Edward Albee, Clive Barnes, Merce Cunningham, Patti LuPone and Ned Rorem, among others.
Mitchell credits much of his success as a photographer to his fifty-two year life and business partnership with Robert Pavlik, who died in 2009. Said Mitchell: ''"Bob took care of my books, taxes, the apartment, and wonderful gourmet cooking for us. And, although he avoided the limelight, he masterminded and cooked for cocktail and dinner parties we had for some boldface names like Christopher Isherwood and Don Bachardy, Warhol and his people, Kevin Kline, Patti LuPone, Joel Grey, The New York Times editors, Sylvia Miles, many major dancers and once, Leonard Bernstein. Bob worked hard to help me."''
Mitchell is best known for his numerous special assignment photographs for the Arts and Leisure section of ''The New York Times'' from 1970 to 1995. When he closed his New York studio on December 17, 1995, ''The Times'' published a full page illustrated article about his work and career. Chronicling the end of an era, Annette Grant wrote:
In 2008, the Smithsonian Institution announced that it had acquired a group of vintage photos from Mitchell. The Smithsonian announcement stated:
After a forty-five year career in New York City, Mitchell now resides, in semi-retirement, in Florida; producing black and white exhibition prints from his vast negative files and working on the concept and content for another book of his fifty-five years of dance photography.