The '''La Crosse Center''' is a multi-purpose arena in downtown La Crosse, Wisconsin, that was built in 1980. The arena can seat between 5,000 and 7,500 depending on the type of event it is being used for.
The Center is also a convention center; in addition to the arena, which offers  of exhibit space, two locker rooms, and three dressing rooms. There is also a  North Hall which can open up to the arena to be used in combination, and a  South Exhibit Hall; all three venues total  of exhibit space.  The complex also contains  of meeting room space in five meeting rooms, which can be divided into nine meeting rooms.
While both exhibit halls and the arena are used for trade shows, conventions, meetings and banquets, the arena is also used for sporting events, concerts, circuses, ice shows, and other events.
In addition, the center is home to countless exhibits and shows. One noteworthy event is the annual Bi-State Classic high school wrestling tournament. The center holds ten full-size wrestling mats and up to 55 wrestling squads. 
The most recent change to the La Crosse Center was a fifty foot skywalk spanning over Second Street in downtown La Crosse.  The skywalk links a five floor parking ramp with the east end of the convention center. 
Notable events at the La Crosse Center: Music as a Weapon IV, WWE Raw, ECW and Smackdown, Larry The Cable Guy, Ron White, Bull riding, Monster trucks and The Harlem Globetrotters.
The La Crosse Center is situated less than 300 feet (91.44 meters) from the banks of the Mississippi River, and Riverside Park in Downtown La Crosse.
The La Crosse Skating Sirens began competing at the La Crosse Center in 2009. The Skating Sirens are a nationally "bouting" women's flat-track roller derby team. 
The La Crosse Spartans of the Indoor Football League began playing at the La Crosse Center in 2010.
It has previously been home to two indoor football teams: The La Crosse River Rats and the La Crosse Night Train; and two Continental Basketball Association (CBA) teams: The La Crosse Catbirds and the La Crosse Bobcats.
The center has fielded bids for additional teams in United Indoor Football, the United States Hockey League, and the NBA Developmental League.