HealthCare Partners Medical Group was formed in 1992 when Los Angeles based California Primary Physicians, Pasadena based Huntington Medical Group, and East Los Angeles based Universal Medi-Co joined forces.  By the end of 1997, Bay Shores Medical Group in Redondo Beach and Memorial Medical Group in Long Beach joined HealthCare Parnters.
In 1996, Alliance of Private Practice Physicians became the first of HealthCare Partners network of independent physician associations (IPAs).  Unifiied Physicians of the South Bay followed soon afterward.
Growth in the 2000   s included three staff-model medical groups teaming with HealthCare partners in California:  Greater Valley Medical Group in the San Fernando Valley, Harriman Jones Medical Group in the Long Beach area,   and Arroyo Seco Medical Group in Pasadena.
In 2006, HealthCare Partners expanded outside of California with JSA Holdings, Inc.  Including JSA Healthcare (dba JSA Medical Group) and AmeriDrug Pharmacy in Florida and Pinnacle Health System in Nevada (which became HealthCare Partners of Nevada).  Also in 2006, to manage the growing number of physicians and patients, HealthCare Partners Medical Group in California implemented Allscripts electronic medical record system.
In 2008, HealthCare Partners independent physician association network acquired Physician Associates of the Greater San Gabriel Valley in Pasadena. In 2009, Northridge Medial Group in the San Fernando Valley joined HealthCare Partners of California and Fremont Medical Centers joining HealthCare Partners of Nevada.
In 2010, Talbert Medical Group of Orange County was acquired by HealthCare Partners in California.  In Nevada, Rainbow Medical Center and Advanced Medical Center joined HealthCare Partners.
HealthCare Partners, LLC, is the parent company of these healthcare-focused organizations.  It manages the administrative systems of its own staff-model Medical Group and provides central support services to its independent physician association (IPA) network.  The organization oversees operations of medical groups in California, Florida and Nevada, as well as The Camden Group, a national consulting firm.
HealthCare Partners Medical Group is the Torrance, California based medical group and independent physician association that cares for more than 575,000 managed care patients through its employed and independently contracted physicians.  
HealthCare Partners    medical group employs more than 700 primary care and specialty physicians at more than 60 locations. It is is one of the largest single providers of Medicare Advantage services in California, and serves the Los Angeles, Pasadena/the San Gabriel Valley, South Bay, Long Beach, the San Fernando and Santa Clarita Valleys, and Orange County areas.
HealthCare Partners    independent physician association (IPA) model consists of more than 900 primary care physicians,  and is supported by 3,000 specialists. The IPA serves the San Fernando Valley, Pasadena, San Gabriel Valley, central Los Angeles, South Bay and Orange County areas.
JSA was founded in 1969 as John Short & Associates, Inc., a hospital consulting firm, and began to provide primary healthcare services in 1985. The company was listed as one of the best places to work in healthcare by Modern Healthcare in 2008, 2009 and 2010, and was also recognized as the best internal and family medicine practice in the Tampa Bay area by Florida Medical Business Newspaper.  JSA Healthcare became part of HealthCare Partners in 2006.
HealthCare Partners of Nevada was founded as Summit Medical Group in 1996 and is a physician-run medical group that offers primary care, specialty care, urgent care, hospital and sub-acute services, and home health, and is the largest private medical group in Nevada. It provides medical management and network management services through its Health Plan Solutions Division, a third-party administrator licensed by the state of Nevada.  These Nevada businesses became part of HealthCare Partners in 2006.
The Camden Group is a medical consulting firm that is a wholly owned subsidiary of HealthCare Partners, LLC. It provides consulting and management services for medical groups, MSOs, hospitals and other health care organizations across the country.
The HealthCare Partners Institute for Applied Research and Education is a non-profit foundation that is controlled by an independent board.  The purpose of the institute is to conduct applied research into health care programs with a focus on managed care.
HealthCare Partners is one of five medical groups nationally to participate in an accountable care organization (ACO) pilot sponsored by the Engelberg Center for Health Care Reform at The Brookings Institution and The Dartmouth Institute for Health Policy and Clinical Practice.  This pilot focuses on improving patient outcomes with coordinated care while slowing the escalating costs of healthcare.
HealthCare Partners implemented a hospitalist program at California Hospital Medical Center in response to CHMC's challenges to care for a growing population of indigent and uninsured patients.  The hospitalists see not only HealthCare Partners patients, but CHMC's uninsured population, bringing more coordination and oversight to these patients' care.  Since its inception, the hospitalist program has resulted in 100% compliance with best care protocols for heart failure and pneumonia, a reduction in heart failure readmission rates, and a reduction in acute care readmission rates for patients over 64, as well as saving the hospital millions of dollars in charity care.
The HealthCare Partners Institute for Applied Research and Education, a non-profit organization controlled by an independent board, supports and develops research to improve clinical outcomes and patient experience through education, delivery system redesign, and community programs.  Current research is in partnership with the University of California at Los Angeles, the University of California at San Francisco, the Oregon Health and Science University, the Indiana University School of Medicine, and in conjunction with California Healthcare Foundation and Lance Armstrong Foundation grants.
In 2009 HealthCare Partners opened its first Comprehensive Care Center (CCC) in downtown Los Angeles, CA.  The CCC   s provide special attention to high-risk patients with multiple chronic diseases and offer patients access to round-the-clock medical attention by a dedicated medical team.  Care is coordinated by a team of the CCC   s physicians, nurses, and social workers to ensure that specialist appointments are scheduled, medications are taken and family and caregivers get the support they need in dealing with the patient   s complex medical and social issues.  For patients in the high-risk program, hospital use has declined 20 percent over the two years of the program.
For over 20 years the HealthCare Partners Clinical Research Center has worked to find new and more effective treatments for a wide variety of health conditions.  Currently HealthCare Partners conducts 60 - 70 Phase II clinical studies per year.
The Integrated Healthcare Association (IHA) is a non-profit organization in California that promotes quality improvement, affordability and accountability of healthcare.  It has recognized HealthCare Partners as a top-performing California medical group for the past seven years.  The criteria for this award is based on clinical quality measures, patient experience measures, use of information technology and coordinated diabetes care.    To determine top scorers, IHA compared 221 California physician groups that represent 35,000 physicians statewide, who care for 10 million patients.  
HealthCare Partners was one of nine healthcare companies to be named a finalist in the Adaptive Business Leader (ABL) organization's 2010 ''Innovations in Healthcare'' 12th Annual ABBY Awards. These awards based on a national competition to recognize companies whose innovations are reducing the cost of quality healthcare.
HealthCare Partners Medical Group was one of the top ranked groups in the most recent annual report published by California   s Office of the Patient Advocate.