Taylor Dayne began singing professionally after graduating from high school in Baldwin, Nassau County, New York, singing in little-known rock bands such as ''Felony'' and ''Next''. She began singing solo after finishing college, and released the dance single "I'm The One You Want" under the name Les Lee in 1985.
Signed to Arista Records, her first song to crack the top ten was the dance-pop hit "Tell It to My Heart" in 1987. The song was an instant smash worldwide, peaking in the top five of most major markets worldwide, and achieving a peak of number one in many countries, including Germany. The hit songs that followed included "Prove Your Love", "I'll Always Love You", "Don't Rush Me", "With Every Beat of My Heart", "Love Will Lead You Back", "I'll Be Your Shelter", "Heart of Stone", "Send Me a Lover", "Naked Without You", and "Whatever You Want".
In the United States, she achieved three gold singles, with "Tell It to My Heart", "I'll Always Love You", and "Love Will Lead You Back". "I'll Always Love You", a change-of-pace ballad compared to Dayne's earlier releases, was her breakout hit on the Adult Contemporary charts in 1988 and paved the way for future uptempo dance tracks such as "Don't Rush Me" and "With Every Beat Of My Heart" to gain acceptance at Adult Contemporary radio.
In 1990, "Love Will Lead You Back", a Diane Warren composition, peaked at #1 on both the Billboard Hot 100 and the Hot Adult Contemporary Tracks chart. In 1993, she sang a cover of Barry White' 1974 hit Can't Get Enough of Your Love. The song reached #2 in the Aria Charts in Australia.
As an actress, Dayne appeared in the 1997 Sci-fi television series ''Nightman'' as Carla Day, a singer who is also the leading character's love interest, performing many jazz songs alongside Marc Bonilla and Dragonchoir. Later on, she performed on Broadway in Elton John's ''Aida'' in 2001. She has had roles in independent films such as ''Fool's Paradise'' (1997), ''Stag'' (also in 1997) and ''Jesus the Driver'' (2004), as well as the Warren Beatty-produced 1994 remake of ''Love Affair''.  Dayne also had a recurring role on the Showtime series ''Rude Awakening''.
Taylor Dayne was featured in the VH1 series ''Remaking'', which featured her close friends, Leah Remini and Michelle Reid (also referred to as the Don on VH1).  The series documents Dayne's return to music after taking time off to have a family, (she has twins, Levi and Astaria via a surrogate mother), and premiered her newest song, "Right Now", a result of her collaboration with Rodney Jerkins.
In April 2006, she was Elton John's choice to perform at the Nile Rodgers We Are Family Foundation tribute to Elton John.
On December 11, 2007, Dayne released the first single, "Beautiful", from her studio album ''Satisfied''. The song is written by Taylor Dayne and Hitesh Ceon of production-team 3Elementz. Dayne has been promoting the single on many radio stations, including top markets including New York's WKTU. "Beautiful" went to #1 on the ''Billboard'' Charts. She also appeared on ''The Today Show'', ''Chelsea Lately'', ''Wake Up With Whoopi'' and VH1. The music video for the single and the ''Satisfied'' album cover were shot by Tony Duran, who has also shot album covers for Justin Timberlake and Jennifer Lopez.
She released her fifth album in February 2008 to positive reviews -  her first recording studio album for over eight years. Producers on this record include Rick Nowels and Gregg Alexander. The album includes both new material and recreations of some of her favorite contemporary songs.
Dayne appeared in the CMT series ''Gone Country'' during its third season. ''Gone Country'' season 3, aired on the CMT network January 24, 2009 and its finale aired on March 7, 2009. The chosen winner was Sheila E.
In May 2010, she lobbied congressional leaders on Capitol Hill on behalf of NAMM (National Association of Music Merchants) and VH1's Save The Music Foundation to reduce cuts in music education in America's schools.
In July 2010, she released "Facing a Miracle", the official theme song to the 2010 Gay Games. Dayne performed the song to an audience of 50,000 fans on July 31, 2010 in Cologne, Germany. It ended the year at #9 on Perfect Beat's Top Worldwide Singles of 2010. Five years before, however, she replied to the question what her thoughts on gay marriage were: "In the eyes of the Kaballah,  can't be 'married.' That requires actual male and female energy and DNA. In the bigger picture, I think that 'marriage' is about a certain circuitry. I'm as married to my business manager as I would be any husband."  
Dayne is currently working on remastering her ''Greatest Hits'' album. She is set to release a new single called "Floor on Fire", 17th June 2011, which will also be included on the Greatest Hits album along with another new track.