New Zealand participated in the World Championship, playing home and away to each nation. They lost twice to Australia, and once each to England and Wales. They defeated both France and Wales and had draws against England and France. The New Zealand team was coached by George Menzies and consisted of Kevin Barry, Paul Matete, Les Beehre, Mocky Brereton, Fred Ah Kuoi, John Smith, Kurt Sorensen, Bruce Dickison, Tony Gordon, Dane Sorensen, Ray Baxendale, John Greengrass, John Whittaker, Phillip Orchard, Dennis Williams, vice-captain Murray Eade, John O'Sullivan, Barrie Dyer, Warren Collicoat, Peter Gurnick, Tony Coll, captain Ken Stirling, Kevin Potter, Lyndsay Proctor, Bob Jarvis, Don Munro, Tom Conroy, Murray Wright, Josh Liavaa, John Wright, Graeme West and John Hibbs.
Auckland defeated France on 13 June 9-3 at Carlaw Park in front of 10,000 fans.
Wales defeated Wellington 8-52, West Coast 5-35 and Canterbury 25-18 before losing to Auckland 31-5. ''rugbyleagueproject.org'' ''rugbyleagueproject.org'' ''rugbyleagueproject.org'' ''rugbyleagueproject.org'' The Canterbury game was marred when Jim Mills felled Mark Broadhurst from behind.
The New Zealand Maori side participated in the Pacific Cup. They defeated Papua New Guinea 38-13 in the final. Coached by Tom Newton, the New Zealand Maori squad included Paul Matete, John Wilson, Fred Ah Kuoi, John Smith, Rick Muru, Dane Sorensen, Dennis Key, Ian Bell and captain Richard Bolton.
Ken Stirling won the New Zealand Rugby League's player of the year award.
Canterbury toured with the Rugby League Cup, defeating Wellington at the Addington Showgrounds 28-13 before losing to Taranaki 43-13 in New Plymouth. The Wellington match was originally scheduled to be played in Wellington but was transferred due to television demands.Coffey, John. ''Canterbury XIII'', Christchurch, 1987. 
Waikato held the Rugby League Cup at the end of the season.
Canterbury won the Rothmans trophy.Sky Rugby League Annual '98 ''New Zealand Rugby League'', 1998 Canterbury defeated Auckland 15-14 to win the trophy at Carlaw Park. The victory was Canterbury's first at the venue. Canterbury had earlier defeated Wellington, Waikato and narrowly defeated the West Coast at Wingham Park. ''Significant Results in Canterbury Rugby League''
Auckland drew with the Manly-Warringah Sea Eagles 14-all in Round one of the Amco Cup, advancing on penalty count back. They then defeated Newcastle 26-16 before losing 23-10 to the Eastern Suburbs Roosters in the Semi finals of the competition.
Otahuhu won the Auckland Rugby League's Fox Memorial Trophy, Rukutai Shield, Roope Rooster and Stormont Shield.Lion Red Rugby League Annual 1990 ''New Zealand Rugby League'', 1990. p.72 Northcote won the Kiwi Shield, Mangere East won the Sharman Cup while Pt Chevalier won the Norton Cup. 
Shane Dowsett (Otahuhu)	won the Lipscombe Cup, Dane Sorenson (Mt Wellington) won the Rothville Trophy, Tom Conroy (Ponsonby) and Fred Ah Kuoi (Richmond) won the Bert Humphries Memorial medals, Mark Graham (Otahuhu) won the Tetley Trophy, John Wilson (Northcote) won the Painter Rosebowl Trophy and Joe Gwynne (Otahuhu) won the Hyland Memorial Cup.
Waterside won the Wellington Rugby League's Appleton Shield.
Kevin Tamati played for Upper Hutt.
Christchurch, Eastern Suburbs won the Canterbury Rugby League's Pat Smith Challenge Trophy.
The Waitara Bears won the Taranaki Rugby League championship. Marist were the runners up