New Zealand co-hosted the World Cup with Australia. The Kiwis lost to Great Britain, France and Australia. Matches were played at the Addington Showgrounds and Carlaw Park. New Zealand were coached by Ron Ackland and consisted of captain Tony Coll (c), Fred Ah Kuoi, Warren Collicoat, Olsen Filipaina, Kevin Fisher, Mark Graham, Whare Henry, Whetu Henry, Chris Jordan, Michael O'Donnell, Dane O'Hara, Lyndsay Proctor, Alan Rushton, John Smith, Kurt and Dane Sorensen, John Whittaker and Dennis Williams. Dane Sorensen became the first New Zealander to be selected for the New Zealand Kiwis while based overseas, when he was picked while playing for the Cronulla-Sutherland Sharks.Coffey and Wood ''The Kiwis: 100 Years of International Rugby League'' ISBN 1-86971-090-8 
Coached by Bill Sorensen, Auckland famously completed a "grand slam" when they defeated Australia, England and France in the space of 21 days in 1977.Coffey, John and Bernie Wood ''Auckland, 100 years of rugby league, 1909-2009'', 2009. ISBN 9781869693664. Auckland defeated Australia 1915, France 17-0 and Great Britain 14-10.
New Zealand also hosted the Pacific Cup. The New Zealand Maori side defended their title, beating Western Australia 35-12 in the final at Carlaw Park. Coached by Tom Newton, the New Zealand Maori squad included Dick Uluave, James Leuluai, Dennis Key, Rick Muru, John Wilson, Josh Liavaa and Ian Bell.
John Smith won the New Zealand Rugby League's player of the year award.
Taranaki held the Rugby League Cup at the end of the season.
Auckland won the Rothmans trophy.Sky Rugby League Annual '98 ''New Zealand Rugby League'', 1998
John Smith played for Auckland.
Auckland were eliminated in Round one of the Amco Cup when they lost 2-23 to a Northern Division side. Canterbury also lost 12-20 to Brisbane Easts in Round one.
Otahuhu dominated, winning the Auckland Rugby League's Fox Memorial Trophy, Rukutai Shield, Roope Rooster, Stormont Shield and the Kiwi Shield.Lion Red Rugby League Annual 1990 ''New Zealand Rugby League'', 1990. p.72 Manukau won the Sharman Cup and Glenfield won the Norton Cup.
John Wilson (Northcote) won the Lipscombe Cup, Dennis Williams (Te Atatu) won the Rothville Trophy, Lindsay Proctor(Ellerslie) and Olsen Filipaina (Mangere East) won the Bert Humphries Memorial, Nick Wright (Otahuhu) won the Tetley Trophy, Joe Karam (Glenora) won the Painter Rosebowl Trophy and Graham Lowe (Otahuhu) won the Hyland Memorial Cup.
The East Coast Bays club was founded in 1977.
St George won the Wellington Rugby League's Appleton Shield.
Kevin Tamati played for Upper Hutt.
Papanui won the Canterbury Rugby League's Pat Smith Challenge Trophy.
Wigram and Woodbourne met in the first rugby league match between Royal New Zealand Air Force bases.Coffey, John. ''Canterbury XIII'', Christchurch, 1987.
The Parklands club joined the Rugby League in 1977.
Mocky Brereton was the player-coach of Marist-Western Suburbs.
The Waitara Bears won the Taranaki Rugby League championship. Marist were the runners up