The '''Islamic Society of North America''' ('''ISNA'''), based in Plainfield, Indiana, USA, is a Muslim umbrella group. It has been described in the media as the largest Muslim organization in North America.
ISNA traces its origins to a Muslim student organization in 1953, which emerged as the Muslim Student Association in January 1963. ISNA regards the MSA's 1963 convention as its first one.  ISNA was founded in 1982 by individuals. In 1983, ISNA completed a $21 million ($}} in current dollar terms) headquarters complex in suburban Indianapolis using funds raised in part from Muslim Brotherhood leader Youssef Nada and the Emir of Qatar.  In 2008, it claimed 400,000 members.
ISNA's goal is "to be an exemplary and unifying Islamic organization in North America that contributes to the betterment of the Muslim community and society at large." ISNA is an association of Muslim organizations and individuals that provides a common platform for presenting Islam, supporting Muslim communities, developing educational, social and outreach programs and fostering good relations with other religious communities, and civic and service organizations.
ISNA includes under its umbrella:  Muslim Student Association (MSA), the North American Islamic Trust (NAIT), Canadian Islamic Trust (CIT; NAIT's counterpart in Canada), Muslim Community Association (MCA), American Muslim Social Scientists (AMSS), American Muslim Scientists and Engineers (AMSE), Islamic Medical Association (IMA), Islamic Teaching Center (ITC), Muslim Youth of North America (MYNA)  and Foundation of International Development (FID).
ISNA provides various services for Muslim immigrants and Muslim communities in North America. It publishes information about Islam to be distributed with the intention of informing Muslims and non-Muslims about various issues in the religion. They provide a forum for discussing aging and mortality as well as domestic violence. ISNA also certifies food service and consumer products companies as ''Halal'', and issues Islamic marriage certificates to couples with a marriage license who have performed the religious ceremony.
Although only a small percentage of mosques are official members, mosque membership in ISNA is an important step for many small communities trying to grow.
ISNA holds an annual national convention, typically on the Labor Day weekend in early September, which is generally the largest gathering of American Muslims in the United States. In the last few years, it has been held in Chicago, Illinois, with increasing numbers attending including people from outside of North America. The convention features Islamic lectures, discussions, debates, nasheeds, and Muslim comedy. A notable comedian who has repeatedly performed at ISNA is Azhar Usman.
Its President is Mohamed Magid, and its Secretary General is Safaa Zarzour.  Muzzamil Siddiqi was president until November 2001, and he and Imam Siraj Wahhaj (named as an unindicted co-conspirator in the case against Abdul Rahman) serve on ISNA's board of directors.  Dr. Sayyid Syeed is the National Director for the Office of Interfaith & Community Alliances for ISNA.
ISNA is associated with the Islamic Society of North America Elementary School in Mississauga, Ontario, Canada.
ISNA invited Rabbi Eric Yoffie, president of the Union for Reform Judaism, to speak before its 44th annual meeting (2007). Reform Judaism is the largest Jewish denomination in the US. Yoffie denounced "opportunists" who demonise Islam, and called for an end to racial profiling and legal discrimination against Muslim Americans. Yoffie drew frequent applause, and a standing ovation. David Harris, executive director of the American Jewish Committee, criticized Yoffie.
ISNA also invited Rick Warren to address the 2009 annual ISNA convention. Rabbis, evangelical and Catholic leaders were also present.
ISNA has participated in interfaith dialogue with the U.S. Bishops' Committee for Ecumenical and Interreligious Affairs.
ISNA was one of a number of Muslim groups investigated by US law enforcement for possible terrorist connections. Its tax records were requested in December 2003 by the Senate Finance Committee. However, the committee's investigation concluded in November 2005 with no action taken. Committee chairman Charles Grassley said, "We did not find anything alarming enough that required additional follow-up beyond what law enforcement is already doing."
In the 2007 Holy Land Foundation terrorist financing case, the United States Department of Justice named ISNA, along with Council on American-Islamic Relations (CAIR), the North American Islamic Trust, as an unindicted co-conspirator and one of a number of "entities who are and/or were members of the US Muslim Brotherhood." According to columnist Rod Dreher's interpretation of court documents, "ISNA is an integral part of the  Brotherhood's efforts to wage jihad against America through non-violent means."
Senator Jon Kyl (R-AZ) has asserted that the Islamic Society of North America is "accused of ties to Islamic extremists", and Steven Emerson accused ISNA of ties to terrorism.
In his testimony before the US Senate in October 2003, Dr. Michael Waller told Senators that    The Islamic Society of North America (ISNA) refers Muslim clerics to the U.S. Bureau of Prisons. The Islamic Society of North America is an influential front for the promotion of the Wahhabi political, ideological and theological infrastructure in the United States and Canada." Claiming that ISNA has connections to 50 to 79 percent of mosques on the North American continent, he accused the organization of "dominating Islam in North America."
Similarly, Stephen Schwartz described ISNA in Senate hearing testimony as one of the chief conduits through which the radical Saudi form of Islam passes through to the US.
A speaker at the 2009 national convention, Warith Deen Umar, a New York imam,  asserted that the Holocaust happened to the Jews "because they were serially disobedient to Allah." He went on to allege that a group of Jews close to President Barack Obama "control the world."
ISNA immediately condemned the comments.
In an article, Sheila Musaji has responded to criticism raised by Umbreen Shah. She states that she searched the ISNA print publications and information on the their website for any claim that they were    the only representative of Muslim Americans from all walks of life", and could not find any. She also points out that many African-Americans may not have been represented in large numbers at the ISNA convention because of the convention by W.D. Muhammad during the same weekend.