While attending the University of California at Berkeley in the late 1960s, Schaeffer was inspired by Stewart Brand and his colleagues who published the ''Whole Earth Catalog'', particularly by the cover of the issue that featured a 1968 image of Earth taken from space by Apollo 8 Astronaut William Anders. Schaeffer became one of many young people rejecting the established values of the 1950s in favor of the communal living practices associated with the back-to-the-land movement of the 1960s and 1970s. The ''Whole Earth Catalog'', which promoted access to tools, became the bible of this movement and the inspiration for Schaeffer's own catalog, the Real Goods catalog, which sold products useful for independent life in the commune. By the 1980s the Real Goods catalog had become the successor to the ''Whole Earth Catalog''.
In 1971, Schaeffer graduated from the University of California at Berkeley and moved north to a 300-acre commune in Mendocino County, California. He embraced the self-reliant lifestyle that included growing his own food and building his own shelter. While he adopted the communal lifestyle, he never accepted that doing so meant he had to sacrifice modern amenities, including watching ''Saturday Night Live'' on TV. By hooking up a direct current television to the battery from his VW Bug, he was able to watch his favorite shows. Later, as solar electric panels developed for the space program became available commercially, he used those as the source to charge his storage battery.
Schaeffer started selling solar energy products and earth-friendly tools to his neighbors, and opened the first Real Goods store in Willits, California with a partner in 1978. When the store closed and the partnership dissolved in 1985, Schaeffer, operating out of his garage, continued the business as a mail order catalog.
In 1991, Real Goods held the first of several direct-to-the-public stock offerings. By the late 1990s the company was the largest direct seller of renewable energy information and products in the country. In 2001, Real Goods merged with Gaiam, a sustainable lifestyle company, and the two companies began sharing order processing, warehouse and accounting resources. Real Goods entered the residential solar installation market in California and Colorado in 2002 under the name Real Goods Solar. A commercial solar installation division was launched in 2004. Since that time, Real Goods Solar has acquired four other solar installation companies: Marin Solar (November 2007), Carlson Solar (January 2008), Independent Energy Systems (August 2008) and Regrid Power (October 2008).
In 1995, Schaeffer and a team of coworkers at Real Goods built the Solar Living Center in Hopland, California on what was once a California Department of Transportation dumping ground. The 12-acre campus contains permaculture gardens, renewable energy and sustainable living demonstrations and an environmental education center. In 1998, Schaeffer founded the educational nonprofit Solar Living Institute, whose mission is to promote sustainable living through inspirational environmental education . The Institute offers educational workshops onsite and online, yearly internships and hosts SolFest, the renewable energy festival that attracts more than 10,000 people each year.
Schaeffer has authored two books: ''A Place in the Sun'', which tells the story of the Solar Living Center, and ''The Solar Living Source Book'', an all-purpose guide to renewable energy systems and sustainable living that has been described as "If you were going to live off grid and had one book to buy, this would be it."
Schaeffer serves as president of Real Goods. He and his wife, Nancy Hensley, live near the Solar Living Center in a passive solar house that is a showcase of the design practices and products that are now defined as the "real goods." The house is made of Rastra-block (a combination of cement and recycled polystyrene beads) and other recycled materials. It is off-the-grid, powered by solar electricity and hydroelectricity, and incorporates principles of permaculture in its grounds and gardens.
Schaeffer and Hensley are organic gardeners who grow most of their own vegetables. They also make Demeter-certified biodynamic wine from grapes grown on their property, and grow olives and press their own olive oil.