The songs tell the story of a one-night stand that sets off a chain of events, which gradually reveals a greater web of lies, sex, homosexuality, and deceit.
Chapters 1-5 were first released, individually, in sequence, in May and June of 2005. On August 28, 2005, R. Kelly lip-synched a "new chapter" live at the 2005 MTV Video Music Awards.  This eventually turned out to be an early version of some of the material found in Chapter 12 (including some lyrics and plot points that were later changed).  In November 2005, seven more chapters were released, for a total of twelve, on DVD. Nearly two years later, in August 2007, 10 more chapters were released on DVD and shown on the Independent Film Channel (IFC), and as well as IFC's website. Kelly said that more chapters would be written and released. In the Big Package DVD, the commentary remix gave a special sneak peek of chapter 23.  There is no official release date for the next 15 chapters of ''Trapped In The Closet''.
In order of appearance:
The first chapter begins with Sylvester (Kelly) waking up around 7:00 in the morning in another person's bed. Sylvester realizes when he wakes up that another woman who is not his wife approaches him and kisses him. After scolding himself for committing infidelity, he puts on the rest of his clothes and grabs his car keys on his way home when the woman comes back, stopping him from moving, telling him her husband was coming up the stairs despite Sylvester's pleas. She insists Sylvester hide in the closet but Sylvester insists on jumping out of a window. When the woman reminds him they're on the fifth floor, Sylvester thinks for a moment and agrees to hide in the closet. As soon after that, her husband walks in and she lies to him, which gets Sylvester to think she should win an Oscar for her acting. They then began making love in the bed when Sylvester's cell phone goes off. Sylvester tries to put it on vibrate but the husband starts suspecting something is up and goes to investigate. After searching through a shower curtain, under the bed and even the dresser, he slowly approaches the closet. Sylvester takes his gun out in preparation. The chapter ends with the husband opening the closet.
The second chapter starts with the husband now knowing what his wife was doing behind his back. Sylvester tries calming him down but to no avail as he begins arguing with his wife. The husband nearly attacks Sylvester but stops due to the fact Sylvester is holding a gun. When the husband's cell phone rings, he tells Sylvester that he is a pastor, which Sylvester thinks would be reasonable to not resort to a violent outburst. When Sylvester decides to leave, the husband tells him to stay because he wants to reveal a "secret" to him and his wife. He then calls someone on his cell phone telling them to turn the car around. When the person alarms him that he's at the apartment, the husband buzzes the person up. Sylvester and the wife are both anxious as to what the husband is about to reveal. When the husband doesn't answer Sylvester's questions quickly enough on who he's been talking to, he threatens to shoot both him and his wife. Just as Sylvester gets to the count of four, the door knocks. The husband opens the door and the person turns out to be another man.
Chapter three has all four people in the room. A shocked and confused Sylvester demands to leave after getting this news but the wife tells him to stay. She then argues with her husband, whose name is revealed to be Rufus, over his own infidelity and they argue over which cheating was worse. The wife berates at Rufus for revealing his cheating to upset her after he had busted her with Sylvester. When Sylvester shuts them up and demands more explanation, the other man, Chuck, begins explaining how their affair came about. Sylvester stops him, however, from revealing any more details. After the wife berates at Rufus again, Rufus calls her real name, which is Cathy, which shocks Sylvester, who was told her name was Mary. When Sylvester again threatens to shoot them, Rufus, Cathy and Chuck all begin yelling at each other, pushing Sylvester to shoot his gun in the air to shut them up, causing them to lie on the floor. Sylvester then calls his cell phone to his home but is stunned to find another man is on the phone. He then quickly bolts out of the apartment while Cathy, Rufus and Chuck remain lying on the floor.
Sylvester is seen in chapter four rushing home, angered and belligerent over the events of the previous night. As he drives home, he's pulled over by a police officer, who gives him a ticket for speeding. When he arrives home, he starts asking his wife who had answered his phone. She responds that it was her brother Twan (short for Antoine), who she had reminded Sylvester earlier that he was coming home from prison. Sylvester remembers and then apologizes to his wife before they begin making love. In the middle of it, the wife, whose name is Gwendolyn, sees a used condom on the side of the bed, covers it up, and then jumps on top of a shocked Sylvester, who tries to get Gwendolyn to stop because he's afraid he might have a seizure. When she demands him to keep going, Sylvester tries reminding her that his leg was beginning to cramp. When Gwendolyn finally gets off him, Sylvester flips the bed cover to find the used condom that she had tried to hide from him.
Chapter five starts with Sylvester now knowing his wife had cheated on him and he starts demanding answers. After a few more angry outbursts, Gwendolyn returns with her own knowledge of Sylvester's infidelity. He quickly turns it back around to her infidelity. When he berates her for not giving him an answer, she quickly comes up with certain names including friends of hers named "Roxanne and Tina" and also mentions "Rufus and Chuck", which confuses Sylvester. She then mentions she and Cathy went to high school and were friends and it was Cathy who introduced Gwen to the police officer that stopped Sylvester, confirming that the police officer was her secret lover.
After realizing that Gwendolyn cheated on him while already knowing he had also cheated on her, Sylvester laughs at the situation; Gwendolyn eventually begins laughing as well, and they reconcile. Sylvester then tells her what he went through the previous night. The police officer, whose name is revealed to be James, is concerned about Gwendolyn, turning his car around and going back to the house where he sees Sylvester's car parked in a crooked space with the lights still on. James looks around the back and sees the door has been broken in and then pulls out his gun and goes in to investigate. He hears Sylvester and Gwendolyn laughing hysterically which he mistakes as yelling and crying. As Sylvester continues to explain what was going on, James thinks Gwendolyn is being abused and when she says that Sylvester is "killing her" with his stories, James bursts in. Sylvester notices the guy as the same cop who pulled him over. Gwendolyn tries to calm them down while Sylvester threatens James to get out of the house with his gun. After Gwendolyn begs and James insists, Sylvester drops his gun, and puts his hands up to freeze, James winks and smiles at Sylvester, which angers him, and then he struggles with James over his gun. While they are fighting, the gun accidentally goes off.
It is discovered that Twan (short for Antoine), Gwen's brother who just was released from prison, is the one who was shot. Sylvester and James argue about who is at fault for the shooting while Sylvester blames everything on the cop. Gwendolyn is hysterical, thinking that Twan is dead. Twan wakes up, having only been shot in the shoulder and everyone tells him what is going on. He jokes by saying that he'd have been better off staying in prison with all the madness going on. There is a knock on the door and Sylvester does not want to answer it. After being insulted by James, Sylvester decides he will shoot whoever is at the door, picks his gun up from the floor, and points it towards the door. Twan grabs James' gun and points it towards the door. He says to the cop "you can arrest me later". The door opens and it is the next door neighbor, Rosie, with a spatula in her hand.  They invite Rosie in, while James snatches his gun back from Twan and leaves.
James gets in his police car after leaving Sylvester's house and calls his wife, Bridget. (R. Kelly sings all of Bridget's lines with a fake Southern accent.) Bridget was a little concerned after not having heard from her husband but James assures her that he's fine and on his way home. Bridget tells James that she's excited to see him and that she baked him a cherry pie. Meanwhile at Sylvester's house, Rosie, the next door neighbor, tells Gwendolyn, Sylvester and Twan that she couldn't stand the cop that just left their house. Sylvester and Twan laugh. Back at James and Bridget's house, James pulls up to the house. A panicked Bridget rushes to the door and kisses her husband, then suggests he has some pears, so he could go "upstairs". James wonders why Bridget is all jittery and Bridget comes up with excuse after excuse, such as "Maybe it's that time of the month". James, instead, insists on heating up some leftover Popeye's chicken. Bridget continues to panic which upsets James even more. James finally starts to suspect that his wife is sleeping around and starts questioning her. Bridget hesitates and an angered James yells that she'd better confess or he is going to shoot. It becomes clear that the man Bridget is cheating with is still in the house.
James hears a noise and starts searching in his kitchen. James then walks toward the oven and the fridge, which he looks behind, while Bridget walks toward the cabinet. Then James looks at the table, he sees the cherry pie with a slice cut out. James becomes aware that someone else was in the house because Bridget is allergic to cherries. He becomes enraged. Bridget stays in front. Then he says "move" she says "no", then he repeats himself. After that he gets angry and says "Bitch, move!!" and "she moves!". James opens the door, and the narrator reveals the man is a midget.
The midget jumps out of the cabinet and fights with James who has the clear upper hand. The midget runs under the table. Bridget runs upstairs and searches her purse for a phone number. James demands the midget tell him what he was doing in James' house. The midget wipes cherry pie crust crumbs off his face and responds that he was paid not to tell. James points his gun directly at the midget who admits that he has just "shitted on himself". Back at Sylvester's house, he, Twan, and Gwen are enjoying themselves and playing cards, despite the fact that Twan was shot in the shoulder only minutes ago, when the phone rings. Gwen answers it. It's Bridget, panicked, who found Gwen's number in James' pocket. Gwen gives Sylvester the address, presumably to go over and stop the fight. Back at James' house, James and the midget are still fighting when Bridget bursts into the kitchen with a double barrelled shotgun, James draws his pistol, the midget pulls out his inhaler. Suddenly, Twan and Sylvester burst in with guns drawn to defuse the scene and notice a peculiar odor coming from the midget's pants. The midget then faints because of all the madness.
After bursting into the house, Sylvester begs Bridget and James to put the guns down but they both say no. When Twan suggests he should kill them all, Bridget says she will drop the gun if James doesn't hurt the midget, Big Man, a stripper at a club called "Dixie's."  Dixie's is where Big Man met Bridget. After Gwendolyn calls Sylvester to see if everything is okay, James calls Sylvester and Twan "Chuck and Rufus", revealing that he knows them also. Then after that Twan goes "who the hell is Chuck and Rufus", saying that he doesn't know them. Bridget admits that she paid Big Man (who is "blessed," in reference to the fact that he's "well-endowed," or has a large penis) and also says that she even followed James around while he was with Gwen. She then reveals that Big Man, who has once again fainted, is her baby's daddy, which negates her previous excuse of it being "that time of the month."
Back at Cathy's house, she, Rufus, and Chuck are getting up from the floor. Cathy confronts Rufus about "creeping" around with Chuck, who is a deacon of a church, and then says "ain't no tellin' what I've got," referring to sexually transmitted diseases. Angered, Chuck exclaims that Cathy will pay for what she said and pulls a knife on her. The fight continues until Rufus breaks them up. However, they still continue to argue with each other while Rufus tries to work it all out. The phone rings but the three ignore it and continue fighting. After the phone rings a second time, Cathy answers. Gwendolyn is on the line, and she begins telling Cathy about all the drama that she's been through. When Gwen tells Cathy about Sylvester going to the Paje's club and the "ho" that he slept with, Cathy realizes that the man she had slept with that night had been Sylvester. Cathy tries to tell Gwen who the "ho" is, but Gwen keeps on going on about James and his wife and the rest of the day. While Cathy is on the phone, Chuck and Rufus are getting annoyed and are trying to hurry Cathy. Cathy yells at them and finally tells Gwen to shut up and listen to her. She then reveals to Gwen that she is that "ho".
Sylvester and Twan are in the middle of a "mysterious errand," when suddenly the scene cuts to Rosie the nosy neighbor and her husband, Randolph (played by Kelly), who spend most of this chapter arguing about personal freedoms after Rosie spies on her neighbors. Randolph suggests that a pigeon flies by and "shits" on his nosy wife's face. It cuts back to Sylvester and Twan &mdash; Sylvester states that he has to go collect money, and then disappears, telling Twan to leave the car in drive and that he might need him to watch his back. An hour goes by, with no sign of Sylvester.
Sylvester and Cathy meet at a restaurant and discuss how Sylvester was paid to go home with her that night. Meanwhile, Twan is waiting outside the restaurant in the car and gets a call from one of his friends (only shown by an extreme close up of his mouth) about a prostitute named Tina. Then it goes back to Sylvester and Cathy in the restaurant and they continue to discuss while being waited on by their waitress. Once again it goes to back to the car with Twan while he learns that Tina is working at the very restaurant that he and Sylvester are at. Then it goes back to the restaurant where Sylvester recognizes the waitress, but isn't sure from where.  He notices her name tag says "Tina" and wants to talk to her but she gets scared, breaks a bottle, and calls her friend/co-worker Roxanne out who is carrying a frying pan. Everyone leaves the restaurant except for Sylvester, Tina, and Roxanne. Roxanne and Tina warn Sylvester to leave them alone, saying that they both take Taibo classes. The two women are about to attack Sylvester when Twan walks in brandishing a gun.
Twan, Sylvester, Tina, and Roxanne are in the empty restaurant. Twan seeks revenge on the two women for his arrest three years ago. Sylvester tries to calm him down reminding him that if he does anything to them that he will go back to jail. Then Sylvester tells him that he spent five years in jail himself and knows how he feels. He then asks Tina and Roxanne for an explanation of what happened on the day of his arrest. Tina says "it was supposed to be a simple operation" describing a "trip" to Atlanta, Georgia. Roxanne tells Sylvester that Twan drove the streets while high, screaming "I'm Rick James, bitch!" It gets to the point they are chased by police squad cars and a helicopter. Twan's car breaks down and he, Tina, and Roxanne are arrested. In the interrogation room, the police tell the women that Twan blamed the drug deal on them in order to save his own skin. It is then when Roxanne tells Twan she turned him in. Roxanne says Tina protected him because Tina was pregnant with Twan's baby.
Twan claims that someone else must have fathered Tina's baby; at this time Tina starts twitching. When Sylvester inquires about this, Roxanne explains she was hit in the eye by a pimp a year ago and that she's had bad nerves ever since. Sylvester then pulls Twan over and convinces him that fatherhood can turn his life around. When Twan decides to tell Tina that he wants to make this work, Roxanne kisses Tina and reveals they are lovers.
In this chapter, Sylvester points his gun towards Roxanne and Tina, who are holding each other. He then puts his gun down for his tolerance of lesbianism, unlike Twan, who tries to get Sylvester to shoot them. Sylvester then tries to leave with Twan, who is threatening to buy a gun and coming back for them later. Sylvester finally convinces Twan to leave.
Chapter 18 begins with Sylvester and Twan driving back from the diner.  Twan is still worked up over seeing Roxanne and Tina together, despite Sylvester's efforts to calm him down. Soon enough, Sylvester gets a phone call from Gwendolyn, who reveals to him that Dale, who Sylvester refers to as "daddy," has been put in jail by "momma."  The scene shifts to a church, where Rufus is leading a rousing worship song with Reverend Mosley James Evans.  The Peace Within Choir is singing "we could work this out," a reference to an earlier chapter, when Rufus said that he and Cathy and Chuck could work it out.  Rufus then gets a call from Chuck, which he takes in his office alone.  Chuck is crying about missing Rufus and how they haven't talked since the incident in earlier chapters, when Cathy enters the room.  Rufus accidentally puts speaker phone on, which leads to Cathy hearing Chuck over the phone yell "Rufus, I need you!"  She grabs the phone and begins arguing with Chuck before Rufus intervenes and sends Cathy from his office.  Back on the phone, Rufus seems to have a revelation about the entire situation and becomes sure that he does love his wife.  As he tries to explain this, Chuck becomes near-hysterical.  Rufus then tells Chuck he will come by to talk with him. It is then Chuck reveals Rufus cannot come visit him, as he is in the hospital.
Reverend Mosley James Evans and the Peace Within Choir attempt to persuade Pimp Lucious, a pimp with a severe stuttering problem, to stop pimping and to turn his life around. As the choir sings "you can do it Pimp Lucious," Lucious pretends to accept the offer and leaves the church.  However, he then tells his pimpin' partner, Bishop Craig, that he is never going to "s-s-s-s-s-stop p-p-p-pimpin," because "p-p-p-pimpin's for life." Then he tells Bishop Craig "now let's get this mmm-mmmmm money."
Rosie the Nosy Neighbor is at home reading the Bible when her husband, Randolph, comes home shouting, "He's got The Package, Rosie! He's got the Package!" Rosie is unwilling to listen at first, until Randolph says it's about the Pastor (Rufus). After initial bickering, Randolph tells Rosie the story: while working as a janitor for the church, Randolph heard Rufus coming into the church office. He hid in the office closet and unintentionally overheard the conversation seen in Chapter 18 among Chuck, Rufus, and Cathy. After relaying the story, Rosie asks Randolph, "But what makes you say he got 'The Package' though?" Randolph replies: "That he's  in the hospital!" Rosie immediately decides to inform the masses, despite Randolph's protests. The chapter ends with Randolph sitting on the couch, falling asleep.
Sylvester and Twan go to visit an apparent mobster named Joey. Sylvester informs Joey of some "job" that could get them a lot of money. While there, Joey accuses Twan of being a cop, as well as calling him "LL Fool J," deeply offending Twan. Sylvester, trying to defuse the situation, asks Twan to wait outside the office while he and Joey discuss business. As Twan leaves the room, he remarks, "I'll be listening from the outside." Joey replies, "Yeah, yeah, whatever. Mama said knock you out, fuck outta here." While waiting outside, Twan has a nightmare of Sylvester and him in the same situation, being pointed at with guns. In the end, Sylvester wakes Twan up, then Joey and Sylvester say their goodbyes, and Joey asks Sylvester to tell Gwen he says hello, as their deal is sealed.
The scene opens to O'Dale and Merna's voicemail (Sylvester's Parents) and eventually fades into the middle of the voicemail box where the narrator (Kelly) says, "And Now The Rumor." Throughout a series of phone conversations among all of the original characters from Chapters 1-12 and those introduced in Chapter 13-22, rumors of "The Package" circulate. Because Chuck has it, it has possibly been passed to Rufus, to his wife Cathy, to Sylvester, and to Gwen. In addition, Bridget realizes that James knows both Chuck and Rufus, though he tried to hide it from her earlier, suggesting he may be on the "down-low" with Chuck as well. Gwen also cheated on Sylvester with James however she used a condom as revealed in Chapter 4. This would put Bridget, Big Man, and James at serious risk. Lastly, Pimp Lucious gets a similar concerned call from an unidentified woman (who may have gotten "The Package" from Big Man, and subsequently passed it to Pimp Lucious). All in all, Chuck, Rufus, Cathy, Sylvester, Gwen, James, Bridget, Big Man, and Pimp Lucious all could have been infected with the Package. Had Pimp Lucious been infected with "The Package" (slang for HIV), he could have passed it to any or all of the hookers he pimps.
Additionally, although there is no confirmation of this, because he is the only pimp the story has focused on thus far, the watcher might assume that Lucious was the pimp who gave Tina her nervous twitch when she was working for him. Were this the case, Tina, Roxanne, Twan, and her baby could all be at risk.
Closing Screen: fades to black with the words "TO BE CONTINUED"