She attended Stephens College in Columbia, Missouri, the University of Arkansas at Fayetteville, and the University of Miami, from which she received a BA in history. She worked for about a year as a school teacher in Mobile, Alabama, then returned to Pine Bluff in 1945. After World War II, she began work as a secretary at the Pine Bluff Arsenal, but was soon transferred (with her boss, Brigadier-General Augustin Mitchell Prentiss) to Washington, D.C., where she met Clyde Jennings, Jr. whom she married on 5 October 1946, and with whom she moved to New York. By Jennings, she had a son, Clyde Jay Jennings (b. 2 November 1947). The couple separated on 18 May 1956 and divorced on 1 August 1957.
She married John Mitchell on 30 December 1957. They had a daughter, Martha Elizabeth (nicknamed    Marty   ) on 10 January 1961. John Mitchell met Nixon professionally, became a friend and political associate, and was appointed Attorney General after Nixon's 1968 election to the presidency. He became entangled in administration efforts to obstruct the investigations of the Watergate scandal.
The Mitchells separated in 1973. After the Watergate break in Martha Mitchell began contacting reporters when her husband's role in the scandal became known, which earned her the title, "the Mouth of the South". Nixon was later to tell interviewer David Frost (in September 1977 on ''Frost on America'')    If it hadn't been for Martha Mitchell, there'd have been no Watergate.    At one point, she insisted she had been held against her will in a California hotel room and sedated to prevent her from making controversial phone calls to the news media. Because of her allegations, she was discredited and even abandoned by most of her family, except her son Jay. Nixon aides even leaked to the press that she had a    drinking problem   . The "Martha Mitchell effect", in which a psychiatrist mistakenly identifies a patient's extraordinary claims as delusions, despite their veracity, was later named after her. 
In 1976, in advanced stages of myeloma, Martha slipped into a coma and died in New York at age 57. She is buried in the Bellwood Cemetery in Pine Bluff.
The birthplace and childhood home of Martha Beall Mitchell, now the Martha Beall Mitchell Home and Museum, was added to the National Register of Historic Places in January 1978.
Martha Mitchell was portrayed in the 1995 film ''Nixon'' by actress Madeline Kahn. In the TV series ''24'', the character named Martha Logan is based on Martha Mitchell.
In 2004, a three-act play, ''This is Martha Speaking   '', by Thomas Doran premiered in Pine Bluff, Arkansas starring Lee Anne Moore as Martha Mitchell and Michael Childers as John Mitchell. That same year, a one-woman play about Mitchell, ''Dirty Tricks'' by John Jeter, appeared off-Broadway.
The song ''Martha the Mouth'' from Captain Sensible's album ''Women and Captains First'' is about Martha Mitchell. On the album ''This Is a Recording'', Lily Tomlin references Mrs. Mitchell.