Please do not change this number based upon the highest number out there; there is much disagreement among the sources, so the best thing to state is the most reliable number (344 as of May 28) with a plus sign. The tornadic total is at least 322 (per the SPC site on killer tornadoes), but no higher than 331 as at least 13 of the deaths have been confirmed non-tornadic.
An extremely large and violent tornado outbreak, the largest in United States history and popularly known as the '''2011 Super Outbreak''', occurred from April 25&nbsp;to 28, 2011. The outbreak affected the Southern, Midwestern, and Northeastern United States, leaving catastrophic destruction in its wake. It produced destructive tornadoes in Alabama, Arkansas, Georgia, Mississippi, North Carolina, Tennessee, and Virginia, and affected several other areas throughout the Southern and Eastern United States. A total of 334 tornadoes were confirmed in 21 states from Texas to New York and even isolated tornadoes in Canada. Four tornadoes on the 27th caused damage that was rated EF5 on the Enhanced Fujita Scale, which is the highest ranking possible; typically there is only about one of these tornadoes in a given year. Widespread and destructive tornadoes occurred on each day of the outbreak, with April 27 being among the most prolific and destructive tornado days in United States history.
At least 344 people were killed as a result of the outbreak. However, the exact number is unknown as various sources differ on the exact count. Some of those fatalities were not caused by tornadoes, but were confirmed to be as a result of other thunderstorm-related impacts such as straight-line winds, hail, flash flooding or lightning; some of the exact causes have not yet been differentiated. Additionally, several people are still missing. 238 deaths in Alabama alone have been confirmed by the state's Emergency Management Agency. |work=Alabama Emergency Management Agency|publisher=State of Alabama |accessdate=}} At least 322 of those deaths have been confirmed to be as a result of tornadoes.http://www.spc.noaa.gov/climo/torn/fataltorn.html
April 27 was the deadliest tornado day in the United States since the 1925 "Tri-State" outbreak, which produced the infamous Tri-State Tornado. Although it has been classified by some news outlets as the second-deadliest tornado outbreak in United States history,, MSNBC, AP News & Reuters (jointly produced article), April 30, 2011, Retrieved April 30, 2011Tornado outbreak is 2nd deadliest on record By the CNN Wire Staff, April 30, 2011 3:36 p.m. EDT http://www.cnn.com/2011/US/04/30/severe.weather.context/index.html the 1936 Tupelo   Gainesville tornado outbreak http://www.accuweather.com/video/888277817001/weather-history-1936-tupelo-g.asp?channel=wxhist actually holds that distinction with at least 436 reported deaths. Officially the outbreak is listed by NOAA as the fourth deadliest in United States history http://www.srh.noaa.gov/bmx/?n=climo_2011torstats and the 24-hour-period from 8:00 a.m. April 27 to 8:00 a.m. April 28 as the fifth deadliest tornado day in United States history. Over 492 preliminary local storm reports were received for tornadoes over four days, including 292 in 16 states on April 27. It was also the costliest tornado outbreak and one of the costliest natural disasters in United States history (even after adjustments for inflation), with insured damage estimated as high as $6 billion, and total damages exceeding $10 billion (2011 USD).
  Conditions were similar on April 26, with a predicted likelihood of severe thunderstorms, including an extended threat of strong to violent long-track tornadoes during the afternoon and evening hours; mixed-layer CAPE values were forecast to be around 3000-4000 J/kg, around east Texas, Louisiana and Arkansas. The storm mode on April 26 was predicted to consist of mostly discrete supercells during the afternoon and early evening, shifting over to a mesoscale convective complex, with more of a threat of damaging winds and hail during the nighttime hours.
As the storm system moved eastward toward the Ohio, Mississippi and Tennessee Valleys on April 27, a very powerful 80-100 knot mid-level jet stream moved into the Ohio and Tennessee Valleys, behind the trough, creating strong wind shear, with a low pressure center moving quickly northeastward across those areas on the 27th. On the afternoon of April 27, CAPE values were estimated to be in the range of 2000-3000 J/kg across Louisiana and southern Mississippi, with the moderate instability moving northeastward across the southern Tennessee Valley; in addition, temperatures across the southeastern United States ranged from the 70s   F (mid-20s   C) to the lower 90s   F (near 35   C). Helicity levels ranged from 450   600&nbsp;m/s2 supportive for significant tornadic activity and strong to violent long-track tornadoes.
In total, 56 severe weather watches were issued by the SPC over those four days in the outbreak area, including 41 tornado watches (10 of which were PDS watches) and 15 severe thunderstorm watches.
Starting on April 19, the Hydrometeorological Prediction Center began to discuss this storm system, and the possibility of an outbreak of strong thunderstorms early the following week near and ahead of its trailing cold front. A large area of possible severe storms for April&nbsp;25   27 was forecast as the Storm Prediction Center (SPC), a division of the National Weather Service, issued a moderate risk of severe weather for three consecutive days, centered over Arkansas through Tennessee. By the late-afternoon hours of April&nbsp;25, several tornadoes had been reported across a few states, including two which caused significant damage in Oklahoma and Texas. At 3:25&nbsp;pm CDT (2025 UTC), the SPC issued a Particularly dangerous situation (PDS) tornado watch for much of Arkansas and parts of Missouri, Oklahoma, Texas and Louisiana. Tornadoes were scattered that day until early evening, when an intense tornadic cell tracked near the Little Rock metropolitan area and a tornado emergency was declared for Vilonia, Arkansas. Initial reports indicate that a tornado either  or   wide caused significant damage in the town. Reports indicate four people were killed.  Another tornado caused extensive damage to Little Rock Air Force Base.  Severe flooding continued across a large area from the Red River valley to the Great Lakes.
 A large PDS tornado watch with very high tornado probabilities was issued that afternoon for that same area. Widespread tornado warnings were issued in this area later that evening, and tornadoes caused damage.
 Further east, severe thunderstorms caused scattered wind damage and large hail across Pennsylvania and New York. Two-inch diameter hail was reported in Lock Haven, Pennsylvania. An isolated supercell moved across Central New York throughout much of the afternoon, producing golf ball sized hail in Syracuse and spawned a very brief EF1 tornado in Verona Mills, causing primarily tree damage.
For the second day in a row, the SPC issued a high risk of severe weather for the Southern United States, and late that morning the SPC increased the probability for tornadoes to 45% along a corridor from Meridian, Mississippi to Huntsville, Alabama, an extremely rare issuance exceeding the high risk standards. Conditions for tornadoes became increasingly favorable for an extreme tornado outbreak. During the afternoon, a tornado emergency was declared for Neshoba County, Mississippi as a large tornado was reported on the ground by storm spotters.  Thus far four tornadoes have been officially rated as EF5 on the Enhanced Fujita Scale. These tornadoes impacted several counties in the states of Mississippi and Alabama, especially the towns of Smithville, Mississippi; Hackleburg and Phil Campbell, Alabama; Philadelphia, Mississippi; and Rainsville, Alabama.  This marks only the second day in history (the other being the April 3, 1974 Super Outbreak) that there were three or more EF5 or F5 tornadoes.
A squall line of severe thunderstorms packing strong straight-line winds and numerous embedded tornadoes impacted North and Central Alabama and parts of Middle and East Tennessee in the early morning hours. These storms knocked out power and telephone lines in a few areas. Many areas did not get their power and telephone restored in the first couple of days, and some remained without power through the remainder of the week and in some cases power was not restored until seven days later. This preliminary line of storms also caused some NOAA weather radio transmitter sites to stop functioning for the remainder of the outbreak. The atmosphere quickly destabilized again that morning, with the atmosphere becoming explosively unstable, and the main tornadic activity began early in the afternoon across Mississippi and Alabama. Weather conditions that afternoon and early evening became extremely violent across those two states, with many destructive and deadly tornadoes touching down. The activity continued to track eastward into the late evening hours, impacting parts of East Tennessee, north Georgia and southwest Virginia with more destructive tornadoes.
The first major tornado of the day struck the city of Cullman, Alabama at around 3:00 p.m. CDT (2000 UTC). This large, wedge tornado was captured on several TV tower cameras from stations such as Fox affiliate WBRC (channel 6) and ABC WBMA-LP/WCFT/WJSU (channels 58, 33 and 40). The tornado caused extensive destruction in downtown Cullman, a city of about 20,000 people; the tornado has been rated an EF4. The final damage count was 867 residences and 94 businesses in Cullman. At 4:00 p.m. CDT a tornado struck Lawrence County, Alabama, causing severe damage and killing a couple dozen people. At around 5:10 p.m. CDT (2210 UTC), a very large and exceptionally destructive tornado struck Tuscaloosa, Alabama. About 40 minutes later, the same tornado struck the northern suburbs of Birmingham, Alabama. A tornado emergency was issued for both cities, and many other tornado emergencies were issued that day. A debris ball was observed by the Birmingham NEXRAD, indicating that the tornado was causing extreme damage. Photos from the damage path showed total devastation. The path of this tornado struck the same small communities as the F4 storm on April 1956 Birmingham tornado, and the F5 storms on April 1977 Birmingham tornado and April 1998 Birmingham tornado.
By the morning of April 30, the Alabama Emergency Management Agency had confirmed at least 45 storm fatalities in Tuscaloosa. Search and rescue still continues in the city, so this death toll may rise further. Also, several small Alabama towns including Hackleburg, Phil Campbell, Rainsville and Harvest suffered catastrophic damage and great loss of life.
A secondary area of severe weather also developed that evening along the Interstate 81 corridor from northern Virginia northward through Maryland, Pennsylvania and New York as far north as northern New York and continued into early April 28. Many tornadoes touched down in this area as well, although most were weak.
A statewide review by emergency management officials has recorded 249 fatalities in Alabama. Damage and power outages in the Huntsville area were so widespread that at one point over 650,000 people were out of power in the TVA system. Severe tornado damage, including at least eight deaths, has also been reported in Ringgold, Georgia. Tornado alerts were issued for Southern Ontario as far north as Ottawa; one tornado was later confirmed at Fergus, and up to three other tornadoes may have touched down in Southwestern Ontario. ''The Record'', April 28, 2011.
The SPC shows 260 tornadoes were reported in the preceding 24 hours. It also broke the record for most tornadoes in 24 hours with 188 (53 of which were in Alabama), breaking the record of 148 set by the 1974 Super Outbreak.
Tornado watches were issued for the Atlantic Seaboard from Pennsylvania to Florida, but tornadoes were predicted to weaken and become more isolated. Even so, several people were killed across the region and tornadoes were reported in Pennsylvania, New York, Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina, Georgia, Florida, and Maryland.  Although tornado watches were issued, no tornadoes were spotted in New Jersey or Washington, D.C. In the wake of the tornadoes and severe thunderstorms, widespread flooding hit the Midwest, South, and Eastern Seaboard, with extensive flood and flash flood warnings issued. The last tornadoes of the outbreak touched down that afternoon in eastern North Carolina which was hard hit from the April 16 outbreak, but they were all weak. The system moved out into the Atlantic Ocean that evening, with the exception of isolated thunderstorms over central Florida that night into April 29, although there were no tornadoes then.
The first killer tornado of the outbreak was a large EF2 that struck the small town of Vilonia, Arkansas in Faulkner County around 7:30&nbsp;pm CDT on April&nbsp;25. A tornado warning was issued for the town roughly 30&nbsp;minutes prior to the tornado's arrival and the relatively low loss of life is attributed to this lead time. A tornado emergency was declared at 7:24&nbsp;pm CDT for Vilonia shortly before the tornado struck. Four people are known to have been killed in the town and many more injured. Numerous structures were also damaged or destroyed. One mobile home was completely destroyed and debris from the home was scattered a significant distance from where it stood. Several other homes were reportedly leveled by the tornado. Within five minutes of the storm, local fire fighters arrived in the town and began search and rescue efforts. Following the tornado, 85 members of the National Guard were deployed to assist in search and rescue, debris clearing, security and traffic control.
A violent tornado struck Smithville, Mississippi, at 3:44 p.m. CDT on April 27. The damage path was 15.24 miles long, half a mile wide, and did extreme damage in Smithville. The NWS damage survey reported EF5 damage, with 18 homes, a post office, a police station, and what was listed as the "water system" completely destroyed, with 52 homes and 7 businesses damaged to varying degrees. Dozens of newly constructed two-story, brick homes were leveled and trees were debarked. At least five people are reported as missing.  Damage assessments have determined that 150 homes, 14 businesses and 2 churches were destroyed by the tornado in Smithville. The homes were well-built, of recent construction, but the storm was violent enough that all appliances and plumbing fixtures in the damage path were "shredded or missing.". The tornado has been officially rated as an EF5 tornado with estimated winds of 205&nbsp;mph; information is still preliminary. The National Weather Service has determined that this tornado continued across the state line and struck Shottsville, Alabama where seven people were killed. In total, 22 people died in this tornado.
The last confirmed EF5 tornado was the Parkersburg, Iowa, tornado on May 25, 2008.
This storm, rated EF5, is likely to have begun in the Lakeview community northeast of Geraldine, Alabama at 4:47 p.m. CDT, during the late afternoon of April 27. The tornado then tracked northeastward generally parallel and just east of State Route 75 through Fyffe, Rainsville, and Sylvania killing at least 26 people. Damage has also been reported farther to the northeast through the Henagar and Ider areas, although these locations have not been surveyed yet.
The tornado touched down in the Lakeview community initially causing structural damage to small buildings and snapping trees. The tornado grew in intensity and the path width increased from around 50 yards to a half a mile as it entered the Rainsville and Sylvania communities. Damage included houses that were completely removed from foundations and debris scattered for about one mile, trees were debarked, and a few mobile homes were completely destroyed with debris strewn for about a mile downstream. In Sylvania, some of these houses completely removed from foundations contained anchor bolts and foundation straps. 
A tornado touched down in Marion County, Alabama about 5 miles WSW of Hamilton, AL around 3:00 p.m. CDT on April 27, leaving massive damage along its track. The storm would eventually reach the Hackleburg area, leveling many structures including a large plant operated by Wrangler. According to the Red Cross, 75% of the town was destroyed.  While initially rated as an EF-3, after further analysis of the damage the rating was increased to EF-5, making it the first F-5 or EF-5 tornado in Alabama since the Birmingham tornado of April 8, 1998.http://www.webcitation.org/5yLJC4Bez
Phil Campbell experienced continuous significant devastation throughout the city. Significant damage occurred from the intersection of County Road 51 and Alabama Highway 237 to the intersection of County Road 81 and County Road 75. Within this corridor, several well constructed houses were destroyed. At least three churches along the path sustained significant damage. One church in Phil Campbell was completely destroyed with only the slab remaining. Multiple mobile homes throughout the path were completely destroyed, and their mangled frames were tossed at least 25 to 50 yards. Cars were tossed and destroyed throughout the path of the tornado, with one car wrapped around a debarked tree in Phil Campbell.  All along the path length, thousands of hardwood and softwood trees were snapped.  Hundreds of trees were also debarked and twisted, and had only stubs of largest branches remaining.
EF-5 damage continued similarly northeast from Phil Campbell, roughly along County Roads 81 and 82. Several high voltage TVA power line trusses were twisted and toppled, particularly near Highway 243. Six chicken houses were completely destroyed near the Franklin-Lawrence County line. The tornado continued into Lawrence County near the Mount Hope area where significant devastation was incurred to single family homes and a restaurant.  Nothing but the foundation and a pile of debris remained in this area, and a small portion of the restaurant foundation buckled.  Thousands of hardwood and softwood trees were snapped, with a significant number of trees twisted and debarked with only stubs of branches remaining. Many mobile homes were also destroyed with the frames mangled, and a single family home was completely destroyed with the walls and contents strewn over a hundred yards. Meteorologist Gary Dobbs, with WAAY-TV since 1984, spotted this tornado from his car and was unable to get to his storm shelter.  While his house was destroyed around him, Dobbs was thrown 40 feet from the house. The door of the storm shelter blew off, but no friends therein were seriously injured. Dobbs required hospitalization.
Further northeast, more trees were found snapped and twisted before reaching Highway 24.  At this location, 4 chicken houses were completely destroyed with much of the debris wrapped around debarked trees.  TVA high voltage power line trusses were also destroyed at this location.  The tornado continued northeast wreaking significant devastation in and around the Langtown community north of Moulton.  On the west side of Alabama Highway 33, several homes sustained significant damage with roofs missing or only interior rooms remaining.  A nearby store and gas station also sustained significant damage. The tornado strengthened again as it moved into County Roads 214 and 298, where multiple houses and mobile homes were completely destroyed.  Several cars were tossed into fields and wrapped around trees along County Road 291 and 292.  One vehicle was tossed into a large hardwood tree that was also debarked.  Tree and mobile home damage continued along County Roads 217 and 222, where a handful of large high voltage TVA power poles were destroyed, cutting off electricity delivery from Browns Ferry Nuclear Power Plant.  Tornado damage continued northeast towards Alabama Highway 20, where a restaurant was completely destroyed and two single family houses were significantly damaged.  Tree damage appeared to continue into extreme northwestern Morgan County.
The same tornado continued a short stretch through the northwest corner of Morgan County and into Limestone, coming within approximately 2 miles of Browns Ferry Nuclear Power Plant and toppling nearly a dozen high voltage power lines in Limestone County, snapping concrete power poles at their bases.  These power lines delivered electricity from Browns Ferry Nuclear Power Plant, and without the outlet, the plant had to be shut down. This tornado produced high end EF-3 damage over a large area in eastern Limestone County along and north of the East Limestone High School.
Tanner experienced a large swath of EF-4 damage and a narrow corridor of "high-end EF-4 to near-EF-5 damage".  The storm "completely wiped clean" several well constructed homes with anchor bolting.  One home was scattered over 300 hundred yards with large items carried completely away. Intense ground scarring occurred in this area.  The storm also tossed a large cargo container approximately 600 yards and carried several cars  airborne for hundreds of yards. In all, hundreds of homes received moderate to major damage along the path from Limestone to Madison County with many of these being total losses.
The track then moved into Tennessee and continued south of Huntland.  Isolated and minor EF-0 tree damage was noted at the intersection of John Hunter Highway (State Route 122) and Limestone Road near the Lincoln/Franklin county line. More significant damage was noted, starting about 1.4 miles south southwest of Huntland. A cinder block building suffered damage to its flat adobe roof, with some of blocks near the roof (around 20 feet off of the ground) pushed out, resulting in EF-2 damage. Surveyors could not directly examine the roof given this building was on the highest ground in the vicinity. Nearby, a single family home of cinder block construction had its roof totally removed, with another home about 1000 feet away having significant roof damage, with over one half of its roof removed, and some shifting off of its foundation. Damage with the latter was consistent with high end EF-2 damage. A chicken building nearby the second home, with metal girding was completely flatten, consistent with EF-2 damage.
A farm complex south of Hickory Grove road had damage to a number of structures there. The home and the main car garage had part of their roofs removed. A barn that was protecting bales of hay was destroyed, with a few of bales blown from 100   200 feet from their original location. The worst damage was noted with lower end EF-3 damage to a cinder block utility building about 200 feet south of the primary residence. Most of its roof was removed, with over half of its downwind wall pushed outward. An older barn nearby suffered lesser EF-0 damage to it roof, while the top half of a silo near that barn was missing. Another barn structure was completely destroyed northwest of the primary home. The width at this point was approximately 1/4 mile. Other damage was noted near the intersection of Hickory Grove Road and Sugar Cove Road, with EF-1 damage to some heavy farm equipment and EF-0 roof damage to a nearby barn. Scattered trees were downed to the northeast, with 8&nbsp;inch fence posts 18&nbsp;inches deep pulled up near Hickory Grove and Buncombe Road. There was evident the tornado continued toward mountains a few miles further east, with some trees damaged along the ridge.
In total, this tornado killed 71 people, all in Alabama. This made it the deadliest single tornado ever to strike the state of Alabama as well as (at the time) the deadliest in the United States since the 1955 Udall, Kansas tornado killed 80.
 Debris from the tornado was reported to be falling from the sky across Birmingham over 20 miles away in Jefferson County. Skycams operated by local Fox affiliate WBRC (channel 6) and ABC affiliate WBMA-LP/WCFT/WJSU (channels 58, 33 and 40; branded as "ABC 33/40") captured video of the tornado as it struck Tuscaloosa. Several stores and restaurants in a business district at the intersection of McFarland Boulevard and 15th Street, near the DCH Regional Medical Center, were destroyed by the tornado; buildings were also reported destroyed on 35th Street, between Interstate 359 and Martin Luther King Jr. Boulevard. As the tornado traveled east to 35th Street and Kauloosa Avenue, the Tuscaloosa Environmental Services and Cintas facilities suffered severe damage. Numerous homes in the Rosedale and Forest Lake neighborhoods, as well as a P&P Grocery store in Rosedale, were devastated. The University of Alabama suspended its operations, cancelled its softball and rowing competitions, cancelled its final exams period, and postponed its commencement until August 6.
Television cameras, including another skycam operated by WBMA-LP/WCFT/WJSU, captured the mile-wide tornado as it moved east-northeast across the western and northern suburbs of Birmingham around 6:00 p.m. CDT. Initial reports indicated significant structural damage and a mile to 11/2 mile wide damage path.
The National Weather Service has determined the path length of this violent tornado to be 80.3 miles with a maximum damage path width of 1.5 miles. The tornado's peak winds reached 190&nbsp;mph; therefore, it was given a final rating of EF-4. Reports from Tuscaloosa indicated 41 people were killed, with over 1000 injured. Overall this tornado killed 63 people.
President Barack Obama and First Lady Michelle Obama visited Tuscaloosa on April 29, taking a ground tour of some of the affected areas.  Obama was quoted as saying that he has "never seen devastation like this." He stated further that he had already declared a federal state of emergency in Alabama.
As of the evening of May&nbsp;2, 326 people remained missing in Tuscaloosa. According to the ''Los Angeles Times'', "no sooner are names stricken than fresh reports flow in to swell the list again." Reports on May&nbsp;3 indicated that throughout Tuscaloosa County, nearly 400 people were missing. Search and rescue efforts throughout the area continued with four cadaver dogs and 100 personnel combing the rubble. According to the Alabama Emergency Management Agency, eight others are missing elsewhere in the state. By May&nbsp;5, the number of missing people in Tuscaloosa decreased to 12.
Image:Tuscaloosatornadodamage2.jpg|Some of the damage sustained in Tuscaloosa, AL.
Image:Tuscaloosatornadodamageneighborhood.jpg|The remains of the Forrest Lake neighborhood in Tuscaloosa, AL.
Image:Tornado Track in Tuscaloosa, Alabama.jpg|Satellite image of the tornado's track through Tuscaloosa.
Image:Tuscaloosatornadodamage1.jpg|The aftermath in Tuscaloosa.
A violent tornado struck portions of far northwest Georgia and southeast Tennessee during the mid-evening hours of April 27; the twister set down along Davis Ridge Road in Catoosa County, Georgia, before reaching the town of Ringgold. Between 75 and 100 homes were damaged or destroyed; with the most severe damage occurring on Cherokee Valley Road in Catoosa County, where twelve homes were flattened. A Red Roof Inn, located near Interstate 75 was also partially collapsed by the tornado, along with a McDonald   s, a Taco Bell and several gas stations located on Highway 151 in Ringgold at the Interstate 75 interchange (exit 348), and the Catoosa County Department of Family and Children Services and other businesses on Nashville Street in downtown Ringgold. The Kellerhals Center for Visual Arts Education at Ringgold High School was destroyed, and Ringgold Middle School was heavily damaged.
The storm then crossed the Tennessee state line at 8:28 p.m. EDT, into Hamilton and Bradley County, Tennessee, and became a strong EF4, before lifting in Polk County; several homes in Hamilton County were leveled, with 150 homes suffering varying damage in Hamilton and Bradley Counties. Several trees were felled in Polk County, before the tornado dissipated., The OKCStormWatcher Weather Blog, April 29, 2011. Retrieved April 30, 2011. All roads in and out of Ringgold were closed until the morning of April 29; after roads leading to the affected areas were reopened, residents and business owners were allowed to return, being allowed entry only by providing identification, and informing police a reason why they are entering into the area, in order to curb looting in the storm-damaged areas., WXIA-TV, April 29, 2011. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
The tornado killed twenty-one people along its 48-mile path across Catoosa, Hamilton and Bradley Counties, including eight fatalities in Ringgold, ranging in age from 16 to 86 years old, including an entire family of four, and another eight in Apison, Tennessee,
Rated at EF4, this tornado tracked straight through downtown Cullman.
The tornado was first seen and then tracked on tower cameras, including one operated by WBMA-LP/WCFT/WJSU, for several minutes. Some cameras were obliterated. Radio stations in downtown Cullman also reported in on the tornado and some even captured the tornado passing over until their broadcast towers were destroyed. Preliminary reports stated that the courthouse and EMS building nearby took a direct hit from the twister. Many well-known businesses such as Vincent's Furniture, the Cullman Times, and the Busy Bee Cafe were severely damaged or destroyed.
Most of downtown Cullman received little to no damage from the tornado.  The major damage was along a two-block area through the center of the
This tornado continued Northeast and swept away a gas station in Arab, Alabama along with completely crippling Arab's power grid and obstructing many roads with trees. Six fatalities were reported from this tornado.
The path of destruction began just east of County Road 26 (around the 3000 Shoal Creek Road address block) and followed along County Road 22/Shoal Creek Road for approximately 12.5 miles. The tornado's path and width varied greatly along Shoal Creek Road, with some areas showing damage much worse on one side of the road than the other, while other areas showed equal devastation on both sides of the road. Finally, the tornado destroyed many waterfront homes at the end of the valley, crossed Neely Henry Lake and continued it's destructive path in Ohatchee, Alabama. Damage ranged from downed trees and roof damage to total destruction as the tornado roared through the valley at 50-60&nbsp;mph, packing winds of 180&nbsp;mph+. Over 200 homes were destroyed or heavily damaged, most phone lines, power lines and poles were destroyed and water lines were severed by uprooted trees. Entire homes were leveled, and in some cases completed removed by the storm, leaving only brick steps or a slab behind. Barns, vehicles, tractors and heavy farming equipment were shredded and moved up to 1/2 mile. Livestock were thrown and killed, and the initial human death toll of 13 would eventually rise to 15 in the area. 
Those that rode out the storm in Shoal Creek Valley describe the classic "freight train" rumble of the tornado, feeling their ears "pop" as the low-pressure tornado approached, and the ground "shaking like an earthquake." Many say that the storm lasted 10 or 15 seconds. This tornado's final death toll along its entire path would eventually come to 23.
This storm system prolonged an ongoing heavy rain event, which began across Arkansas and Missouri on April 22.  Weekly rainfall totals reached  six miles east-northeast of Springdale, Arkansas,  four miles northwest of Poplar Bluff, Missouri, and  at Westville, Oklahoma.  On April 25, 2011, thunderstorms with high winds swept through parts of southern and southeastern Ohio.  Straight-line winds estimated at  uprooted trees, damaged roofs, and downed power lines through Perry County, Ohio and Athens County, Ohio.  Strong thunderstorms and heavy downpours which led to flooding was also reported in multiple areas across Upstate New York with heavy flooding in the Syracuse, New York area.  Interstate 81 was briefly shut down downtown at traffic hour and Upstate University Hospital also closed briefly due to flooding in the lobby.
Farther south, flash flooding late on April 26 resulted in two fatalities in Monroe, Louisiana after an apartment complex was swamped. The flooding there was considered to be worse than the flooding after Hurricane Gustav in 2008. In central and northern Arkansas, up to 10.44&nbsp;inches (265&nbsp;mm) of rain was reported during that week. The resulting flash flooding in central Arkansas also resulted in five people losing their lives. Many roads were closed as a result of the flooding there. The flooding was mitigated somewhat by a significant drought that had existed before the storm.
Severe thunderstorms were reported as far north as Northern Ontario on the evening of April 26. Heavy rains and minor flooding were also reported in Northern Ontario from April 26   28. Windstorms were also reported in Southern Ontario and Southern Quebec which resulted in several injuries and one death, damages and power outages. ''Ottawa Citizen'', April 28, 2011 ''The Weather Network (Canada)'', April 28, 2011. ''The Weather Network (Canada)'', April 28, 2011 
Other fatalities due to straight-line winds occurred in McComb, Mississippi early on April 26 and also in Moody, Alabama, Vestavia Hills, Alabama and Franklin, Tennessee early on April 27 from the squall line with embedded tornadoes.
Alabama Governor Robert J. Bentley declared a state of emergency in the state of Alabama on April 27, due to storm damage from severe thunderstorms earlier that day as well as forthcoming severe weather later that day. States of emergency were also declared in Arkansas, Kentucky, Mississippi, Missouri, Tennessee, and Oklahoma because of the flooding and tornadoes. Following the tornado outbreak on the evening of April 27, President Barack Obama granted a federal emergency declaration for the state of Alabama, giving federal assistance, including search and rescue assets, to the affected region. There have unfortunately been several fatalities since the outbreaks from accidents sustained by volunteers as a part of the clean-up initiative.
More than 2,000 National Guard troops have been deployed to Alabama, assisting local and state first responders in search and rescue efforts. President Obama visited the affected areas of Alabama on April 29. Also on April 29, he approved a federal disaster declaration for seven Mississippi counties: Clarke, Greene, Hinds, Jasper, Kemper, Lafayette, and Monroe.
Storms through the area severely damaged Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA)'s power grid for transmitting electricity throughout the region.  More than 300 power transmission towers,  to  tall, were destroyed in the storms, some "twisted like bow ties" according to National Weather Service meteorologist Eric Holweg.  The towers supported some 90 transmission lines, a mixture of 500kV and 161kV lines.  Those lines provided power from TVA to 128 regional distributors.
TVA lost the ability to transmit power from both Browns Ferry Nuclear Power Plant and Widows Creek Fossil Plant after the storms on April 27, requiring both to be shut down.  The nuclear plant's cold shutdown was supported by diesel generators for four days until a second 161kV line could be restored to the plant.  The loss of redundant off-site power required a "notification of unusual event", the lowest of four levels of concern dictated by the NRC.  Some 60% of the sirens for warning residents of worse problems around Browns Ferry were disabled by the storms, and the plant had to arrange plans to use cars with loudspeakers to warn residents in case of another problem. Chief Operating Officer Bill McCollum of TVA stated that it could be weeks before the nuclear plant is up and running again. The Nuclear Regulatory Commission stated at a press conference: "The plants' conditions are stable and are being placed in a cooled-down condition."
Huntsville was the largest city with no electricity from TVA. All the traffic lights were off, a dusk-to-dawn curfew was imposed, students were sent home from United States Space Camp, and Panoply Arts Festival was cancelled. Power was restored gradually to Huntsville, beginning with 3% on Sunday morning, after the Wednesday tornadoes.  Only localized outages remained eight days after the storm.  In addition to traffic and safety issues, the outage caused difficulties with water treatment and distribution and retail of all kinds, including gasoline and food purchases.
Ontario electricity outages were minor, mostly caused by the windstorms of April 28. Although they affected thousands of people at different times throughout the day, all power was restored by the end of the day.