In 2009, ground broke one the largest solar fields in the Midwest and in the United States, located in Wyandot County. The plant, finished in September 2010, was constructed by Germany-based Juwi Solar and is called Wyandot Solar LLC., leasing its energy to AEP. 
A large solar field is being constructed by Advanced Distributed Generation and nearing completion on the University of Toledo campus. 
The airbase for 180th Fighter Wing of the Ohio Air National Guard in Toledo is currently expanding their existing solar installation, which will make it the second largest installation among U.S. Air Force bases in the country. 
In 2010, the Ohio Department of Transportation announced Xunlight and First Solar would provide panels for a $1.5 million research project at the Veterans' Glass City Skyway in Toledo.
In 2009, University of Dayton graduate Scott Brusaw's company Solar Roadways received a $100,000 grant from the U.S. Department of Energy to develop his solar road prototype, which embeds solar panels into driving surfaces. It won General Electric's Ecomagination Challenge Award in 2010.
Another of the state's largest solar arrays was constructed by The Dayton Power and Light Company in Dayton, Ohio. The solar field generates 1.1 Megawatts of power., Retrieved 17 dec 2009. The facility will consist of 9,000 solar panels constructed over , and will generate enough electricity to power nearly 150 homes.
A fun note, the same year Holiday Inn announced plans for the construction of a $10 million green solar hotel in Washington Township. In September of that year, Third Sun Solar in collaboration with the Akron Metro Regional Transit Authority and Sharp Solar Energy Solutions Group installed the largest rooftop solar array in the state, comprising 2,076 solar modules producing 488&nbsp;kW.
Later that year, American Electric Power and Turning Point Solar announced the construction of a 49.9 MW facility in southeastern Ohio, in conjunction with Spain-based Prius Energy S.L. and Isofoton, who plan to open their North American manufacturing operations in the state.  Campbells announced plans to construct a $21.6 million, 50 MW solar facility to provide energy for its operations in Napoleon, while the city of Columbus announced in 2011 it would install solar parking meters.
In 2011, Columbus-based Glimcher Realty Trust announced plans to construct the largest rooftop solar array in North America at Jersey Gardens, a 4.8 MW project.