The '''2012 United States House of Representatives elections in Arkansas''' will be held on Tuesday, November 6, 2012 to elect the four U.S. Representatives from the state, one from each of the state's four congressional districts. The elections will coincide with the elections of other federal and state offices, including a quadrennial presidential election.
 and not partisan. In the new map, five counties are split between districts, the first time in Arkansas history that counties have not been kept intact in congressional districts.
The 1st district had lost population, and so was drawn in the new map to incorporate counties in southeastern Arkansas which were previously a part of the 4th district.
Republican incumbent Rick Crawford was first elected in 2010. Potential Democratic challengers include Paul Bookout, the president pro tempore of the Arkansas Senate; L. J. Bryant, the unsuccessful 2010 Democratic nominee for Arkansas Land Commissioner; Chad Causey, the former chief of staff to U.S. Representative Marion Berry and unsuccessful 2010 nominee in the 1st district; David Cook, a former state representative and unsuccessful candidate in the 2010 Democratic primary in the 1st district; state representative Clark Hall; state representative Keith Ingram; Robert S. Moore, the speaker of the state House of Representatives; businessman Steve Rockwell, who considered running in the 1st district in 2010; and state senator Robert F. Thompson. In June 2011, ''Roll Call'' rated the race as "Leans Republican."
Population growth in Arkansas's central counties meant that the 2nd district had to shrink in the new map. Under the new map, the 2nd district is likely to continue to favor Republicans.
Republican incumbent Timothy Griffin was first elected in 2010. Potential Democratic candidates include David Boling, the former chief of staff to U.S. Representative Vic Snyder and unsuccessful candidate in the 2010 Democratic primary in the 2nd district; attorney Bob Edwards, who considered running in the 2nd district in 2010; Bill Halter, the former Lieutenant Governor of Arkansas who unsuccessfully ran in the Democratic primary for the U.S. Senate in 2010; Pat Hays, the mayor of North Little Rock; state senator David Johnson; state representative Tracy Steele; and Robbie Wills, the former speaker of the state House of Representatives and unsuccessful candidate in the 2010 Democratic primary for the U.S. Senate. ''Roll Call'' rates the race as "Likely Republican."
Population growth in Arkansas's northwestern counties meant that the 3rd district had to shrink in the new map. Under the new map, the 3rd district is likely to continue to favor Republicans.
Republican incumbent Steve Womack was first elected in 2010. Though Democrats may choose not to challenge Womack in 2012, Womack may be vulnerable to a primary challenge. ''Roll Call'' rates the race as "Safe Republican."
Under the new map, the 4th district loses some territory in the east of the state to the 1st district and gains some Republican-leaning northwestern Arkansas counties from the 3rd district. The district also gains Yell County from the 1st district, which is expected to make the 4th district more favorable to Democrats.
Democratic incumbent Mike Ross was first elected in 2000. Potential Republican candidates include lieutenant governor Mark Darr; Gunner DeLay, an attorney and former state senator; Glenn Gallas, who unsuccessfully ran in the 2010 Republican primary in the 4th district; state representative Lane Jean; Beth Anne Rankin, who unsuccessfully challenged Ross in 2010; and state representative Matthew Shepherd. ''Roll Call'' rates the race as "Likely Democratic."