The spacecraft will be placed in a polar orbit to study the planet's composition, gravity field, magnetic field, and polar magnetosphere. Juno will also search for clues about how Jupiter formed, including whether the planet has a rocky core, the amount of water present within the deep atmosphere, and how the mass is distributed within the planet.  Juno will also study Jupiter's deep winds, which can reach speeds of 600&nbsp;km/h.
Juno's trajectory will use a gravity assist speed boost from Earth, accomplished through an Earth flyby two years after its 2011 launch, scheduled for 5 August. In 2016, the spacecraft will perform an orbit insertion burn to slow the spacecraft enough to allow capture into an 11-day polar orbit.
  The Juno mission is set to conclude in October 2017, after 32 orbits around Jupiter when the probe will be de-orbited to crash into Jupiter. 
The Juno spacecraft's suite of seven science instruments will determine:
 and takes it close to the poles (within 4300 km (~2,670 miles)), but then far beyond even Callisto's orbit. This helps it avoid Jupiter's radiation belts which are damaging to spaceraft electronics and solar panels. The 'Juno Radiation Vault', with titanium walls, will also aid in protecting and shielding Juno's electronics.
Scott Bolton of the Southwest Research Institute in San Antonio, Texas is the Principal Investigator and is responsible for all aspects of the mission. The Jet Propulsion Laboratory in California manages the mission and Lockheed Martin Corporation is responsible for the spacecraft development. The mission is being carried out with the participation of several institutional partners.
The Juno mission's science objectives will be achieved with a payload of eight instruments onboard the spacecraft:
Juno will be the first mission to Jupiter using solar panels instead of the radioisotope thermoelectric generators (RTGs) used by Pioneer 10, Pioneer 11, the Voyager program, Cassini   Huygens, and the Galileo orbiter. Advances made in both solar cell technology and efficiency over the past several decades makes it economically feasible to use solar panels of practical size to provide power at a distance of 5 AU from the Sun. In addition, RTGs are in short supply, limiting their availability for space missions. NASA plans several more projects involving RTGs, and the decision to use alternate technology on this mission is more practical and economical than political.
The Juno spacecraft uses three solar arrays symmetrically arranged around the spacecraft, which are stowed against the sides of the spacecraft for launch. Immediately after launch the arrays deploy. Two of the arrays have 4 panels each, and the third array has 3 panels with a magnetometer experiment in place of the fourth panel. The total area of the arrays is over . This is enough to produce about  while in Earth orbit, but only  when Juno arrives at Jupiter, declining to  as the radiation degrades the cells. The solar panels will remain in sunlight continuously from launch through to the end of the mission, except for short periods during the operation of the main engine.