Seven Group Holdings is Seven West Media   s largest shareholder with 29.6% of Seven West Media shares and $250m Seven West Media Convertible Preference Shares (CPS).
Seven West Media owns two of Australia   s iconic media assets: Australia   s largest commercial television network (by audience and advertising market share), Seven Network; and The West Australian, the leading metropolitan newspaper in Western Australia.
It also owns the second largest publisher of magazines in Australia, Pacific Magazines, and 21 West Australian regional newspapers, nine regional radio licences, a specialist publishing business and WAN   s digital division.
Seven West Media is also creating a significant presence in online and new communications technologies, such as through its 50% interest in Yahoo!7, one of Australia and New Zealand   s leading online platforms, with global and local content across online, mobile and IPTV.
On 21 February 2011, Seven Media Group announced its intention to merge with West Australian Newspapers Holdings Limited (WAN). WAN purchased Seven Media Group from Seven Group Holdings and partner Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co., and announced the new company would be known as "Seven West Media".http://au.news.yahoo.com/thewest/a/-/newshome/8874283/wan-to-buy-sevens-media-assets-for-4-1b/ WAN to buy Seven's media assets for 4.1 billion
Seven West Media was created through the acquisition of Seven Media Group by West Australian Newspapers Holdings Limited (WAN) as approved by WAN shareholders on 11 April 2011. Seven West Media is the leading, listed national multi-platform media business based in Australia. We comprise Seven Television, the leading free to air capital city television network; Pacific Magazines, the country's second largest magazine group by readership; Yahoo!7 one of the nation   s most successful internet platforms, as well as Western Australia's leading newspaper, The West Australian and associated WA regional newspapers and radio stations.
See also the newspaper and radio interests of West Australian Newspapers Holdings Limited
In addition to ''The West'', West Australian Newspapers Holdings Limited owns a number of other media outlets.
In September 2007, WAN sold a 50% interest in the Hoyts Cinemas Group.
In March 2008, major shareholder Seven Network Limited initiated an extraordinary general meeting to consider removal of all non-executive directors.
Seven Network's chairman Kerry Stokes criticised the WAN board's "lack of leadership". A new website ("Refresh The West") was simultaneously launched, directly targeting the board of West Australian Newspaper Holdings (WAN). At a business breakfast in April, Stokes held up a copy of ''The Sunday Times'' and said it was a superior newspaper that ''The West'' should try to emulate.
The shareholder meeting was held on 23 April 2008, preceded by reports that Stokes was seeking two seats on the WAN board. The motion on notice was defeated by proxy votes.
As a result of subsequent negotiations, a joint statement was issued on 16 September 2008 saying the WAN board had been increased from five to seven members, the two new seats being taken up by Kerry Stokes and fellow Seven director Peter Gammell. On 3 December 2008, Stokes achieved total victory when WAN's chief executive, chairman and two independent directors quit en masse. Stokes became chairman and, within a fortnight, ''The West Australian'''s controversial editor Paul Armstrong was sacked. He was eventually replaced by former ''Sunday Times'' editor Brett McCarthy on 15 March 2009.Nick Perpitch  ''The Australian'' 16 March 2009  Seven's managing director Chris Wharton filled the CEO position and four additional directors were appointed. Corporate information on official website The group's editor-in-chief is Bob CroninChris Thomson  The Age BusinessDay 16 December 2008 whose authoritarian style caused resentful employees to nickname him "Cronin the Barbarian" in the 1980s.
On 21 February 2011, West Australian Newspapers Holdings Limited and Seven Media Group announced their intentions to merge. "Seven West Media" would be created by Western Australian Newspapers purchasing Seven Media Group from Seven Group Holdings and partner Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co.
In addition to the West Australian Newspaper Holdings assets,  Seven Media Group bought: