Rick is known as social media pioneer for having founded BranchOut, the professional networking service on Facebook, and for having co-founded Tickle.com, which won a Webby Award for being the fastest growing web site on the Internet in 2002. Tickle was a personality testing site with 200 million registered users and close to $40 million of annual revenue. Under Rick's leadership as the co-founder, CFO, and Chief Strategist, Tickle was acquired by Monster Worldwide in 2004 for over $100 million.
Rick was born in Biddeford, Maine and grew up in Merrimack, New Hampshire. In 1994 Rick received a bachelors degree at the University of New Hampshire. He then worked for Fisher Scientific in their mergers and acquisitions group. In 1999 Rick earned an MBA from Harvard Business School, where he met James Currier, his co-founder at Tickle.
Tickle.com was launched in Cambridge, Massachusetts and originally called Emode. Tickle began with serious personality tests, similar to the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator. They soon added fun tests, like the "What Breed of Dog Are You?" test, which became very popular. 
After raising $9 million in venture funding from August Capital, Tickle moved to San Francisco, California. The team grew to nearly 80 employees. Rick left Tickle in January 2007. In April 2008, it was announced that Tickle.com would be shut down later that year.
In 2008 Rick founded SuperFan, a profitable social entertainment site that produced social games and Facebook apps for clients such as CBS, MTV, Sony, and Universal Music.
In July 2010 Rick founded , a professional networking service on Facebook. BranchOut allows users to create professional profiles, find jobs, source leads for sales or recruiting, and build a network of professional connections on the Facebook platform.
In September 2010 BranchOut raised $6 million in venture capital from Accel Partners, Norwest Venture Partners, FLOODGATE Fund, and a number of prominent angel investors, including Shawn Fanning, the founder of Napster. In May 2011 BranchOut announced that it has raised an $18 million Series B financing from Redpoint Ventures, Accel Partners, Norwest Venture Partners, and FLOODGATE Fund.
BranchOut's use of game mechanics in the online recruiting field has been covered by Fast Company and Bloomberg BusinessWeek.