I am trying to sort the list of "secret projects" in the 1999 ''Sid Meier's Alpha Centauri'' by how likely they could become real.  So far I have:  (was true before publication),  (was true before publication),  (was true and keeps coming true in more geographies),  (was true -- is it still?),  (came true),  (came true, big deal),  ( seems to qualify.)
These haven't come true yet as far as I know:  (okay if seen as a stand in for general medical advances),  (if standing in for general user interface improvements),   (not sure),  (not sure),  (maybe for organ replacement therapy?),  (can't that be done without microbes?),  (only as a stand in for news corps improvements),  (I hope so!),  (no idea; not sure I care),  (is this even a good idea? Can't we have non-invasive neural coupling instead?)
These I hope will not happen:  (good heavens I hope not!),  (I sure hope not!),  (individuals and ecology better than groups and ecologies.)
These I am sure won't happen:  (requires materials with tensile strength which are not likely without non-atomic states of solids),  (energy storage and heat dissipation limit the size of general purpose robots above the nanoscale),  (the singularity depends on nanobots),  (requires nanobots.)
Are there any reasons to believe otherwise?   ( ) 01:55, 2 May 2011 (UTC)
Assuming global oil peak will happen in 2030 approximately, one can assume global oil supply will be greatly diminished by 2100. Assuing alternative energy resources will not be developed as an exact alternative to petroleum, I want to know what will happen to industrial civilization after 2100? Will the airline industry survive? Will the entire petroleum-based transportation system (this include ocean liners, cargo ships, cargo planes, trucks) collapse? --  ( ) 03:57, 2 May 2011 (UTC)
I don't think we will have to wait 90 years to see the effects of peak oil which is likely to happen in the next ten years.   ( ) 13:57, 2 May 2011 (UTC)
Civilization will survive, because in a few decades we'll have far more advanced robot technology and in about a century we'll have intelligent machines that will replace humans. Industrial civilization in the 2100 century will involve the colonization of the Moon, Mars and some other planets using self-replicating machines and factories. Whether this involves nano-technology or more crude technologies remains to be seen. But the basic point is the following.
If our economy grows, then we get more factories, that goods at a higher rate. But because humans are involved in almost all parts of the production process, this contrains the rate at which you can increase production. If, in contrast, everything is produced from raw ,material, including the machines to build the factories, the machines to get the raw materials out of the ground etc. etc., then the whole system can grow exponentially until the access to the raw materials gets compromized (e.g. because the whole planet as been covered by machines).
You can e.g. imagine that on the Moon one puts a machine that produces solar panels from the materials that can be found on the Moon and which makes a copy of itself. The machine is powered by solar energy. Suppose that this machine produces a solar panel of 1 square centimeter per month and makes a copy of itself in that time. Then, in just 4 years and 10 months, almost the entire surface of the Moon would be covered by solar panels. This example clearly illustrates that the bottleneck limiting growth is not oil, rather it is humans.   ( ) 14:36, 2 May 2011 (UTC)
Respected Sir,I have learnt through one of my doctor friends tha Pepsi and Coca cola contain high acidity ( their pH value is even less than 3 ) , which means that they are very harmful for human consumption. I want to ask whether there is ban on use of Pepsi and Coca cola in the colleges,schools and Universities of US ?     Preceding   comment added by   ( ) 05:18, 2 May 2011 (UTC) 
What software do scientists use to ensure that published images of micrographs, charts and gels etc are all the same size and appropriately and consistently aligned with each other and with their labels? I've seen research papers where diagrams were blatantly arranged by eye in PowerPoint, but what software is used to achieve a professional appearance with a minimum of hair-loss? --  ( ) 18:40, 2 May 2011 (UTC)
Wikipedia has an article about Management of baldness that may be helpful  concerning hair loss. We cannot give personal advice for which consult a qualified trichologist.   ( ) 08:14, 4 May 2011 (UTC)
Do we (humanity) currently have the technology to genetically engineer a unicorn?  That is create a horse which will grow a single stright horn out of the top of its head?    ( ) 19:55, 2 May 2011 (UTC)
Two things. Firstly, I understand that putting something cold into something hot results in a pain relative to the temperature difference (something to do with the way the receptors work, I think). Question is: is it right to hurt more? Is it the temperature difference or absolute temperature that's more likely to cause damage? Secondly, it seems to me that areas on the water's surface hurt the most of all; why is this?   ( ) 20:21, 2 May 2011 (UTC)
I often hear from opponents of public health that the European counties systems are so bad they have to send they patients to American hospitals for anything serious. How much truth is there to this? What are they statistics? 