Born in Canton, Ohio, William Raynolds was appointed from his native state and entered United States Military Academy at West Point, New York on July 1, 1839. A smiling young man of fair complexion, brown hair and blue eyes, a classmate later described the cadet Raynolds as somewhat staid and studious in his habits, but invariably friendly and helpful to fellow cadets. Raynolds graduated fifth out of 39 classmates in his class of 1843, which included William B. Franklin, friend Joseph J. Reynolds and future United States President Ulysses S. Grant.
Initially appointed a Brevet Second Lieutenant in the 5th U.S. Infantry, Raynolds was transferred to a new branch of the Corps of Engineers, the Topographical Engineers, an officer-only unit which made surveys and maps for army use. Raynolds would serve in this branch for his entire career.
Raynolds's first assignments involved improving navigation on the Ohio River and surveying the northeastern boundary of the United States. When war with Mexico seemed likely, topographic engineers were sent to the border to assist the army's preparations. Raynolds accompanied Winfield Scott and his staff to rendezvous off the port of Veracruz.
Raynolds served in Scott's Mexican-American War campaign from Veracruz to the Mexican capital district but received no brevet promotions, unlike his West Point classmates Franklin and Grant. After the completion of the war, the American army occupied Mexico City for some months. Looking for adventure, Raynolds and a few of his fellow soldiers obtained permission to explore and map nearby mountains. Raynolds's party was credited for being the first to climb to the summit of Pico de Orizaba  which at , is the tallest mountain in Mexico. This feat may have been the American mountaineering altitude record for the following 50 years.
After returning from Mexico, Raynolds returned to the uncompleted task of mapping the Canadian border he'd been surveying before the war, then embarked on a project to develop water resources for the nation's growing capitol at Washington, D.C.. Next Raynolds traveled the Great Lakes for several years surveying and mapping shorelines while identifying potential lighthouse locations. After promotions to First Lieutenant and Captain, in 1857 Raynolds undertook the construction of a number of lighthouses along the Jersey Shore  and Delmarva Peninsula. In less than two years Captain Raynolds supervised construction of the Fenwick Island Light, the Finns Point Front Range Light, the Cape May Light and the Absecon Light.
Raynolds returned to Washington at the outbreak of the war, and was made chief topographic engineer of the Department of Virginia in July, 1861. The army lacked adequate maps for military use, so Raynolds and his team of engineers began to survey and draw useful maps of Virginia and the newly created loyal state of West Virginia. In 1862, Raynolds was engaged as part of John C. Fremont's Mountain Department in chasing Stonewall Jackson up the Shenandoah Valley, being surprised by and losing to Jackson's forces at Battle of Cross Keys.
Raynolds spent two months recovering from illness after the Valley Campaign, then was assigned as chief engineer of Middle Department and VIII Corps in January 1863. Promoted Major in the Corps of Engineers from March 1863, Raynolds found himself in charge of the defenses of vital Harpers Ferry, West Virginia during Robert E. Lee's second Confederate invasion of the north before the Gettysburg Campaign.
As the end of war approached and hostilities with Sioux Indians loomed, Raynolds's knowledge and experiences of the Great Lakes area became more important to the army than his abilities commanding an ordnance depot. From April 1864, while his classmate U.S. Grant was planning his Overland Campaign, Raynolds returned to the Great Lakes as superintending engineer of surveys and lighthouses. Raynolds supervised the siting of lighthouses like the Alpena Breakwater Light in Alpena, Michigan and dozens of others.
Raynolds was brevetted Brigadier General for his Civil War service and promoted to Lieutenant Colonel in the Corps of Engineers. He continued serving with the Corps of Engineers in a variety of harbor and river navigational improvements until his retirement in 1884. Raynolds sited and oversaw the installation of dozens of lighthouses in the Great Lakes area. He erected more lighthouses along the Gulf Coast and again in New Jersey, such as the Hereford Inlet Lighthouse built in 1874 and the original New Castle Range Front and New Castle Range Rear Lighthouses in 1876.
After the Civil War, the Corps of Engineers undertook a massive program of river and harbor improvements. Raynolds supervised the dredging and improvement of navigation on western waterways of commerce like the Arkansas, Mississippi and Missouri Rivers. He was involved in harbor dredging and construction in Buffalo, New York, Harbor of Refuge in New Buffalo, Michigan, Erie Harbor in Erie, Pennsylvania, and the river harbors of St. Louis, Missouri and Alton, Illinois.
As he approached retirement, Raynolds was elected trustee of the Presbyterian Church.
According to USMA classmate Joseph Reynolds, who saw William Raynolds at the USMA Association of Graduates reunion in 1893, Raynolds had maintained a vigorous and healthy appearance even in extreme age, his brown hair "then but slightly sprinkled with gray..." Raynolds left his widow a substantial estate, estimated at his death in 1894 between $50,000 and $100,000. After providing for his widow, his will directed that after her death, the entire estate would create a trust fund to assist Presbyterian churches in need.
For a lifelong soldier who was engaged in few actual battles, Raynolds spent much of the first part of his career exploring the American western frontier, negotiating successfully with local indian tribes, and drawing the first maps of areas now called the Dakotas, Wyoming and Montana. His improvements to harbors and navigation were undertaken to and undoubtedly did save lives. Hundreds of lighthouses sites selected by Raynolds are still in use; dozens of lighthouses built by Raynolds still stand, and many still operate.
The mountain gap where Raynolds's party crossed Continental Divide between Southwest Montana and Northeast Idaho is named Raynolds Pass  in his honor, as is Raynolds Peak  in the Teton Range.