The '''Merger of AT&T and T-Mobile''' was announced on March 20, 2011.
 If the deal goes through AT&T would have a 43% market share of mobile phones in the U.S. making AT&T significantly larger than any of its competitors.
On March 20, 2011 Deutsche Telekom AG accepted a US$39 billion stock and cash purchase offer from AT&T Inc. for T-Mobile USA, Inc.
According to an industry analyst, after the introduction of the iPhone in 2007, T-Mobile USA began to lose lucrative contract customers, dropping to 78.3 percent of subscribers in 2010, compared to 85% in 2006. T-Mobile USA's high churn rate of 3.2% compared to 1.2% at Verizon Wireless and AT&T Mobility, the needed investments in network upgrades and spectrum purchases were too risky given the drop in contract customers, reenforcing Deutsche Telekom's decision to sell.
If the merger is completed, AT&T will have a customer base of approximately 130 million users, making AT&T the largest wireless carrier in the United States. Regulators question the effects such a deal will have on both competitors and consumers, with critics stating the deal will likely increase prices for customers, with interest group Public Knowledge stating the merger would cause "higher prices, fewer choices,  less innovation". AT&T chief executive Randall Stephenson however stated that the merger would increase network quality and would lead to large savings for the company. AT&T stated it may have to sell some assets to gain approval from regulators, but that they have done their "homework" on regulations.
This merger must undergo a regulatory review that the two companies expect to take at least 12 months.  The deal requires approval by the U.S. Department of Justice and the Federal Communications Commission.
The Senate Judiciary Subcommittee on Antitrust, Competition Policy and Consumer Rights held a hearing on the acquisition of T-Mobile USA by AT&T in May. During the hearing senators questioned the companies CEOs on the effects of the merger on competition and other issues. At one point during the hearing the two companies denied that they were competitors. 
Sen. Amy Klobuchar asked if AT&T was prepared to offer its customers T-Mobile's current pricing plans. Stephenson said AT&T would honor existing T-Mobile contracts, even when customers renewed, as long as they bought similar phones.
Gigi Sohn, president of Public Knowledge, testified at the hearing. Sohn stated that at least 1,000 people had signed the group's petition opposing the merger and that more than 5,000 people had written to the Federal Communications Commission opposing the deal.
A diverse group of industry and public-interest organizations are opposed to AT&T's merger with T-Mobile. While AT&T's chief executive, Randall Stephenson, has expressed his confidence in the deal being approved based on the benefit to the public of expanding wireless access and relatively robust competition in the wireless market, analysts say the deal stands a good chance of being rejected by federal regulators.
Consumer groups including Public Knowledge, Consumers Union, Free Press and the Media Access Project are publicly opposed to AT&T merger. These groups have influence with Democrats at the Federal Communications Commission and in Congress. These organizations fear that the merger will raise prices and stifle innovation by consolidating so much of the wireless industry in one company.  Free Press and Public Knowledge have started letter-writing campaigns against the deal.
Internet companies are generally skeptical of the merger because it leaves them with fewer counter-parties to negotiate with for getting their content and applications to customers. The AT&T merger might leave them dependent on just two AT&T and Verizon. The Computer & Communications Industry Association (CCIA), which counts Google, Microsoft, Yahoo and eBay among its members, is opposed to the merger. "A deal like this, if not blocked on antitrust grounds, is of deep concern to all the innovative businesses that build everything from apps to handsets. It would be hypocritical for our nation to talk about unleashing innovation on one hand and then stand by as threats to innovation like this are proposed," said Ed Black, head of CCIA.
The Rural Cellular Associaton (RCA), a trade group representing roughly 100 mobile carriers located in rural areas, has expressed its opposition to the proposed merger between AT&T and T-Mobile. The RCA said that the merge would stifle competition, harm innovation, and lead to higher prices.
Sprint Nextel has announced its opposition to the merger. Sprint said the deal would severely reduce competition in the United States cell phone industry.
AT&T and T-Mobile use different radio frequencies on their wireless networks. This could mean that T-Mobile customers would need to eventually replace their phones. Some users are declining to upgrade their phones due to this issue. AT&T has admitted that it plans to shift T-Mobile users over to a different frequency and that T-Mobile users will need to new phones. AT&T claims that this shift will be spread over several years to allow consumers to replace phones at the time they normally would do so.