Note:  If you are seeing this page as a result of an attempt to re-nominate an article for deletion, you must manually edit the AfD nomination links in order to create a new discussion page using the name format of  .  When you create the new discussion page, please provide a link to this old discussion in your nomination. -->
The result was    '''delete'''. -- ''' ''' ( ) 05:21, 17 May 2011 (UTC)
The only claims to notability are dubious (e.g. that he is a 'noted' genealogist is just based on being one of dozens of people thanked on someone's self-published web site) or poorly documented (membership in Sons of Confederacy, consisting of generic links, not to specific item), and none of them seem to meet the notability standards for scholars: Google Books turns up no matches that aren't reprints from Wikipedia, Google News nothing.  Contains significant material which appears by cites to be original research by synthesis, and a pedigree that is entirely undocumented. Fails  ,  ,   and concerns over  .  I don't see anything here to salvage.   ( ) 02:12, 10 May 2011 (UTC)
This is Harrison Thomas LaTour, a paid genealogist and historian.
RE: Question 
Tuesday, February 10, 2009 11:08 AM
From: "Gregory Pilcher" 
To: harrisonlatour@yahoo.com
Thank you, Harrison, the check will be on its way today. This is really helpful. It shows that my grandfather, and his second wife, Stella Crawford, were living with my great grandmother, Cora Stagg Parrott Long.
I want this information so that I can join the Military Order of the Stars and Bars and, eventually, the Sons of the American Revolution. How do I reference this information to use in my application?
Secondly, can you trace my ancestry through the Stagg line to John Stagg of New York, who was, I am told, an officer in the Revolution? If so would you please do so for me?
Thanks,
Father Gregory
The following pages are pages on wikipedia that was created or edited by Harrison Thomas LaTour and the :
I am Harrison Thomas LaTour. I was not asked to be born Harrison Thomas LaTour, a descendant of a African-Creole Confederate Soldier, but I am. The fact that I am a genealogist and submitted documentation to prove my ancestry to a national organization, the Sons of Confederate Veterans, and they accepted and approved me to become one of the only African-Creole members in the State of Oklahoma is notability.
What makes me any different from Nelson W. Winbush. He was an educator, a retired assistant principal, and a member of the Sons of Confederate Veterans. Surely, he does not have a wikipedia page because he was a educator, but because of his notability as a member of the Sons of Confederate Veterans.
Re: SCV Membership 
Re: free research request; re: Pierre A. Leufroi, LA
Saturday, December 20, 2008 11:30 AM
From: "Gale Red" 
To: harrisonlatour@yahoo.com
Cc: "Terry Wabnitz"  
Harrison,
Over a year ago, I researched your Confederate ancestor and sent you an application per your request to join the SCV.  Did you ever join, and if so, what camp?  If not, is there anything I can do to help that happen?  Please get back with me and let me know.  Thanks.
Gale Red, 
SCV Genealogy Committee
Leufroy Pierre-Auguste
Friday, November 6, 2009 8:34 PM
From: "Charley Wilson" 
To: harrisonlatour@yahoo.com
Sir, I was reading your bio about your Confederate ancestor Leufroy Pierre-Auguste.  Interesting for sure.
Are you a member of the Sons of Confederate Veterans (SCV)?  If not, you sure ought to be and we can assist you to join the SCV by and thru the CSA service of your GGG-Gf.  
I'm an SCV member and belong to the South Kansas Camp No. 2064 in Wichita, KS.
Regards,
Charley Wilson
Wichita, Kansas
Re: Joining the SCV
Thursday, November 12, 2009 7:57 AM
From: "jrpriddy@xxxxx" 
To: harrisonlatour@yahoo.com
Thanks Harrison.  I enjoyed speaking with you last night and hope you can make our December 1st meeting.
I'll pass along your ancestor's and family genealogy information to our Edmond Camp Adjutant and State Genealogist.  
Best regards,
John
John Priddy, Commander
Oklahoma Division
Sons of Confederate Veterans
405-330-xxxx
405-808-xxxx
The fact that I am a African-American Creole member of what was once a racist organization is notability. My great-great-great grandfather, a African-American Creole faught for what he believed in. He was a part of history. I owe it to him to make sure that his battle for freedom and liberty was not in vain.
How educational is it for students to learn that Africans faught for the Confederacy during the American Civil War. The Harrison Thomas LaTour page educates and brings use close to who we are as a individual.