Amonix, Inc. is a Solar power system developer based in Seal Beach, California. The company manufactures concentrated photovoltaic (CPV) commercial solar power systems designed for installation in sunny and dry climates. CPV systems convert sunlight into electrical energy in the same way that conventional solar photovoltaic technology does, except that they use optical concentrators to focus the solar radiation onto solar cells. According to a comparative study of energy production of solar technologies, CPV systems require no water for energy production and produce more energy per megawatt (MW) installed than traditional PV systems. Amonix has 19 Megawatts of CPV solar power systems deployed globally, including Southwestern U.S. U.S. states and Spain.
Amonix was founded in 1989 by CPV solar technology developer, Vahan Garboushian, its current chief technology officer and chairman of the board of directors. The company began research and development of large-scale CPV solar power systems for the electric utility industry in 1990. Since then Amonix has developed seven generations of progressively advancing CPV solar power systems.
In 1994, the company won R&D Magazine   s R&D 100 award for silicon solar cell performance with record conversion efficiency. According to the Department of Energy, Amonix developed the world   s most efficient silicon solar cell in 2005, achieving a sunlight-to electricity conversion efficiency of 27.6 percent, which still holds the world record for efficiency of a silicon cell. 
In 2007, the company began incorporating multijunction solar cell technology originally developed for the space industry into its modular design. The system contains several photovoltaic solar cells which are combined to boost power production even further. Once connected the cells become modules that can be combined into arrays to provide increasing levels of solar power. Amonix has achieved 31 percent efficiency in its modules, and 39 percent efficiency in its production cells. 
Amonix opened its 78,000 square foot headquarters in Seal Beach, Cal., in 2008. In December 2009 the company acquired Sunworks Solar LLC, a solar manufacturing plant developer. Sunworks' co-founder and chief executive officer, Brian Robertson, became Amonix CEO as part of the restructuring. 
In May 2011, the company opened its largest solar array manufacturing plant -- a 214,000 square foot manufacturing facility in North Las Vegas, Nevada -- bringing more than 300 jobs to the area. The plant produces approximately four solar panel arrays a day, each 50 feet by 72 feet. The project was financed through a $6 million tax credit from the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act and an additional $12 million in private capital. The new manufacturing facility will be powered by an  as part of its electrical power source.
Amonix received $129.4 million in a Series B financing round, which closed in April 2010. Also in 2010, the company received $9.5 million in stimulus funding as part of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act's Advanced Energy Manufacturing Tax Credit. Amonix previously raised $25 million in Series A funding, and also received $15.6 million in grant funding through the DOE's Solar America Initiative to improve the reliability and reduce the cost of solar electricity to meet national goals (measured as the levelized cost of electricity) of 6 cents per kilowatt hour by 2015. 
In addition to the DOE, Amonix investors include Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers, , , , , New Silk Route, , , and Goldman Sachs.
Amonix employs concentrated photovoltaic technology systems which require no water in power production and produce more energy per acre than any other solar technology. CPV technology uses optics to focus large amounts of sunlight onto small photovoltaic surfaces to generate electricity. CPV systems are the most efficient solar energy systems and produce the most energy in dry, sunny climates, where the solar radiation averages 6 kilowatt-hours per square meter per day (6 kW-hr/m2/day) or more. According to the research firm, Global Data, the average cell, module and system efficiencies for CPV systems are expected to reach 50.37 percent, 39.48 percent and 34.03 percent, respectively. 
Originally used for space-based applications, the CPV technology was adapted to utility-scale application by Amonix to take advantage of the improved energy efficiencies it offers over the previous silicon-based technology.
The multijunction solar cells used in Amonix CPV systems work by layering semiconductor materials that have different band gaps. Sunlight enters the layer that has the largest band gap and continues to penetrate the solar cell until it reaches the layer that has a smaller band gap than its photon   s energy.       In this way, multijunction solar cells are more efficient than single layer solar cells because less of the photon   s energy is lost to heat when it exceeds the band gap of the absorbing semiconductor material.
Used in conjunction with concentrator optics such as Fresnel lenses, multijunction solar cells are capable of converting sunlight into electricity exceeding 40 percent efficiency. This efficiency rises as the level of concentration increases, but decreases as temperature increases. The Amonix CPV system is designed to keep the cell temperature as low as possible using passive air-cooling.           
Amonix CPV systems use refractive Fresnel lenses to focus sunlight 500 times onto multijunction solar cells. The Amonix CPV system is composed of seven modules, each with its own acrylic lenses and advanced multijunction solar cell collector plates. A dual-axis mounting structure tracks the sun throughout the day as the lenses collect sunlight. Amonix systems integrate and align solar cells and Fresnel lens pairs into a proprietary module called a MegaModule. Modules are mounted to a proprietary hydraulic drive tracking structure. The Amonix tracking system follows the sun from dawn to dusk to maintain the sun   s focus on the solar cell. This ensures that the system generates close to peak power output throughout the day and produces more energy to better match power demand from utilities.
Amonix Manufacturing Facility, North Las Vegas, NV, USA
Utility-scale solar power systems:
CPV system vendors: