The CEO of Meizu Technology Co., ltd, Jack Wong, announced that the Meizu M9 would be released in late 2010.  Only 300 copies of the phone were released on the first day of the phone   s launch. It was only available in December 2010 if it was pre-ordered in October. The price of the Meizu M9 was set for 2380 Yuan (350 dollars).   The phone was originally slated for release in early November. Because of several delays, the phone   s release date was delayed to late December. One of the delays in the release of the phone was the company   s decision to brand the phone with an ancient Chinese character for a logo.  Another delay was caused by the validation process of the phone by the China Academy of Telecommunication Research. The validation process took two months. Another delay was caused by the arrival of the IPhone 4 to China. Because Meizu Technology Co., ltd wanted to compete with Apple, the company had to use the same retina screen as the iPhone 4.
The Meizu M9 is very fast because of its processor and supporting hardware. It runs on a 1&nbsp;GHz CPU, Power VR 540 GPU and 512 MB of RAM. The Meizu M9 is similar to the iPhone 4. They both have the same CPU, the ARM Cortex A8-based. The difference is that the Meizu m9 has the Samsung S5PC1110 application processor rather than the Apple A4 application processor. Even the clock speed and phone internals are similar between the Meizu M9 and the Apple iPhone 4.
The Meizu M9 uses a 3.5 inch Sharp AVS display with a 960x640 resolution. This offers a pixel density of 326ppi, a substantial improvement over most Android phones and a pixel density identical to that of the Apple iPhone 4. Because of the improved pixel density, text in zoomed-out views of the web browser or other applications can be read, and tasks such as gaming appear more attractive. 
The Meizu M9 runs on Android 2.2, with an upgrade to 2.3 that is coming soon. With the Android 2.2, there is some lag but that is going to be fixed when the new 2.3 upgrade comes out. The interface is designed by Eico. Eico is a Chinese design firm that has a good reputation because of its good work with Google, ASUS and Creative. Eico have designed a very unique user interface for the Meizu m9. A lot of people that have HTC cell phones have started importing the Meizu m9 interface into their cell phones because of its layout. The Meizu also has its own apps that have been designed by Eico. These apps are designed to work well with the interface which makes it look stunning.
Meizu M9 has three physical buttons below the screen. The middle button is the    HOME    button; the BACK button is on the left and the    KEY    button on the right. The left and the right buttons are not used too often but they do perform well when needed. On the top of the phone is the    LOCK SCREEN    key and on the left side is the    VOLUME    key. Meizu M9 does not have a physical button on the sides for taking pictures which leaves the right side of the phone without push buttons. The Meizu M9 screen will appear with 3 icons on its lockscreen after turning on the phone. There is a    LOCK    icon in the middle which opens the Home screen, a "PHONE" icon on the left, and a "SMS" icon (for text messages) on the right. These icons can be activated by dragging them upwards.
After dragging the phone icon up to unlock the phone a dial pad will appear; this gives the user both the flexibility to dial and access contacts. After dialing one can choose to put the call on speaker, mute, hold, and record, check contacts list or end the call by pressing the orange box at the bottom. All this commands appear on the screen during the time of the phone call.
To write a text message first press the    TYPE TO COMPOSE    button and the keyboard will appear. The main difference with Meizu M9 from other iPhones is that the keyboard does not go landscape when the phone is reoriented. Also it can easily switch from Chinese to English and vice versa simply by pushing the    EN    and    CH    buttons respectively.
Upon pushing the    Home    button on the middle of the screen, the user is immediately connected to the default homepage of the Meizu web browser. The top left button on the screen allows the opening of more than one internet page at the same time. Also at the bottom of the page there are three icons: on the left is the    Refresh    icon on the middle    Bookmark    button and on the right is the    More Options    icon, which allows the user to download list, add to desktop, select text etc    The screen can scroll up, down, left, right and also zoom in and out with just the touch of the finger making it easier to read.
The Meizu M9 uses a Pentile Matrix display which distorts the display's clarity and casts a reddish hue; thus, the phone has poor color balance compared to other modern smartphones. 
The sound quality is known to be quite cacophonic, especially when the volume is increased to its maximum. The distortion is said to be unlike any modern day MP3 player. Most people find this hard to believe, because Meizu used to be an MP3 company before it decided to go into the phone business.
Critics have stated that the ROM for the phone isn   t stable enough for full customer reliability.
One of the major issues of the Meizu M9 is its inability to synchronize with third party software. For example, the WhatsApp application cannot access the SMS confirmation code, and the Google Calendar and Contact syncs do not perform well on this phone. 
The battery life span of the Meizu M9 is comprable to that of most modern smartphones. When fully charged, it can last up to a day with normal usage, and it can last up to two days with minimal usage. There is speculation that the Android 2.3 update will improve the Meizu M9's battery life.
Unless one is in China, getting access to the Meizu M9 can prove to be quite an arduous task. The best way to purchase one of these phones is to get it from an online seller; the downside to this is that a warranty is not available. There are also a lot of scams and unreliable people out there.
The Meizu M9 was reported to have already hit its total sales target for 2011 in the first quarter. Consequently, the CEO Jack Wong refused to reduce the price of the phone. Its success could be as a result of low project target sales or unexpected popularity of the product. This phone is highly popular in China, and is starting to gain worldwide attention.