I was watching an episode of ''Heroes'' and noticed something that I thought was strange.   shows a woman holding a cellphone.  The camera angle is from her lap, basically.  So you're looking up at her as she's speaking on the phone.  The darker bit on the cell phone near the top of the image is the cover for the headphone jack.  The wording next to the silver bit at the bottom says "Lock".  So, is this (in my experience with cell phones) an unusual phone in that it has the lock button and headphone jack on the bottom of the phone?  Or did the actress just screw up and hold the phone incorrectly?  Not the most interesting of questions, I know, but forgive me.   |  09:30, 22 May 2011 (UTC)
In countries like Afghanistan, Myanmar, and Columbia, growing opium and coca is obviously ''very'' profitable. Trying to get farmers to voluntarily grow other crops is obviously a big challenge.
My question is: per hectare cultivated, what are the most valuable "licit" (non-drug) crops? I'm interested in ''any'' horticulture, so feel free to include trees, shrubs, etc. Include those which need a particular climate / soil type, however rare. Just please exclude truffles and other fungi - (they aren't "plants"). Also please exclude those crops that generally can't be "cultivated", such as Kopi Luwak. I'm assuming a situation where quality cultivation techniques, expertise, logistics, supplies and equipment are all available, enabling efficient output. (Note: this is ''not'' a homework question. I've puzzled about this question for a while).   ( ) 11:03, 22 May 2011 (UTC)
So, should all countries with a large pool of cheap labour and suitable climate / soil be taking up vanilla cultivation? Or am I missing something? I accept the price may be temporarily inflated (the Madagascar floods), but even if it fell by 75% to $120,000 per acre it would seem to be way out of proportion. What's missing in this picture? Why aren't more countries taking it up?   ( ) 11:50, 22 May 2011 (UTC)
I think I have asked this previously, but cannot remember when. Why do people use coins for low-valued cash units and notes for high-valued cash units? At the moment, I can only think of two possible reasons:
Am I right here, and are there other reasons?   &#124;   19:47, 22 May 2011 (UTC)