The '''2011 New England tornado outbreak''' occurred on June 1, 2011, in Massachusetts' Connecticut River Valley, devastating the large city of Springfield, Massachusetts and its surrounding region. Although the majority of damage occurred in the Connecticut River Valley, the tornado outbreak spawned 7 tornadoes across New England, effecting both the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and the State of Maine.
By 9:47 PM EDT, the violent storms   which included seven reported tornadoes   had killed four people and injured over 300 people in the Springfield area alone.    More than 48,000 electricity customers lost power.  Because of the severe weather and resulting damage, Governor Deval Patrick declared a state of emergency for Massachusetts, and on June 14, 2011, President Barack Obama declared Springfield and the surrounding region a United States Federal disaster area.http://www.masslive.com/news/index.ssf/2011/06/president_obamas_disaster_area.html. Governor Patrick also activated 1,000 National Guard troops for rescue and recovery efforts.
On May&nbsp;30, two days before the outbreak, the Storm Prediction Center (SPC) noted the possibility of a severe weather event in the Northeastern United States in their three day outlook. Warm, moist air (with dewpoints in the 60s) from the south was brought into the area by a pre-frontal warm sector. In light of this, the SPC issued a slight-risk for the area. As an upper-level trough moved over the Great Lakes, further moisture and warmth increased atmospheric instability in the area, raising the threat of a squall line or supercell thunderstorms. By June&nbsp;1, the storm system moved over Ontario and Quebec, with a cold front trailing behind it over much of New England. CAPE values exceeded 4,000&nbsp;j/kg, allowing for potential supercells to develop. Additionally, a strong upper-level jet stream brought significant wind shear, prompting a tornado threat, though the main effects were expected to result from straight-line winds, downbursts and large hail.
 At 10:05&nbsp;a.m., the SPC issued a severe thunderstorm watch for the entire state of Vermont, much of northern New York, northeastern Pennsylvania and parts of western Massachusetts and Connecticut. By this time, a broken line of severe storms developed over parts of western New York and northern Pennsylvania. With the storms gradually developing throughout the day and an increasing threat of tornadoes, a tornado watch was issued at 1:00&nbsp;p.m. for much of New England, southern New York, eastern Pennsylvania and most of New Jersey. Around 2:00&nbsp;p.m., severe storms with damaging hail, measured up to , and winds around  developed near Albany, New York. These storms gradually tracked east-southeastward into Vermont and later New Hampshire. One particular supercell produced giant 3.25 in diameter hail at Shaftsbury, VT after producing a funnel cloud and baseball sized hail across the border in New York State.  At 2:43&nbsp;p.m., the first of several tornado warnings in the area was issued for southern Coos County, New Hampshire.
Between 3:00 and 3:30&nbsp;p.m., a line of severe storms developed over western Massachusetts and prompted a tornado warning at 3:28&nbsp;p.m.. About an hour later, another warning was issued for Springfield, Massachusetts and surrounding areas. Within minutes, a touchdown was confirmed near Springfield by local law enforcement and amateur radio operators. This tornado was later rated a strong EF3 on the Enhanced Fujita Scale. Over the next hour, damage was reported as far east as Sturbridge. At 6:07&nbsp;p.m., another tornado was reported in Westfield, and again through Springfield and Sturbridge, with the last report at 7:25&nbsp;p.m..
 The outbreak included the first killer tornado in Massachusetts since the 1995 Great Barrington tornado.
 Overall, the tornado killed four people and injured hundreds of others. In terms of structural losses, over 700 buildings and 95 trailers were destroyed or left uninhabitable along the storm's path. Damage estimates from the storm reached $140&nbsp;million, the majority of which was from the destruction of homes and businesses. Based on a post-storm survey by the National Weather Service office in Boston, the tornado attained maximum estimated winds of  as it moved into Springfield, ranking it as a high-end EF3.
Around 4:13&nbsp;p.m., a strong thunderstorm developed over western Hampden County and gradually developed as it tracked eastward at . This storm prompted a severe thunderstorm warning for portions of Hampden, Worcester and Hampshire Counties in Massachusetts as well as Hartford, Tolland and Windham Counties in Connecticut. At the time, Doppler weather radar indicated weak rotation within the storm, a sign of a possible tornado and around 4:17&nbsp;p.m., a tornado touched down in the Munger Hill section of Westfield, Massachusetts. The previous severe thunderstorm warning was then superseded by a tornado warning at 4:18&nbsp;p.m. following stronger rotation apparent on radar. Within Westfield, damage was mainly confined to trees but a local school did sustain roof damage. Once the tornado moved out of the town and into West Springfield, it rapidly intensified, causing extensive damage to industrial buildings, removing roofs and the upper floors of three-story apartment complexes. Additionally, a few homes collapsed due to the severity of structural damage. Throughout West Springfield, 88 buildings were destroyed and two people were killed. One woman was killed after her home collapsed on top of her while protecting her daughter. Another fatality took place when a  wide oak tree fell on a vehicle, killing the driver.
The storm then crossed the Connecticut River and moved into Metro Center Springfield, destroying over 100 homes.  The tornado caused extensive damage to Springfield's Connecticut River Walk Park, deforesting much of the park's formerly lush tree canopy and removing large sections of its wrought-iron fences.  200 year-old Heritage Trees in Court Square were destroyed and commercial brick buildings in Springfield's historic South End sustained extensive damage - large portions of their roofs were removed and numerous brick facades were completely destroyed.  Severe structural damage to apartments and townhouses took place near Mulberry Street and due east on the campus of Springfield College. In the upper-middle-class East Forest Park neighborhood, numerous houses were completely destroyed, and Cathedral High School sustained significant damage. Some debris from this area was found roughly  away, being discovered in Millbury. Continuing eastward, the tornado tracked through Wilbraham, causing near-total deforestation and extensive structural damage. The storm then moved through the center of Monson, damaging nearly every structure in the area. A total of 77 buildings were destroyed, some completely, in the town. In some locations, trees were debarked and had most of their branches removed. The roof of Monson High School was also completely destroyed. In Natick, roughly  from Monson, a picture from the town was found.
Shortly before 5:00&nbsp;p.m., the tornado moved through Brimfield State Forest where it reached its maximum width of . Near Brimfield, the Village Green campground, a trailer park, was almost completely destroyed with 95 out of 96 trailers destroyed. Here, one person was killed after her RV was overturned by the tornado. Losses in this area exceeded $1&nbsp;million. Around 5:09&nbsp;p.m., another tornado warning was issued to include portions of Norfolk County, Massachusetts and Providence County, Rhode Island. Significant damage took place to both buildings and trees for several miles before the storm moved into Southbridge. There, the Southbridge Airport sustained some damage and aircraft were picked up and thrown into the nearby woods. Once through the airport, the tornado weakened and eventually dissipated in southwestern Charlton at 5:27&nbsp;p.m..
Immediately following the storms, the Springfield Tornado disaster left four people dead, hundreds of people suffering in hospitals with injuries ranging from lightening strikes to trauma, and over 350 people homeless, most of whom stayed in the MassMutual Center. Over two weeks later, more than 200 people were still homeless at the MassMutual Center in Springfield.  In addition to the MassMutual Center, Tantasqua High School in Sturbridge and Brookfield Elementary School were opened up as emergency shelters. A Special Emergency Response Team was activated by the state police in order to search for missing people and those trapped underneath debris. In Springfield, firefighters from the city of Worcester were called in to assist in rescue efforts. Governor Deval Patrick also declared a state of emergency in Massachusetts, and activated 1,000 National Guard troops for rescue and recovery efforts. By June&nbsp;2, six Red Cross shelters had been opened in the state and housed about 480 people. Within two days of the tornadoes, the process of demolishing structures beyond repair began as local officials inspected hundreds of damaged homes. By June&nbsp;7, three shelters remained open, housing 362 people.
On June&nbsp;15, the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) declared Hampden and Worcester Counties as major disaster areas, allowing for government aid to be distributed to affected residents. The following day, the number of insurance claims sharply rose from about 5,000 to 8,200. In addition to federal funds, state lawmakers passed a $50.3&nbsp;million supplemental budget that included $15&nbsp;million for emergency response, cleanup, and assistance and shelter to residents affected by the storms. By June&nbsp;20, just over $1&nbsp;million in individual aid had been provided to 254 households.