The publisher and agency solutions, available in 4 languages (French, English, German and Spanish) allow the user to manage the advertising space as well as program, deliver, optimize and track online advertising campaigns.
Created in 2001, Smart AdServer rapidly became an important ad server on the market, with more than 250 customers in 25 countries.
Smart AdServer has offices in Europe (UK, Germany, France, Spain, Poland) and North America (US, Canada, Mexico).
Tens of billions of display ads are served every month in over 1,600 websites. Among its customers are to be found global media agencies (Fullsix, Performics, Publicis,   ), publishers(Betclic , Meetic, Bild, Pixmania, Canal+, Axel Springer, La Vanguardia, Radio-Canada), ad networks (Amaury Group, Aufeminin.com. Since 2002, 95% of          Smart AdServer          contracts have been renewed.
Smart AdServer's headquarters are based in Paris, France.
Smart AdServer was created in 2001 by the major Web publisher, au Feminin, as an internal solution to provide advanced capabilities for managing ad spaces and its communication campaigns.  
The agency solution was developed in 2002 and the first contract was signed with Zenith. Its solutions quickly gained recognition and benefited from rapid development through media agencies, advertising agencies, and publishers.
The company became independent in 2005 and   Axel Springer, the largest newspaper publishing company in Europe, acquired the auFeminin.Com Group (including this product ) in summer 2007.
2007 marked also the beginning of   global expansion, with   sales offices in Montreal, Canada, and Amsterdam, Netherlands.
The number of clients increased from 20 in 2006 to 145 by the end of 2008.
Today, it  has :   250 clients across 4 continents,  (among them 50 agencies and 1,600 websites using the technology), with  7 offices in Europe   and 3   in North America. The annual growth is 40%.
Smart AdServer is now globally certified by Facebook as a third party ad server.
Since 2008, Smart AdServer has been third-party ad server certified by ''' Google'''  (Google's portal and adnetwork, including  Youtube)
Smart AdServer has become globally certified by ''' Microsoft'''    (MSN portal) since 2010, regarding display and rich media formats sur des formats standards & rich media.
Since 2010, Smart AdServer has been certified by Yahoo!    (Yahoo! network, Dailymotion included) regarding rich media & display formats in the world.
Smart AdServer is a IAB member in 10 different countries
Smart AdServer has been involved in the Ad Impression Measurement Guidelines since 2004 (Interactive Audience Measurement and Advertising Campaign Reporting and Audit Guidelines, September 2004, Version 6.0b, Global - )