Spiral Island has been featured in a number of newspapers and TV documentaries around the world, including in Japan and South Korea, and was seen in an episode of the ''Ripley's Believe It or Not!'' television program.
The first Spiral island was located in a lagoon near Puerto Aventuras, on the Caribbean coast of Mexico south of Cancun; Sowa began constructing it in 1998.  He filled nets with empty discarded plastic bottles to support a structure of plywood and bamboo, on which he poured sand and planted numerous plants, including mangroves. The island sported a two-story house, a solar oven, a self-composting toilet, and three beaches. He used some 250,000 bottles for the  by  structure. The mangroves were planted to help keep the island cool, and some of them rose up to  high.
Almost all of the sand Sowa used for Spiral Island I was taken from the end of the beach, where it came up against the man-made rock pier on the edge of the canal system where the Island was tied. Due to the prevailing winds, beach-sand was constantly being piled up because of the constant motion of the waves and wind. The beach sand was dredged out using large machinery so that boats could continue to come through the canal. Since Sowa gathered 8 to 10 large buckets per week, the builders of Puerto Aventuras Canal did not need to dredge it again, as he was doing it for them.
The island was destroyed by Hurricane Emily in 2005. The island was washed completely onto the beach in one piece, and a small proportion of the bags of bottles washed up on the beach away from where it landed. The roots of the 7-year old, -tall mangroves were intertwined through the island's base and the strong net that was wrapped totally under the whole island helped to keep it together.
In late 2007 and 2008, Sowa built a new Spiral Island in the waters of Isla Mujeres, the "Island of Women", also near Cancun. It opened for tours in August, 2008. 
The new island is about  in diameter, and plants and mangroves are already growing on it.  It contains about 100,000 bottles. The new island has three beaches, a house, two ponds, a solar-powered waterfall and river, a wave powered washing machine and solar panels. Volunteers helped with the project.  Sowa will continue to make improvements to the Island, so it will always be a work of art in progress.