The '''Central Florida Research Park''', abutting the main campus of the University of Central Florida in Orlando, Florida, USA, is a university-related research park. The Park was established as a result of legislation passed by the Florida Legislature in 1978, and is a cooperative effort between the University of Central Florida, the Orange County Research and Development Authority, and the Orange County Board of County Commissioners. The governing body of the Park is the Orange County Research and Development Authority.
The Central Florida Research Park is the largest research park in Florida, and the seventh largest in the United States.
The university and officials of the Central Florida Research Park believe that the potential for the establishment of close ties between the university and industry will create an attractive environment conducive to the location of research-oriented industry in the Park. This activity will enrich and support the academic, teaching, and research programs of the university. 
Planned to provide a campus-like environment for business adjacent to UCF, the Central Florida Research Park consists of over 1,000 acres (4&nbsp;km  ) of land. Businesses which desire a "university relationship" can purchase or lease land in the Research Park on which to construct a facility or can lease space for office, office/lab, or light manufacturing activities.
University organizations, including the Institute for Simulation and Training, are located in the Research Park. The Naval Air Warfare Center Training Systems Division, the US Army Program Executive Office for Simulation, Training, and Instrumentation (PEO STRI), Research, Development and Engineering Command United States Army Simulation and Training Technology Center (STTC) and the Air Force Agency for Modeling and Simulation (AFAMS), the focal point of the nation's simulation and training industry, have their headquarters in the Research Park. Over $700 million in federal contracts is granted by the Army and Navy each year.
Research Parkway, and its sister road Challenger Parkway, have become infamous within the UCF community for horrific late night high speed traffic collisions that occur several times per semester, costing many students their lives. A key contributor to these incidents is the layout of the roadways and their limited access. Research Parkway and Challenger Parkway are both four lane roads with wide banking turns and long straightaways. These streets offer little outside road access, allowing for even modest vehicles to attain high speeds without the fear of sudden traffic. Late at night these roads can be covered with water due to the Research Park's sprinkler system, resulting in slick roadways.
Take the East-West Expressway (408) east approximately  and you will enter straight into the ''Central Florida Research Park'' as the Expressway ends and becomes Challenger Parkway. Turn right on Ingenuity Drive and proceed approximately 1/2 mile (800 m) to Discovery Drive, turn left on Discovery Drive and proceed approximately 1/2 mile (800 m) to Research Parkway, turn left, the Research Pavilion will be on the left.