The premise of the doctrine is that the U.S. Constitution reserves for the United States Congress at least some degree of exclusive power "to regulate Commerce with foreign Nations, and among the several States, and with the Indian Tribes" (Article I,    8). Therefore, individual states are limited in their ability to legislate on such matters.  The Dormant Commerce Clause does not expressly exist in the text of the United States Constitution. It is, rather, a doctrine deduced by the U.S. Supreme Court and lower courts from the actual Commerce Clause of the Constitution.  Justice O'Connor has written that: The central rationale for the rule against discrimination is to prohibit state or municipal laws whose object is local economic protectionism, laws that would excite those jealousies and retaliatory measures the Constitution was designed to prevent.   See The Federalist No. 22, pp.&nbsp;143&ndash;145 (C. Rossiter ed. 1961) (A. Hamilton);  Madison, Vices of the Political System of the United States, in 2 Writings of James Madison 362&ndash;363 (G. Hunt ed. 1901).
The idea that regulation of interstate commerce may to some extent be an exclusive Federal power was discussed even before adoption of the Constitution, though the framers did not use the word "dormant."  On September 15, 1787, the Framers of the Constitution debated in Philadelphia whether to guarantee states the ability to lay duties of tonnage without Congressional interference, in order for states to finance the clearing of harbors and the building of lighthouses. James Madison believed that the mere existence of the Commerce Clause would bar states from imposing any duty of tonnage: "He was more and more convinced that the regulation of Commerce was in its nature indivisible and ought to be wholly under one authority."
The word "dormant," in connection with the Commerce Clause, originated in dicta of Chief Justice John Marshall. For example, in the case of ''Gibbons v. Ogden'', , he wrote that the power to regulate interstate commerce "can never be exercised by the people themselves, but must be placed in the hands of agents, or lie dormant." Concurring Justice William Johnson was even more emphatic that the Constitution is "altogether in favour of the exclusive grants to Congress of power over commerce."
Later, in the case of ''Willson v. Black-Bird Creek Marsh Co.'', , Chief Justice Marshall wrote: "We do not think that the  act empowering the Black Bird Creek Marsh Company to place a dam across the creek, can, under all the circumstances of the case, be considered as repugnant to the power to regulate commerce in its dormant state, or as being in conflict with any law passed on the subject."
In order to determine whether a law violates this so-called "dormant" aspect of the Commerce Clause, the court first asks whether it discriminates on its face against interstate commerce. In this context, "discrimination" simply means differential treatment of in-state and out-of-state economic interests that benefits the former and burdens the latter.
Over the years, the Supreme Court has consistently held that the language of the Commerce Clause contains a further, negative command prohibiting certain state taxation even when Congress has failed to legislate on the subject. Examples of such cases are ''Quill Corp. v. North Dakota'', 504 U.S. 298 (1992); ''Northwestern States Portland Cement Co. v. Minnesota'', 358 U.S. 450, 458 (1959) and ''H.P. Hood & Sons, Inc. v. Du Mond'', 336 U.S. 525(1949).
Application of the dormant commerce clause to state taxation is another manifestation of the Court's holdings that the Commerce Clause prevents a State from retreating into economic isolation or jeopardizing the welfare of the Nation as a whole, as it would do if it were free to place burdens on the flow of commerce across its borders that commerce wholly within those borders would not bear.   The Court's taxation decisions thus " 'reflect a central concern of the Framers that was an immediate reason for calling the Constitutional Convention: the conviction that in order to succeed, the new Union would have to avoid the tendencies toward economic Balkanization that had plagued relations among the Colonies and later among the States under the Articles of Confederation.' ''Wardair Canada, Inc. v. Florida Dept. of Revenue'', 477 U.S. 1 (1986); ''Hughes v. Oklahoma'', 441 U.S. 322 (1979); ''Oklahoma Tax Commission v. Jefferson Lines, Inc.'', 514 U.S. 175 (1995).
The command has been stated more easily than its object has been attained, however, and the Court's understanding of the dormant Commerce Clause has taken some turns.   In its early stages, the Court held the view that interstate commerce was wholly immune from state taxation "in any form," "even though the same amount of tax should be laid on (intrastate) commerce,"  This position gave way in time to a less uncompromising but formal approach, according to which, for example, the Court would invalidate a state tax levied on gross receipts from interstate commerce, or upon the "freight carried" in interstate commerce, but would allow a tax merely measured by gross receipts from interstate commerce as long as the tax was formally imposed upon franchises,  or " 'in lieu of all taxes upon (the taxpayer's) property,' "  Dissenting from this formal approach in 1927, Justice Stone remarked that it was "too mechanical, too uncertain in its application, and too remote from actualities, to be of value." 
Accompanying the revolution in approach in the Court's Congressional powers jurisprudence, the New Deal Court began to change its approach to state taxation as well.  The Jefferson Lines decision continues:
During the transition period, some taxes were upheld based on a careful review of the actual economic impact of the tax, and other taxes were reviewed based on the kind of tax involved, whether the tax had a nefarious impact on commerce or not.  Under this formalistic approach, a tax might be struck down, and then re-passed with exactly the same economic incidence, but under another name, and then withstand review.
The absurdity of this approach was made manifest in the two Railway Express cases.  In the first, a tax imposed by the state of Virginia on American business concerns operating within the state was struck down because it was a business privilege tax imposed on the privilege of doing business in interstate commerce. But then, in the second, Virginia revised the wording of its statute to impose a "franchise tax" on "intangible property" in the form of "going concern" value as measured by gross receipts.
The Court upheld the reworded statute as not violative of the prohibition on privilege taxes, even though the impact of the old tax and new were essentially identical. There was no real economic difference between the statutes in Railway Express I and Railway Express II. The Court long since had recognized that interstate commerce may be made to pay its way. Yet under the Spector rule, the economic realities in Railway Express I became irrelevant. The Spector rule (against privilege taxes) had come to operate only as a rule of draftsmanship, and served only to distract the courts and parties from their inquiry into whether the challenged tax produced results forbidden by the Commerce Clause.
Complete Auto Transit is the last in a line of cases that gradually rejected a per se approach to state taxation challenges under the commerce clause.  In overruling prior decisions which struck down privilege taxes per se, the Court noted the following, in what has become a central component of commerce clause state taxation jurisprudence: 
These four factors, nexus, relationship to benefits, discrimination, and apportionment, have come to be regarded as the four Complete Auto Transit factors applied repeatedly in subsequent cases.  Complete Auto Transit must be recognized as the culmination of the Court's emerging commerce clause approach, not just in taxation, but in all of its aspects.  Application of Complete Auto Transit to State taxation remains a highly technical and specialized venture, requiring the application of commerce clause principles to an understanding of specialized tax law.  How does a federal court decide whether a tax is "fairly related to benefits provided the taxpayer," and what deference should the court show to state legislative determinations?  How does the Court determine whether a tax which is facially non-discriminatory should be upheld or struck down?  What level of nexus is required, and how does one determine that a tax is fairly apportioned.  All of these issues belong in an article on the law of local taxation.
Discrimination in the flow of interstate commerce has arisen in a variety of contexts. A line of important cases has dealt with local processing requirements.  Under the local processing requirement, a municipality seeks to force the local processing of raw materials before they are shipped in interstate commerce.
The basic idea of the local processing ordinance was to provide favored access to local processors of locally produced raw materials.  Examples of Supreme Court decisions in this vein are set out in its Carbone decision.  They include ''Minnesota v. Barber'', 136 U.S. 313, (1890) (striking down a Minnesota statute that required any meat sold within the State, whether originating within or without the State, to be examined by an inspector within the State);  ''Foster-Fountain Packing Co. v. Haydel'', 278 U.S. 1 (1928) (striking down a Louisiana statute that forbade shrimp to be exported unless the heads and hulls had first been removed within the State);  ''Johnson v. Haydel'', 278 U.S. 16 (1928) (striking down analogous Louisiana statute for oysters);  ''Toomer v. Witsell'', 334 U.S. 385 (1948) (striking down South Carolina statute that required shrimp fishermen to unload, pack, and stamp their catch before shipping it to another State);  ''Pike v. Bruce Church, Inc.'', supra  (striking down Arizona statute that required all Arizona-grown cantaloupes to be packaged within the State prior to export);  ''South-Central Timber Development, Inc. v. Wunnicke'', 467 U.S. 82 (1984) (striking down an Alaska regulation that required all Alaska timber to be processed within the State prior to export).   The Court has defined "protectionist" state legislation as "regulatory measures designed to benefit in-state economic interests by burdening out-of-state competitors." ''New Energy Co. of Indiana v. Limbach'', 486 U.S. 269, 273&ndash;74(1988).
Flow control laws typically came in various designs.   One common theme was the decision to fund local infrastructure by guaranteeing a minimum volume of business for privately constructed landfills, incinerators, composters or other costly disposal sites.    In some locales, choice of the flow control device was driven by state bonding laws, or municipal finance concerns.    If a county or other municipality issued general obligation bonds for construction of a costly incinerator, for example, state laws might require a special approval process.  If approval could be obtained, the bonds themselves would be counted against governmental credit limitations, or might impact the governmental body   s credit rating: in either instance the ability to bond for other purposes might be impaired.  But by guaranteeing customers for a privately constructed and financed facility, a private entity could issue its own bonds, privately, on the strength of the public   s waste assurance.  
The private character of flow control regimens can thus be explained in part by the desire to utilize particular kinds of public financing devices.  It can also be explained by significant encouragement at the national level, in national legislation as well as in federal executive policy to achieve environmental objectives utilizing private resources.    Ironically, these public-private efforts often took the form of local processing requirements which ultimately ran afoul of the commerce clause.  
The Town of Clarkstown had decided that it wanted to promote waste assurance through a local private transfer station.  The transfer station would process waste and then forward the waste to the disposal site designated by the Town.    The ordinance had the following features:
Waste hauling in the Town of Clarkstown was accomplished by private haulers, subject to local regulation.  The scheme had the following aspects:  A) The Town promoted the financing of a privately owned transfer station through a waste assurance agreement with the private company.     Thus the designated facility was a private company.  B) The Town of Clarkstown forced private haulers to bring their solid waste for local processing at the designated transfer station, even if the ultimate destination of solid waste was an out-of-state disposal site.  (C) The primary rationale for forcing in-state waste into the designated private transfer station was financial; it was seen as a device to raise revenue to finance the transfer station.  
The Town of Clarkstown   s ordinance was designed and written right in the teeth of the long line of Supreme Court cases which had historically struck down local processing requirements.     In short, it was as if the authors of the ordinance had gone to a treatise on the commerce clause and intentionally chosen a device which had been traditionally prohibited.    A long line of Supreme Court case law had struck down local processing requirements when applied to goods or services in interstate commerce.  As the Court in Carbone wrote:
The Court plainly regarded the decision as a relatively unremarkable decision, not a bold stroke.  As the Court wrote:    The case decided today, while perhaps a small new chapter in that course of decisions, rests nevertheless upon well-settled principles of our Commerce Clause jurisprudence.     And, the Court made it plain, that the problem with Clarkstown   s ordinance was that it created a local processing requirement protective of a local private processing company:
The Court's 2007 decision in ''United Haulers Association v. Oneida-Herkimer Solid Waste Management Authority'' starkly illustrates the difference in result when the Court finds that local regulation is not discriminatory.  The Court dealt with a flow control regimen quite similar to that considered in Carbone.   The "only salient difference is that the laws at issue here require haulers to bring waste to facilities owned and operated by a state-created public benefit corporation."  The Court decided that the balancing test should apply, because the regulatory scheme favored the government owned facility, but treated all private facilities equally.  
The Court's United Haulers decision demonstrates an understanding of the regulatory justifications for flow control starkly missing in the Carbone decision:
The Court would not interfere with local government's efforts to solve an important public and safety problem.  
The history of commerce clause jurisprudence evidences a distinct difference in approach where the state is seeking to exercise its public health and safety powers, on the one hand, as opposed to attempting to regulate the flow of commerce. The exact dividing line between the two interests, the right of states to exercise regulatory control over their public health and safety, and the interest of the national government in unfettered interstate commerce is not always easy to discern.  One Court has written as follows:
In Exxon, the Court stressed that the Commerce Clause protects the interstate market, not particular interstate firms, from prohibitive or burdensome regulations.  A nondiscriminatory regulation serving substantial state purpose is not invalid simply because it causes some business to shift from a predominantly out-of-state industry to a predominantly in-state industry.  Only if the burden on interstate commerce clearly outweighs the State   s legitimate purpose does such a regulation violate the commerce clause.  When a state statute regarding safety matters applies equally to interstate and intrastate commerce, the courts are generally reluctant to invalidate it even if it may have some impact on interstate commerce.  In ''Bibb v. Navajo Freight Lines'' 359 U.S. 520, 524 (1959), the United States Supreme Court stated:  'These safety measures carry a strong presumption of validity when challenged in court.   If there are alternative ways of solving a problem, we do not sit to determine which of them is best suited to achieve a valid state objective.   Policy decisions are for the state legislature, absent federal entry into the field.   Unless we can conclude on the whole record that "the total effect of the law as a safety measure in reducing accidents and casualties is so slight or problematical as not to outweigh the national interest in keeping interstate commerce free from interferences which seriously impede it"  we must uphold the statute.
There are two notable exceptions  to the Dormant Commerce Clause doctrine that can permit state laws or actions that otherwise violate the Dormant Commerce Clause to survive court challenges.
The first exception occurs when Congress has legislated on the matter. See ''Western & Southern Life Ins. v. State Board of California'', . In this case the Dormant Commerce Clause is no longer "dormant" and the issue is a Commerce Clause issue, requiring a determination of whether Congress has approved, preempted, or left untouched the state law at issue.
The second exception is "market participation exception". This occurs when the state is acting "in the market," like a business or customer, rather than as a "market regulator." For example, when a state is contracting for the construction of a building or selling maps to state parks, rather than passing laws governing construction or dictating the price of state park maps, it is acting "in the market."  Like any other business in such cases, a state may favor or shun certain customers or suppliers.
Another important case is ''White v. Massachusetts Council of Constr. Employers, Inc.'', in which the Supreme Court held that the City of Boston could require its building contractors to hire at least fifty percent of their workforce from among Boston residents.  460 U.S. at 214&ndash;15. Because all of the employees covered by that mandate were "in a substantial if informal sense, 'working for the city,' " Boston was considered to be simply favoring its own residents through the expenditures of municipal funds.  The Supreme Court stated, "when a state or local government enters the market as a participant it is not subject to the restraints of the Commerce Clause." Id. at 208.  Nothing in the Constitution precludes a local government from hiring a local company precisely because it is local.
Other important cases enunciating the market participation exception principle are ''Reeves v. William Stake'',  and ''South-Central Timber v. Wunnicke'', . The ''Reeves'' case outlines the market participation exception test. In this case state-run cement co-ops were allowed to make restrictive rules (e.g. rules not to sell out-of-state). Here, this government-sponsored business was acting restrictively like an individually-owned business and this action was held to be constitutional. ''South-Central Timber'' is important because it limits the market exception. ''South-Central Timber'' holds that the market-participant doctrine is limited in allowing a State to impose burdens on commerce within the market in which it is a participant, but allows it to go no further. The State may not impose conditions that have a substantial regulatory effect outside of that particular market.
The "market participation exception" to the Dormant Commerce Clause does not give states unlimited authority to favor local interests, because limits from other laws and Constitutional limits still apply.  In '''', , the city of Camden, New Jersey had passed an ordinance requiring that at least forty percent of the employees of contractors and subcontractors on city projects be Camden residents. The Supreme Court found that while the law was not infirm because of the Dormant Commerce Clause, it violated the Privileges and Immunities Clause of Article IV of the Constitution. Justice Rehnquist's opinion distinguishes the market-participant doctrine from the privileges and immunities doctrine.  
Similarly, Congress has the power itself under the Commerce Clause to regulate and sanction states acting as "market participants," but it lacks power to legislate in ways that violate Article IV. 
In the 21st century, the Dormant Commerce Clause has been a frequent legal issue in cases arising under state laws regulating some aspects of Internet activity. Because of the interstate, and often international, nature of Internet communications, state laws addressing internet-related subjects such as spam, online sales or online pornography can often trigger Dormant Commerce Clause issues.
References in more recent Court decisions have argued that "Whether or not the Founders intended this "negative" or "dormant" component to the Commerce Clause has been hotly debated." See, e.g., ''Tyler Pipe Indus. v. Washington State Dep't of Revenue'', 483 U.S. 232, 259&ndash;65(1987) (Scalia, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part) (arguing that Framers did not intend "negative" or "dormant" component of Commerce Clause);  ''Itel Containers Int'l Corp. v. Huddleston'', 507 U.S. 60(1993) (Scalia, J., concurring in part and concurring in the judgment) (concurring in enforcement of dormant Commerce Clause on stare decisis grounds);  FELIX FRANKFURTER, THE COMMERCE CLAUSE UNDER MARSHALL, TANEY AND WAITE 12 (1937) (describing absence of comment during drafting and ratification of Constitution regarding possible negative implications of Commerce Clause);  Albert S. Abel, The Commerce Clause in the Constitutional Convention and in Contemporary Comment, 25 Minn. L. Rev. 432, 493 (1941) (arguing that historical evidence "supports the view that, as to the restricted field which was deemed at the time to constitute regulation of commerce, the grant of power to the federal government presupposed the withdrawal of authority ''pari passu'' from the states.").
Both Supreme Court Justices Antonin Scalia and Clarence Thomas
Trailer Marine Transport Corp. v. Rivera Vazquez, 977 F-2d 1, 7-8 (1st Cir. 1992) held that the dormant Commerce Clause applies to Puerto Rico.