Having moved with his family to Woking, England in fall 1993 Finkel learned about Magic: The Gathering at a local game shop shortly thereafter. After he returned to the New York area in 1995 Finkel quickly made friends with the "OMS brothers", Steven and Daniel O'Mahoney-Schwartz.
In 1996 the first   was held in New York. Finkel competed in the Junior Division of the tournament, made it to the Top 8, and won a $1,000 scholarship. After reaching another Top 8 in the Junior Division of Pro Tour Columbus Finkel had his first appearance in the senior competition of the Pro Tour at the   in Seattle. A ninth place finish earned him $3,200.
Finkel had three Top 16 finishes in the  , but never made it to the finals. His first Top 8 appearance was at  . In the same season Finkel won his first Grand Prix title in Rio de Janeiro, his first Pro Tour title in New York, finished third at US   and the World Championship, and eventually claimed the   title.
The   opened with Finkel winning another Grand Prix in Boston and making his third consecutive Top 8 appearance, a feat only once before achieved by Scott Johns and never since. Finkel finished the season second to Kai Budde in the Pro Player of the Year race. At the first Team Pro Tour in Washington the following   Finkel finished third with his friends and team mates Daniel and Steven O'Mahoney-Schwartz. After some mediocre finishes in the middle of the season Finkel won the   as well as the team and the individual portion of the  . Eventually Finkel finished third in the Pro Player of the Year race. Later in 2000 Finkel also won the Magic Invitational, giving him the chance to design his own Magic card. His creation, , debuted in the   set and was later reprinted in Time Spiral.
After two additional Top 8 appearances in the   Finkel's performances dropped in the  . Two Top 8s in   were followed by another drop in   and eventually by Finkel retiring from professional play. In 2005 he was inducted into the   as the vote leader of the inaugural class. This allowed him to attend further Pro Tours without having to qualify. In 2008 Finkel thus attended and won  , becoming the first player to win a Pro Tour after his induction into the Hall of Fame. Magic head designer Mark Rosewater commented on the occasion " is the most naturally gifted player the game has ever seen. His accomplishments are rivaled by only one other man "
In recent years, Finkel, like fellow Magic players David Williams and Noah Boeken, has been playing in high-level poker tournaments.
Finkel also has been involved with Tenacious Games in the development of their game ''The Spoils'' as an advisor since 2002. In 2006, he also became an investor in the company.
He currently works as a managing partner at the hedge fund Landscape Capital Management.
In addition Finkel was inducted into the Hall of Fame as the class of 2005 vote leader.  Finkel holds the highest vote percentage of any inductee.