He is the son of former major league pitcher Dizzy Trout.  Teammates and friends often referred to him simply as "Sorenson" along with the fairly obvious nickname Rainbow Trout. He displayed a little "dizziness" of his own from time to time, developing a reputation for his offbeat personality.
Trout was drafted by the Chicago White Sox in the first round of the  draft., Baseball-Reference.com, Retrieved on June 22, 2007 He played three years in the minor leagues before joining the White Sox and pitching in his first big league game on July 1, 1978 against the Minnesota Twins.
Before the  season, Trout was traded to the Chicago Cubs along with Warren Brusstar for Scott Fletcher, Pat Tabler, Randy Martz, and Dick Tidrow.  Trout had 32 starts in his first season with the Cubs, going 10-14 with a 4.65 ERA. Trout was known as a tough autograph to fans, always screaming, "I'm late!" while vanishing inside Wrigley Field.
The following season in , he stayed in the Cubs rotation, pitching along with Rick Sutcliffe, Dennis Eckersley, and Lee Smith which led the Cubs to 96 victories, and their first trip to the playoffs in 39 years. Steve pitched the Cubs home opener on April 13 against the New York Mets, pitching a complete game and gaining two hits in the 11-2 victory. On May 30, Trout took a no-hitter into the eighth inning against the Atlanta Braves that was broken up by Albert Hall.
Trout finished the season with a 13-7 record in 31 starts, posting a 3.41 ERA. Steve pitched effectively in the division series against the San Diego Padres, going 8.1 innings for the victory in game two."Steve Trout", Cubs Official 1985 Yearbook, Published by Woodford Associates
Trout started strong in  with a 6-1 record through June 8, until ulnar nerve problems caused him to miss time on the disabled list, as he was only able to make nine starts for the remainder of the season Trout was traded in  to the New York Yankees, for Bob Tewksbury, Rich Scheid, and Dean Wilkins.
Trout's acquisition by the New York Yankees in a mid-season trade proved to be a disastrous trade for the Yankees. Though his last two starts with the Cubs were complete game shutouts, and his ERA was one of the best in the National League, with the Yankees he proved unable to locate the strike zone. He walked 37 batters and threw 9 wild pitches in 46 innings and lasted an average of only four innings a start in his nine starts Yankee starts. The Yankees traded Trout to Seattle after the 1987 season, paying the Mariners over one million dollars to offset some of Trout's substantial salary.
Trout was traded to the Mariners before the  season. He pitched infrequently over the next season and a half before being released by the team.
Trout runs a baseball clinic from his home in Venice, Florida from November through April.  It is open to all ages. In 2002, he Published a book about his and his father's, Dizzy Trout, baseball lives called ''Home Plate: The Journey of the Most Flamboyant Father and Son Pitching Combination in Major League History.''
He has also been a pitching coach for the Brockton Rox of the Can-Am League and Chicago's Windy City ThunderBolts of the Frontier League.  On January 25, 2008, it was announced that Trout would be the manager of the Texarkana Gunslingers for their inaugural season 
Moloka'i high school in Hawaii hired Trout in March 2010 to be its head coach. Trout answered an ad in the local newspaper.