Prisoner Joe Sullivan (Dennis O'Keefe), who has "taken the fall" for an unspecified crime, breaks jail with the help of his girl, Pat (Claire Trevor).  Neither Joe nor Pat is aware that the escape has been facilitated as a set-up by mobster Rick Coyle (Raymond Burr), a sadistic pyromaniac, who has arranged for Joe to be killed during the break-out in order to avoid confronting him and paying Joe his agree-upon share of $50,000 for the crime. When the break-out scheme succeeds, contrary to Rick's expectations, Rick decides that he must have Joe done in some other way, by somebody else.
In the course of their run,  Pat and Joe kidnap a social worker, Ann (Marsha Hunt) who has been visiting Joe in prison, trying to reform him.  This begins a doomed film noir love triangle.  A fight with a vicious thug ends when Ann shoots Joe's attacker in the back. After this act of murder, Ann realizes she is in love with Joe. Relenting, he sends her away and prepares to flee the country with Pat.  In their hotel room, Pat receives a phone call from Rick's associate warning them that Ann has been seized by Rick, and will be harmed if Joe and Pat do not come out from hiding.  Pat does not disclose the nature of the phone call, but instead tells Joe that it was a call from the hotel desk clerk about their check-out time, since she is anxious to avoid telling him anything about Ann that would lead him to hesitate beginning a new life with Pat.  After boarding a ship to flee the country, Joe attempts to convince Pat that they can start over a new life together, however Pat finally realizes that Joe will always be thinking of Ann.  Pat realizes she must tell Joe that Ann is in danger and does so.  Before the ship sets sail, Joe races to save Ann and kill her captor Rick.  Under the cover of a thick fog, Joe manages to get past Rick's thugs who are positioned to ambush Joe, and sneaks into Rick's room.  Surprised by Joe   s sudden intrusion, a sudden gunfight erupts with Rick and Joe shooting each other and inadvertently starting a fire.  Joe and Rick, both wounded, fight hand to hand with Joe finally pushing Rick through an upper story window to his death.  Mortally wounded, Ann comforts the dying Joe in her arms as Pat looks on.
When the film was released, ''The New York Times'' film critic Bosley Crowther, panned the film, "But this, of course, is a movie   and a pretty low-grade one, at that   in which sensations of fright and excitement are more diligently pursued than common sense...Except for the usual moral   to wit, that crime does not pay   the only thing proved by this picture is that you shouldn't switch sweethearts in mid-lam.
In ''Girl and a Gun: The Complete Guide to Film Noir'', David N. Meyer wrote "It's the richest cinematography in noir outside of Orson Welles' ''Citizen Kane''."