The '''Pennsylvania Convention Center''' is a multi-use public facility in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania which is designed to accommodate conventions, exhibitions, conferences and other events.
In the latter part of the 20th century, the minute Philadelphia Civic Center became outmoded. With the opening of the Spectrum in South Philadelphia, fewer big sporting and entertainment events used the Civic Center. Political conventions, too, outgrew the capacity of the Civic Center to host them. By the 1980s, regional and state leaders had begun to plan for a new convention center in the heart of Center City. The Pennsylvania Convention Center opened in 1993 and when it did, most of the Events held in the Civic Center, including trade shows and the annual Philadelphia Flower Show, moved to the new facility.
The Pennsylvania Convention Center comprises four main halls or rooms, smaller meeting rooms and auditoriums, and the grand hall, which is part of the former Reading Railroad terminal elevated train shed. (The rest of the train shed is occupied by meeting rooms and a hallway on one floor and the grand ballroom, which is on a new floor inserted into the shed.) The headhouse entrance to the Convention Center is located at 12th and Market Streets in Center City. The A, B, and C exhibit halls extend across 12th Street one story up (the 200 level) from the street level (100 level) , between 11th and 13th Streets and Arch and Race Streets.  At the south side of the A exhibit hall a walkway extend over Arch Street, south into the grand hall.  The opposite end of the grand hall provides a gated entrance into the headhouse lobby for the Marriott Hotel that occupies the old office spaces of Reading Railroad.  Access to an adjoining Marriott Hotel is gained from this lobby by means of another second-story walkway over 12th Street.  
The hotel, designed by BLT Architects with completion in 1995, is connected to the Market East Transportation Center via a skybridge to the historic Reading Terminal.  The 1,200-room hotel also offers restaurants, a health/fitness center, and various-sized ballrooms and pre-function areas for meetings, convention activities, and other public and private events.  In 1999 designs by BLT Architects to expand the Marriott Hotel at the Pennsylvania Convention Center were completed.  The upper seven floors of the historic Reading Terminal Headhouse, designed by the Wilson Brothers in 1894, provided space to expand the Marriott   s conference capabilities with a 210 unit suites-type hotel featuring terraced restaurants and other public spaces.  The grand ballroom occupies the Reading Railroad Company   s original waiting room.
In December 2006, the Convention Center approved a $700,000,000 plan to expand the Convention Center west to Broad Street, bringing the amount of convention space to approximately one million square feet. The expansion was completed in March 2011.
The headhouse was a passenger station and the company headquarters for the Reading Railroad.  The single-span arched train shed roof structure is touted as the world's oldest surviving. The headhouse was designed in 1891 by New York architect Francis H. Kimball, and the trainshed by the Philadelphia architecture/engineering firm of Wilson Brothers & Company. The terminal opened in 1893 and served to enhance the railroad company's power and prominence, and contributed to the city's importance.  The train tracks were raised on a viaduct and entered the great arched shed about  above street level. Reading Terminal Market, which had prior rights to the railroad's right-of-way for the property use, was built below the trainshed.  When Reading Company ceased to exist as a railroad owner and operator, it sold the headhouse and train shed to SEPTA, the regional rail service.  SEPTA operated its regional trains out of the shed until 1985, when they developed an underground station that bypassed the terminal, and the facility fell into disuse.
City and state officials pondered on a means to reuse the facility, and formed a convention center authority.  Public reaction to redevelopment prompted the new authority to preserve the market and the train shed in its design of the new convention center.  It currently oversees the operation and maintenance of the convention center.
The Pennsylvania Convention center annually hosts the Philadelphia Auto Show in early February and the Philadelphia Flower Show in early March.