Stagecoach in Hull's origins can be traced back to the municipal-owned '''''Hull Corporation Transport''''', which, in addition to conventional buses, also operated trams and trolleybuses in the city.
By the late 1970s/early 1980s, Hull Corporation became '''''Kingston-upon-Hull City Transport (KHCT)''''' and, as had been the case for decades, KHCT shared Hull's bus network with the then National Bus Company (NBC) subsidiary ''East Yorkshire Motor Services'' (EYMS). In 1986, the then Conservative Transport Secretary, Nicholas Ridley, ordered the deregulation of the British bus industry.
As a consequence, the ownership of KHCT changed from Hull City Council to an arms-length private company owned by the council. Furthermore co-ordination/co-operation of the Hull bus network between KHCT and East Yorkshire, which was now owned by its management, was deemed illegal and the two operators became engaged in fierce competition from the late 1980s to the early/mid 1990s.
East Yorkshire began to operate on much of KHCT's network of services and KHCT's position was compounded by smaller-sized competitors entering Hull's bus network - including ''Connor & Graham'', ''Metro Citybus'', ''Pride of the Road/North Bank Travel'' and ''City Traveller''. These operators mainly focused upon the profitable corridors of Hull's bus network, with elderly/second-hand vehicles and in some, not all, cases a low-fare down-market image. These operators would eventually fade away, either going bankrupt or taken over. in particular by EYMS, and as a consequence KHCT was making losses and was itself subject to a hostile takeover bid from EYMS. KHCT rejected the EYMS bid but, faced with escalating losses and increased competition, a decision was taken by Hull City Council to sell KHCT in December 1993 to Stockton-based '''''Cleveland Transit''''', which itself had been the object of takeover interest from EYMS. This deal also offered KHCT's employees a 49% stake in the business, and at the time Cleveland Transit was considered one of the emerging 'groups' within the British bus industry, with acquisitions in Teeside, North/East Yorkshire and County Durham.
However, throughout 1994 Stagecoach Holdings plc pursued a phase of expansion in the North East of England, which saw it acquire the former Tyne & Wear PTE operation Busways Travel Services Ltd. from its management and employees in July 1994 and then Cleveland Transit in September that year too. Initially, KHCT's blue/white livery, albeit a modified version based upon Cleveland Transit's current green livery, was maintained by Stagecoach. However by December 1995 KHCT became known as '''''Stagecoach Kingston Upon Hull''''', later '''''Stagecoach in Hull''''', with the Stagecoach corporate livery being introduced to Hull by spring of 1996. More recently, the management of Stagecoach in Hull has been transferred to Stagecoach East Midlands, and since the early 2000s a more co-ordinated pattern of competition has been reached with East Yorkshire in the running of Hull's bus network.
Stagecoach provide mainly local services within the city boundary, with the addition of the X62 service to Leeds, West Yorkshire (via Goole, East Riding of Yorkshire) and services to Wawne, Cottingham, and Hedon, all in the East Riding of Yorkshire. Stagecoach Hull also operates part of service 350 'Humber Fastcat' to Barton and Scunthorpe in association with Stagecoach's Scunthorpe depot and East Yorkshire Motor Services.
To assist the elderly and disabled, some routes have low-floor buses. Many services operate on a 10 min frequency, known as Frequento, although there are also many specialist services, which may operate only once or twice a day, such at the Mecca Bingo services, and the service to the King George Dock Ferry Terminal.
Services in the main operate from the new integrated transport hub known as Hull Paragon Interchange which opened on 16 September 2007,
Although most routes operate all week, some routes do not operate on Sundays, and some operate only on Sundays. On Bank Holidays, a Sunday service is usually operated.
Other bus services are available within the city. The main competitor is East Yorkshire Motor Services who run a comparable operation, but with a greater service to the outlying villages.
A wide variety of vehicles are used on the services provided by Stagecoach in Hull. 
The fleet consists of:
21 Volvo Olympians
50 Dennis Tridents
17 Plaxton Presidents (Dennis)
14 10 Reg Enviro 300
6 09 Reg Enviro 300
3 Volvo Vykings For the X62 Leeds service
26 Dennis Darts
2 Optare Solo's
5 Volvo Jonckheere Mistral for Megabus services
9 60 Reg Enviro 400
The Newest Buses In The Fleet Are The 9 Enviro 400s Which Were Bought For The
Frequento Route 30 To Replace The Tridents/Presidents