The wear of foreign decorations may either be approved on a case-by-case basis or a general order may be declared allowing for blanket approval to all U.S. service members to wear a particular non-U.S. decoration.
The following is a list of foreign decorations which have been approved at one time for wear on United States military uniforms. Such awards are always worn after all United States decorations and international military awards. The list below is by no means comprehensive, but does display the awards which have been bestowed to U.S. service members by the governments of foreign countries.
Argentinian decorations are only rarely awarded to senior US officers, most of those senior U.S. officers have been in the United States Southern Command & United States Southern Command Air Forces Commander usually as "end-of-tour" decorations.
Australian decorations are only rarely awarded to very senior U.S. officers, at the Joint Chiefs of Staff level
Kingdom of Bahrain decorations were only rarely awarded to very senior U.S. officers. Most of those senior US officers in the United States Central Command as "end-of-tour" decorations.
Belgian Order's were awarded to senior U.S. officers, while the War Cross was presented to any rank for valor during World War I & World War II.
Bolivian decorations are only rarely awarded to senior U.S. officers, most of those senior US officers have been in the United States Southern Command & United States Southern Command Air Forces Commander usually as "end-of-tour" decorations.
Brazil's highest orders of merit were rarely awarded to senior U.S. officers, during World War II.
In the 21st century United States military most of those post World War II era presentations are still only awarded to senior US officers, most of those senior U.S. officers have been in the United States Southern Command & United States Southern Command Air Forces Commander usually as "end-of-tour" decorations.
Bulgarian decorations are only rarely awarded to very senior U.S. officers. Most of those were awarded to the United States European Command Commander usually as "end-of-tour" decorations.
Canadian decorations were mainly awarded during World War I and World War II. The Meritorious Service Cross and Meritorious Service Medal are currently the only Canadian awards still being awarded to US personnel today. Most of those are awarded to senior U.S. officers in the United States European Command, United States Northern Command or North American Aerospace Defense Command usually as "end-of-tour" decorations.
Colombian decorations are only rarely awarded to senior U.S. officers, most of those senior US officers have been in the United States Southern Command & United States Southern Command Air Forces Commander usually as "end-of-tour" decorations.
Chinese decorations were only rarely awarded to very senior U.S. officers during World War II.
Chilean decorations were only rarely awarded to very senior U.S. officers during World War II.
Croatian decorations are only rarely awarded to very senior U.S. officers. Most of those were awarded to senior US officers in the United States European Command usually as "end-of-tour" decorations.
Czech Order of the White Lion was only rarely awarded to very senior U.S. officers. The Czechoslovak War Cross was a little more commonly awarded to officers, then the ''Czech Order of the White Lion'' was, during World War I and World War II.
Cross of Merit of the Minister of Defense First Class are only rarely awarded to the United States European Command Commander usually as "end-of-tour" decorations.
Danish decorations were only rarely awarded to senior U.S. officers, during World War II.
Ecuadorean decorations were only rarely awarded to senior U.S. officers, during World War II.
Egyptian decorations were only rarely awarded to very senior U.S. officers. Most of those senior U.S. officers in the United States Central Command as "end-of-tour" decorations.
El Salvadoran decorations are only rarely awarded to senior U.S. officers, most of those senior U.S. officers have been in the United States Southern Command & United States Southern Command Air Forces Commander usually as "end-of-tour" decorations.
Estonian decorations are only rarely awarded to very senior U.S. officers. Most of those were awarded to senior U.S. officers in the United States European Command usually as "end-of-tour" decorations.
Image:Fourragere CG.png|Fourragere aux couleurs de la Croix de guerre 1914-1918
French decorations were presented to U.S. service members extensively during World War I and World War II. By far, the Croix de guerre was the most commonly bestowed decoration to United States service members of all ranks.  Today, members of United States 5th Marine Regiment and 6th Marine Regiment, the Army's 2nd Infantry Division, the Army's 3rd Infantry Division, the Army's 3rd Squadron, 4th Cavalry Regiment, the 1st BN U.S. 28th Infantry Regiment, and the National Guard's 45th Infantry Brigade Separate Brigade are authorized to wear a Fourragere aux couleurs de la Croix de guerre, signifying that brigade's award of three Croix de guerre during the World War I, but only while that individual is assigned to the unit. The wearing of the decoration is considered ceremonial and the fourragere is not entered as an official military award in permanent service records.
The National Order of the Legion of Honor is mostly awarded to senior U.S. officers and Senior Enlisted Advisors in the United States European Command usually as "end-of-tour" decorations.
The National Order of Merit is awarded to lower ranking U.S. officers (Brigadier General - Major) and Senior Non-commissioned officer's assigned to the United States European Command usually as "end-of-tour" decorations.
The French Commemorative Medal and the French Medal of National Defense can be awarded to any foreign military member who has served under French command. These are the only French medals still being awarded to U.S. personnel today.
German decorations have been awarded to United States soldiers beginning as far back as the American Revolution. By the time of the First World War, German decorations had faded from the military memory of the United States and, during the actual conflict where Germany and America were on opposing sides, the wear of any German decoration by an American soldier would have been unthinkable.
The sole authorization of a Nazi decoration to U.S. personnel was in 1938 when the Order of the German Eagle was awarded to a small number of U.S. military personnel who had either served in Germany in a diplomatic posting or who had performed an act of service to the German state. The Order was entered in service records, but was never authorized for display on a United States uniform.
In the 21st century United States military, the German Proficiency and Marksmanship Badges are far more commonly awarded, mainly to U.S. Army and Air Force personnel. The Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany was last awarded to a US officer in 2007 and is today rarely awarded to only very senior U.S. officers. Most of those senior U.S. officers were in the United States European Command usually as "end-of-tour" decorations.
Greek decorations were only very rarely awarded to very senior U.S. officers, during World War II.
Guatemalan decorations are only rarely awarded to senior U.S. officers, most of those senior U.S. officers have been in the United States Southern Command & United States Southern Command Air Forces Commander usually as "end-of-tour" decorations.
Haitian decorations were only rarely awarded to senior U.S. officers, during World War II.
Honduran decorations are only rarely awarded to senior U.S. officers, most of those senior U.S. officers have been in the United States Southern Command & United States Southern Command Air Forces Commander usually as "end-of-tour" decorations.
Hungarian decorations are only rarely awarded to very senior U.S. officers. Most of those were awarded to the United States European Command Commander usually as "end-of-tour" decorations.
Icelandic decorations are only rarely awarded to very senior U.S. officers. Most of those were awarded to the United States European Command Commander usually as "end-of-tour" decorations.
Iraqi decorations are only awarded to very senior U.S. officers, most of those were awarded to the Multi-National Force - Iraq Commander as "end-of-tour" decorations.
To date the ''only'' person that has been allowed to wear any Iraqi award has been General Petraeus, Multi-National Force - Iraq Commander.
The Service in Israel Medal is awarded to military attaches who service at least two years in Israel upon the end of their assignment with the IDF. First instituted in 2007, it is still a somewhat rare decoration and there are certain restrictions regarding its display (or in some case, even its mention) for U.S. personnel stationed in other Middle Eastern Arab countries who are on unfriendly terms with Israel. These include the UAE, Yemen, and Saudi Arabia.
Italian decorations are only rarely awarded to very senior U.S. officers. The first presentations of Italian decorations to U.S. personnel were made in the months following World War II. This was mainly done to foster a new era of friendly relations between the US and Italy.
There is post-World War II presentations, but most of those medals are awarded often to officers assigned in Italy. The Italian Order's are mainly awarded to senior U.S. officers in the United States European Command usually as "end-of-tour" decorations.
The first presentations of Japanese decorations to U.S. personnel were made in the months following World War II when the new Japanese government presented several decorations to senior U.S. military officers then in charge of the occupation force garrisoning Japan. This was mainly done to foster a new era of friendly relations between the US and Japan and to recognize the joint and allied nature which the new Japanese Self Defense Force would have with the United States armed forces. Some awards where discontinued after the Second World War, such as the Order of the Golden Kite.
Today Japanese decorations are only awarded to senior U.S. officers in the United States Pacific Command usually as "end-of-tour" decorations.
The Kuwait Liberation Medal was awarded to all U.S. service members who served in the theater of operations during the "Operation Desert Shield" and "Operation Desert Storm" phase of the Gulf War, between 2 August 1990 and 31 August 1993.
Lithuanian decorations are only rarely awarded to very senior U.S. officers. But most of those were awarded to the United States European Command Commander usually as "end-of-tour" decorations.
Luxembourg decorations were presented mainly during World War II. There have been some rare post-World War II presentations, but most of those were awarded to the United States European Command Commander usually as "end-of-tour" decorations.
The Order of the Gold Lion of the House of Nassau was founded by Grand Ducal decree on 31 March 1858 by King-Grand Duke William III. The honour was to be shared between both branches of the House of Nassau, under agreement between William, King of the Netherlands and Grand Duke of Luxembourg, and Adolphe, Duke of Nassau and future Grand Duke of Luxembourg.
Mexican decorations were mainly presented to very senior U.S. officers during World War II. There have been some rare post-World War II presentations, but these are mainly confined to the senior ranks of the U.S. military.
Montenegrin decorations were only rarely awarded to very senior U.S. officers during World War I.
The Order of Ouissam Alaouite was awarded mainly to United States military officers who had served on the Operation Torch planning staff during World War II. In the film ''Patton'', George C. Scott plays then Major General George S. Patton who is awarded the Grand Cross of the Order of Ouissam Alaouite at the start of the film. There have been some rare post-World War II presentations, but these are mainly confined to the senior ranks of the U.S. military.
The Dutch presented awards to U.S. service members mainly during World War II; the Honorary Sabre was very rarely awarded to very senior US officers. There have been some rare post-World War II presentations, but most of those were awarded to the United States European Command Commander usually as "end-of-tour" decorations.
The Order of the Gold Lion of the House of Nassau was founded by Grand Ducal decree on 31 March 1858 by King-Grand Duke William III. The honour was to be shared between both branches of the House of Nassau, under agreement between William, King of the Netherlands and Grand Duke of Luxembourg, and Adolphe, Duke of Nassau and future Grand Duke of Luxembourg.
Nicaraguan medals were only rarely awarded to very senior U.S. Marine and Naval officers, during the Nicaraguan Campaigns of 1912 & 1933.
Norwegian Order's were only rarely awarded to very senior U.S. officers, during World War I & World War II.
The ''War Cross'' is Norway's highest ranking decoration for gallantry. It was so rarely awarded to US military personnel, that only two U.S. officers have ever received it to date, CAPT Alfred Carini and LTC Keith N. Allen.
Pakistani decorations were only rarely awarded to very senior U.S. officers during World War II. There have been some rare post-World War II presentations, but these are mainly confined to the senior ranks of the U.S. military.
Paraguayan decorations were only rarely awarded to very senior U.S. officers during World War II.
Peruvian decorations were only rarely awarded to very senior U.S. officers during World War II. There have been some rare post-World War II presentations, but these are mainly confined to the senior ranks of the U.S. military.
In the 21st century United States military, the awarding of Peruvian decorations are still only rarely awarded to senior US officers, most of those senior US officers have been in the United States Southern Command & United States Southern Command Air Forces Commander usually as "end-of-tour" decorations.
The Philippine Medal of Valor, Distinguished Conduct Star and Philippine Legion of Honor were only rarely awarded to very senior U.S. officers, during World War II. The Philippine Defense Medal, Philippine Liberation Medal and Philippine Independence Medal were commonly awarded to soldiers and sailors of all ranks during World War II.
Polish decorations were first presented to U.S. senior military leaders in the aftermath of World War II as a measure of thanking the Allies for liberating Poland from Nazi Germany. In reality, however, the USSR engaged in the physical liberation of this nation with British and American troops having little to no part in actions on the Eastern Front other than  providing the USSR with billions of dollars of aid including hundreds of thousands of trucks.
When Poland fell behind the Iron Curtain, awards to U.S. service members all but ceased. In the 21st century, with Poland now a member in NATO, awards have resumed to U.S. personnel, but most of those were awarded to the United States European Command Commander usually as "end-of-tour" decorations. 
The Iraq Star has been awarded to U.S. officers who served with Polish forces in Iraq (MND-CS).The Afghanistan Star has been awarded to U.S. officers who served with Polish forces in Afghanistan (as part of the ISAF).
The Polish Army Medal has been awarded by Minister of National Defense ''to foreign nationals, military or civilian, who rendered merit in cooperation between the Polish Armed forces and the armed forces of other countries, in particular by supporting peacekeeping operations of the Polish Armed forces, rendered merit in the area of cooperation of international military units including Polish units, contributed to the growth of military potential of the Polish Armed Forces or to dissemination of Polish military history or traditions abroad.''
Portuguese Order of Aviz was awarded to very senior U.S. officers, during World War II. Most of the medals awarded now in the 21st century United States military, are to the United States European Command Commander usually as "end-of-tour" decorations.
South Korean decorations were first awarded to U.S. service members during the Korean War. 
The award of Korean medals in the 21st century is mainly confined to senior U.S. military leaders attached to either USFK or CNFK.
Romanian decorations were only rarely awarded to very senior U.S. officers, during World War I and World War II. There have been some rare post-World War II presentations, but these are mainly confined to the senior ranks of the U.S. military.
The Saudi Arabian Kuwait Liberation Medal was a little less commonly awarded to all U.S. service members, it was awarded only during the dates of 17 January 1991 and 28 February 1991 with in-theater service of the Gulf War.
Singaporean decorations are very rarely awarded to only senior U.S. officers, at the Joint Chiefs of Staff level.
Slovakian decorations are only rarely awarded to very senior U.S. officers. Most of those were awarded to the United States European Command Commander usually as "end-of-tour" decorations.
South Vietnamese decorations, also known as awards of the Republic of Vietnam, were first issued to United States service members beginning around 1964. The ''Military Merit Medal'' was awarded solely to enlisted U.S. service members who had been killed in battle, while the ''National Order'' and ''Distinguished Service Order'' were awarded only to senior U.S. military personnel. The ''Gallantry Cross'' and ''Campaign Medal'' were commonly awarded to all U.S. personnel and the remainder of the decorations were awarded with different frequency between the U.S. service branches and amongst officer/enlisted personnel.
Soviet decorations were only rarely awarded to very senior U.S. officers during World War II. Due to the different ribbon bar sizing between US and USSR decorations, Soviet ribbons were also impractical for daily wear on United States uniforms. In addition, by the 1950s at the start of the Cold War, most U.S. officers who had been awarded such medals during World War II simply chose to stop wearing them.
Spanish decorations were only rarely awarded to senior U.S. officers during World War II.
Swedish decorations were only rarely awarded to senior U.S. officers during World War II.
Thai decorations are very rarely awarded to only senior U.S. officers, at the Joint Chiefs of Staff level.
Tunisian decorations were only rarely awarded to senior U.S. officers during World War II.
UAE decorations were only rarely awarded to very senior U.S. officers during the Gulf War. Most of those senior U.S. officers in the United States Central Command as "end-of-tour" decorations.
Britain's highest award for gallantry the Victoria Cross has only been awarded to one U.S. military member, the U.S. Unknown Soldier was awarded the Victoria Cross, on November 11, 1921.
United Kingdom decorations were awarded extensively to U.S. service members during both the First World War and World War II. The orders of chivalry were reserved mainly for senior U.S. military leaders. The remaining decorations were awarded frequently amongst the entire enlisted and officer corps of the U.S. military. The Distinguished Flying Cross was a common decoration for those Americans attached to the Eagle Squadrons; when some of those personnel transferred back to the United States Army Air Forces after America entered the war, the British DFC became a fairly common sight on U.S. uniforms during that time period.
In the 21st century United States military, the awarding of British decorations to U.S. service members is still somewhat common, most often to officers assigned in England or other various capacities with NATO European based defense groups.
Uruguayean decorations are only rarely awarded to senior U.S. officers, most of those senior U.S. officers have been in the United States Southern Command & United States Southern Command Air Forces Commander usually as "end-of-tour" decorations.
Vatican awards are so rarely awarded to U.S. military personnel, that only the Order of St. Sylvester has been awarded once, to Major General William Joseph Donovan.
The Order of the White Eagle was only rarely awarded to very senior U.S. officers, during World War II.