The '''United States territorial courts''' are tribunals established in territories of the United States by the United States Congress, pursuant to its power under Article Four of the United States Constitution, the Territorial Clause.
Among the United States territorial courts still in existence are:
Their jurisdiction is similar to that of a United States district court, but despite the name similarity, they are '''not''' "United States district courts" (though they sometimes use that term).  A "United States district court", created under Article III of the U.S. Constitution, exists only in a United States federal judicial district, which is found only in the 50 states, the District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico.
The territorial courts themselves or article IV courts also assume the jurisdiction of a United States bankruptcy court in their respective territories; they do '''not''' have separate bankruptcy courts under their supervision, as do the article III U.S. district courts.
Article IV judges had not the authority to decide petitioners    appeals or be appointed to a United States Court of Appeals.
Though they could be considered "territorial courts" in a semantic sense (since their jurisdictions are not states), the United States District Court for the District of Columbia, the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit, and the United States District Court for the District of Puerto Rico are '''not''' U.S. territorial courts since D.C. and Puerto Rico are Article III federal judicial districts.
In addition, the District of Columbia has two other local courts, the Superior Court of the District of Columbia and the District of Columbia Court of Appeals, which hear cases involving D.C. local law only.  Though their jurisdiction is similar to state courts, like other federal courts they were created by Congress and their final appellate court is the Supreme Court of the United States.  Like the D.C. federal courts, they are "territorial courts" in a semantic sense, but are '''not''' truly U.S. territorial courts.  However, these courts are not Article III courts, as the judges serve only 15-year terms.
The  American legal system includes both state courts and federal courts.  Puerto Rico and the Northern Mariana Islands have their own courts which hear cases involving commonwealth law.  Though they could be called "territorial courts" by some (since a U.S. commonwealth is a type of territory), they are '''not''' U.S. territorial courts as they were created by the commonwealths themselves and not by Congress; except for being in commonwealths, they are the same as state courts.
In 1961 Congress legislated to provide Puerto Rico with a judicial state-federal
4,   3, of the Constitution, of making all needful rules and
The Article Three of the United States Constitution, establishes the judicial branch of the federal government.  This constitutional article was expressly extended to the United States District Court for  the District of Puerto Rico by the U.S. Congress through the federal law 89-571, 80 Stat. 764, and signed by the President Lyndon B. Johnson in 1966. From this moment on, judges appointed to serve on the Puerto Rico federal district court have been Article III judges appointed under the Constitution of the United States. In addition in 1984 one of the judges of the federal district court, Chief Judge Juan R. Torruella, a native of the island, was appointed to serve in the United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit with jurisdiction over Puerto Rico, Massachusetts,
Rhode Island, Maine, and New Hampshire.
In 1966 President Lyndon Johnson signed Public Law 89-571, 80 Stat. 764, which
Congress was not conducted pursuant to Article IV of the Constitution, the Territorial Clause,
From this moment on, judges appointed to serve on the Puerto Rico federal district court have
There does not appear any reason why the U.S. District Judges for
See 1966 U.S.C.C.A.N. 2786-90 (emphasis added); see also Examining Bd. of Engineers Architects
Eighteen (18) Article III United States District Judge have been appointed to sit in the District of Puerto Rico from 1966 to 2008.