Citron controlled several Orange County funds including the General Fund, the Investment Pool, and the treasury Commingled Pool.  He sent out the county's tax bills with catchy slogans, such as "Taxes paid on time never draw fines."  He won re-election seven times; in his last election victory, his opponent, John Moorlach, charged that his handsome gains were the result of risky betting.
As controller of the various Orange County funds, Citron had taken a highly leveraged position using repurchase agreements (repos) and floating rate notes (FRNs). The loss incurred by the usage of these financial instruments reached the amount of $2 billion and was caused by being too highly leveraged for rising federal interest rates. In other words, if federal interest rates had not risen, the massive trading position would have been a substantially profitable position; if interest rates did rise, the trading position would result in substantial losses.  In fact, rates rose.
The Orange County funds, managed by Citron, were worth $8 billion. However, Citron went out to the repo market and leveraged the County Pools to amounts ranging from 158% to over 292%. To obtain this degree of leverage, he used treasury bonds as collateral.  Profits of the fund were excessive for a period of time and Citron resorted to concealing the excess earnings.  He pleaded guilty to improperly transferring securities from the Orange County General Fund to the Orange County Treasury Commingled Pool.
The county's finances were not suspect until February 1994.  The Federal Reserve Bank began to raise US interest rates, causing many securities in Orange County's investment pools to fall in value.  As a result, dealers were requesting extra margin payments from Orange County.  These extra margin payments were funded in part by another bond issue made by Orange County; the size of that bond issue was $600 million. However, this fix proved to be only temporary.  In December 1994, Credit Suisse First Boston (CSFB) realized what was going on and blocked the "rolling over" of $1.25 billion in repos ("rollover" essentially means issuing another repo when the previous one ends, but, at the new prevailing interest rate). At that point Orange County was left with no recourse other than to file for bankruptcy.
Citron pled guilty to six felony counts and three special enhancements.  Charges also included filing a false and misleading financial summary to participants purchasing securities in the Orange County Treasury Investment Pool.
While in bankruptcy, every county program budget was cut, about 3,000 public employees were discharged, and all services were reduced. Citron was ordered to serve five years of supervised probation, and to perform 1000 hours of community service.  Citron did not serve any time in prison.