As a writer, artist or editor, Todd has worked at just about every comic book company, contributing to a variety of characters, from Superman and Spider-Man to licensed characters like Barbie and Looney Tunes. Newspaper comic strips Todd has written and drawn include ''Speed Racer'', ''Rat Fink'', and ''Molly the Model''. His illustrations have graced many CD covers, magazines, newspapers and ads.
Todd has also had a long career in film, video and animation. He storyboarded many award-winning commercials and he has produced animation for Walt Disney, Sesame Street, CBS, MTV, and Comcast, including an animated TV pilot featuring Christopher Walken.
Todd was raised in the state of Maine, where he cultivated a keen interest in all media. As a youth, he started drawing and writing comics, and a stint as editor of his camp newspaper foreshadowed his later career. In high school he drew advertisements and record covers for local clubs and bands and created the Stiv Bators logo still being used for the late Dead Boys' solo career.
As a teen, he moved to New York City and began creating the classic Back from the Grave garage punk album covers from Crypt Records. Many record labels created knock-offs, and Mort re-created the first cover for a new album from the Jon Spencer Blues Explosion. During this time he was bringing in a regular pay check as a telephone sales person for J & R Music World under his real name Michael dela Femina (delle femine).  Mort Todd is a combination of the Latin and German words for DEATH and was an apt choice considering the gothic material in which he dealt. 
Along with Daniel Clowes and Rick Altergott, Todd contributed stories and art to the seminal ''Psycho Comics''. He sold his first screenplay for a TV pilot called ''The Ultimates'' to a German production company while still a teenager. The pilot was produced, but never distributed, and stars a young Clowes as a teen rock 'n' roll superhero. Mort also wrote and penciled some stories for Clowes' ''Lloyd Llewellyn'' series from Fantagraphics. Around then he started freelancing for DC Comics, Marvel Comics, Kitchen Sink, Myron Fass, and many other smaller publishers.
Todd created ''Monsters Attack!'', an EC Comics/Warren Publishing hybrid comic magazine featuring many of the above artists, along with Alex Toth, Gene Colan and Gray Morrow. Horror comics were supplemented with articles about movies, and included one of the first interviews with director Sam Raimi. Todd wrote and drew stories for ''Cracked'' and ''Monsters Attack!'', and did the layouts for every cover.
Todd started his own imprint, '''AAA''', which published the first authorized collection of Bill Ward's pin-ups in ''W.O.W. (World of Ward)'' and planned a new ''Mr. A'' series by ''Spider-Man'' creator Steve Ditko, which was never published due to weak pre-sales. AAA also published a bilingual humor comic called ''Pepito'' with stories by ''Sabrina the Teenage Witch''-creator George Gladir.
In 1994, Todd launched a line of music comics called Marvel Music at Marvel Comics, working with such artists as Kiss, Rob Zombie, The Rolling Stones, KRS-One, and the estates of Elvis Presley and Bob Marley. Some of the talent working on these books included Neil Gaiman, Kyle Baker, Dan Barry, Severin, Colan, and Morrow.
While at Marvel, Todd also edited a series of pre-Comics Code horror and giant monster reprints (''Curse of the Weird'' and ''Monster Menace'') from Marvel's past, and developed the over-sized ''Comic Book'' by Ren & Stimpy-creator John Kricfalusi. He also got the Ayn Rand estate to agree to do an ''Atlas Shrugged'' graphic novel, but unfortunately could not get noted Objectivist Steve Ditko to sign on.
Recently, Todd was assistant director on the live action film ''Distraction'' and directed his first live action short, a gangster comedy called ''A Change of Heart''. Todd also has other film projects in the works, and is producer of ''The Diabolikal Super-Kriminal'' documentary, which had its world premiere in Italy at the Ravenna Nightmare Film Festival in November 2007, and its U.S. premiere at the San Diego Comic-Con in July, 2009.
In 2005, Todd re-joined the struggling ''Cracked'' magazine, this time as a contributing editor. But several months later, Todd parted company with the revamped magazine, complaining about low pay rates and work-for-hire issues of copyright.
Even more recently Todd has written and illustrated for the new ''Tales from the Crypt'' comic series, and completed new comic books featuring ''Lucy Hell, Devilgirl'' and ''Mr. Krime''. With his long-time collaborator Cliff Mott, Todd has created and directed three new animated cartoons for ''Playboy''.