His biggest hit is the song "Regulate" with Nate Dogg released in 1994.
In 1990, Warren G formed the group 213 (in reference to Long Beach, California's area code at the time - now it is 562) with Nate Dogg and Snoop Dogg, known as Snoop Doggy Dogg at the time. They were in search of a record deal and in 1992, Warren G introduced the group to his stepbrother Dr. Dre, who was impressed. However, only Snoop Dogg and eventually the late Nate Dogg were signed to Dre and Suge Knight's record label, Death Row Records. Warren G was left without a record deal and thus pursued a solo career. Although Death Row Records did not sign him, he did make some contributions to Dr. Dre's album ''The Chronic'', released in December 1992.
Warren G's second album was entitled ''Take a Look Over Your Shoulder (Reality)'' and was released in 1997. It featured two singles: The hit "I Shot the Sheriff" (US #20, UK#2), a gold single in the US; and "Smokin' Me Out" (US #35, UK#14). The album would be certified gold in America.
Together with Sissel Kyrkjebo, Warren G had a hit in several European countries in 1998 with Prince Igor on the concept album The Rapsody Overture. The album combined American rappers with European opera singers. Sissel sang an aria from Borodin's opera Prince Igor during the chorus, while Warren G rapped.
Warren G had signed to the independent label Restless Records by the release of his third album ''I Want It All (album)'' (1999). The album offered a jazz-rock fusion style and featured a host of guests including Mack 10, Snoop Dogg, Kurupt, and Eve. The first single, "I Want It All" (US #23), sampled the song "I Like It" by DeBarge. Second single "Game Don't Wait" failed to crack the US Hot 100, and peaked at #58 on the US R&B Chart. Also at this time, Warren G had decided to fully embraced his less-gangsta image at this time. The album was certified gold in the US.
For his fourth album, Warren G returned to major label distribution as Universal Records released his ''The Return of the Regulator'' in 2001. The album had one single released, "Lookin' at You", which did not crack the Hot 100, and peaked at #72 on the R&B singles chart. By 2004, Warren G, Snoop Dogg, and Nate Dogg had reunited their group 213 and released the album ''The Hard Way'' on TVT Records, which contained the single "Groupie Luv." The song did not break into the Hot 100, but it peaked at #48 on the R&B Chart. The album, however, peaked at #4 on the US Top 200 Album Chart, and was certified gold. 
The week of August 1 to August 6, 2005, was dedicated as the "Warren G Week" by the Mayor of Long Beach.
Warren G released a new album on October 11, 2005, called ''In the Mid-Nite Hour''. In December 2005, he signed with UniqueInc LTD (UK) for the UK & Eire, Craze Productions of London is doing the digital distribution and sales on Mobile and online and Hawino Records for the North America release. Warren G also appeared on ''Celebrity Fit Club''. In 2006, he produced the theme song for Ice Cube's TV show, ''Black. White.'' On March 22, Warren G made a song called "Mr. President," addressing the 2008 presidential candidate race and encouraged everyone to vote. He also appeared in ''Celebrity Rap Superstar'' as a mentor.
On June 7, 2008, Warren G was arrested for possession of marijuana with intent to sell. The car he was riding in was pulled over for running a red light in Los Angeles. He was released on $20,000 bail, all charges were dropped due to insufficient evidence.
Three of Warren G's albums have featured a song by 213: "Game Don't Wait" appeared on his third album ''I Want It All''; "Yo' Sassy Ways" appeared on his fourth album ''The Return of the Regulator;'' and "PYT" appeared on his fifth album ''In the Mid-Nite Hour''. ''The G-Files'' (released independently on TTL Records on September 29, 2009) failed to reach the Billboard Top 200 Album Chart, in addition to breaking the aforementioned streak. It had sold 3,000 copies in its first week.
In April of 2011 Warren G and Chris Kanik teamed up to promote a new natural male enhancement supplement called Affirm XL.  Although Warren G has admitted to not needing the supplement himself, he does believe that this product can be of help to many individuals