The '''National Mall''' is an open-area national park in downtown Washington, D.C., the capital of the United States.  The National Mall is a unit of the National Park Service (NPS), and is administered by the National Mall and Memorial Parks unit.  The term "National Mall" commonly includes areas that are officially part of West Potomac Park and Constitution Gardens to the west, and often is taken to refer to the entire area between the Lincoln Memorial and the United States Capitol, with the Washington Monument providing a division slightly west of the center.  The National Mall receives approximately 24 million visitors each year.
L'Enfant identified himself as "Peter Charles L'Enfant" during most of his life, while residing in the United States.  He wrote this name on his  (Washington, D.C.) and on other legal documents. However, during the early 1900's, a French ambassador to the U.S., Jean Jules Jusserand, popularized the use of L'Enfant's birth name, "Pierre Charles L'Enfant". (See: Bowling, Kenneth R (2002). ''Peter Charles L'Enfant: vision, honor, and male friendship in the early American Republic.'' George Washington University, Washington, D.C.) The National Park Service identifies L'Enfant as '''' and as '' '' on its website. The United States Code states in : "(a) In General.&mdash;The purposes of this chapter shall be carried out in the District of Columbia as nearly as may be practicable in harmony with the plan of Peter Charles L'Enfant." The National Mall occupies the site of this planned "grand avenue", which was never constructed. The Washington Monument stands near the planned site of its namesake's equestrian statue. Mathew Carey's 1802 map is reported to be the first to name the area as "The Mall."
During the early 1850s, architect and horticulturist Andrew Jackson Downing designed a landscape plan for the Mall. Over the next half century, federal agencies developed several naturalistic parks within the Mall in accordance with Downing's plan. In addition, railroad tracks crossed the Mall on 6th Street, west of the Capitol. Near the tracks, a large market (Central Market) and a railroad station rose on the north side of the Mall. Greenhouses belonging to the U.S. Botanic Garden appeared near the east end of the Mall.
 The plan differed from L   Enfant   s by replacing the  wide  "grand avenue" with a  wide vista containing a long and broad expanse of grass. Four rows of American elm (Ulmus americana) trees planted fifty feet apart between two paths or streets would line each side of the vista. Buildings housing cultural and educational institutions constructed in the Beaux-Arts style would line each outer path or street, on the opposite side of the path or street from the elms.  In subsequent years, the vision of the McMillan plan was generally followed with the planting of American elms and the layout of four boulevards down the Mall, two on either side of a wide lawn.
 Although the Navy intended the buildings to provide temporary quarters for the United States military during World War I, the reinforced concrete structures remained in place until 1970. Much of the buildings' area then became Constitution Gardens, which was dedicated in 1976.
On October 15, 1966, the National Mall was listed on the National Register of Historic Places. In 1981, the NPS prepared a National Register nomination form that documented the Mall's historical significance.  More recently, the 108th United States Congress enacted the Commemorative Works Clarification and Revision Act of 2003, which prohibits the siting of new commemorative works and visitor centers in a designated reserve area within the cross-axis of the Mall.
The official boundaries of the National Mall (National Mall proper) are Constitution and Pennsylvania Avenues on the north, 1st Street, NW on the east, Independence and Maryland Avenues on the south, and 14th Street, NW on the west, with the exception of the section of land bordered by Jefferson Drive on the north, Independence Avenue on the south, and by 12th and 14th Streets respectively on the east and west, which the U.S. Department of Agriculture administers and which contains the Jamie L. Whitten Building (U.S. Department of Agriculture Administration Building). However, people often consider areas outside of these boundaries to be part of the Mall.
The National Park Service states that the purposes of the National Mall are to:
The National Mall (proper) contains the following landmarks, museums and other features:
2. National Museum of American History
3. National Museum of Natural History
4. National Gallery of Art Sculpture Garden
5. West Building of the National Gallery of Art
6. East Building of the National Gallery of Art
8. Ulysses S. Grant Memorial
10. National Museum of the American Indian
11. National Air and Space Museum
12. Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden
13. Arts and Industries Building
14. Smithsonian Institution Building ("The Castle")
15. Freer Gallery of Art
16. Arthur M. Sackler Gallery
17. National Museum of African Art
Union Square
Capitol Reflecting Pool (see United States Capitol Complex)
Peace Monument
James A. Garfield Monument
Andrew Jackson Downing Memorial Urn
Smithsonian Carousel
With the exception of the National Gallery of Art, all of the museums on the National Mall (proper) are part of the Smithsonian Institution.  The Smithsonian maintains a number of gardens near its museums.  These gardens include:
Mary Livingston Ripley Garden
Enid A. Haupt Garden
Kathrine Dulin Folger Rose Garden
Butterfly Habitat Garden
Victory Garden at the National Museum of American History
Heirloom Garden at the National Museum of American History, Behring Center
Native Landscape at the National Museum of the American Indian
Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden
As popularly understood, the Mall also contains landmarks and features that are east of 1st Street, such as the United States Capitol and its grounds (#7 on image) and some that are south of Maryland Avenue, such as the United States Botanic Garden (#9 on image).  Many people also believe that the Mall contains landmarks and features that are west of 14th Street, NW, including the Washington Monument (#1 on image), the Monument's grounds and the following:
Constitution Gardens
Sylvan Theater
Lincoln Memorial
Lincoln Memorial Reflecting Pool
National World War II Memorial
Korean War Veterans Memorial
Vietnam Veterans Memorial
The Three Soldiers Statue
Vietnam Women's Memorial
District of Columbia War Memorial
John Ericsson National Memorial
John Paul Jones Memorial
Lock Keeper's House
Jefferson Pier
The Smithsonian Institution is planning to construct the National Museum of African American History and Culture on a  site between the grounds of the Washington Monument and the National Museum of American History.  The boundaries of the museum site are Constitution Avenue on the north, Madison Drive on the south, 14th Street, NW on the east, and 15th Street, NW on the west. Construction is expected to begin in 2012.
The population of American elm trees planted on the Mall and its surrounding areas in accordance with the McMillan Plan has remained intact for the past 70 years because of disease management and immediate tree replacement.  Dutch elm disease (DED) first appeared on the Mall during the 1950s and reached a peak in the 1970s. The NPS has used a number of methods to control this fungal epidemic, including sanitation,  pruning, injecting trees with fungicide, replanting with DED-resistant American elm cultivars and combatting the disease's local insect vector, the smaller European elm bark beetle (Scolytus multistriatus), by trapping and by spraying with insecticides. Soil compaction and root damage by crowds and construction projects also adversely affect the elms.
Other attractions within walking distance of the National Mall include the Library of Congress and the United States Supreme Court Building east of the Capitol; the White House (on a line directly north of the Washington Monument), the National Archives, the Old Post Office Pavilion, the National Theatre, Ford's Theatre, and the Albert Einstein Memorial to the north; the National Postal Museum and Union Station to the northeast; and the Jefferson Memorial, the Franklin Delano Roosevelt Memorial, the George Mason Memorial, the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum, and the Bureau of Engraving and Printing to the south.
The Martin Luther King, Jr. National Memorial, scheduled for completion in 2011, will be located on a  site south of the Mall on the northwest corner of the Tidal Basin.  The site is within the sightline between the Jefferson and Lincoln Memorials.
The National Mall, in combination with the other attractions in the Washington Metropolitan Area, makes the nation's capital city one of the most popular tourist destinations in the country.  However, it has uses other than as a tourist focal point.
The National Mall's status as a wide, open expanse at the heart of the capital makes it an attractive site for protests and rallies of all types.  One notable example is the 1963 March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom, a political rally for African American civil rights, at which Martin Luther King, Jr. gave his famous "I Have a Dream" speech.
  The next year, a committee of the 104th United States Congress provided no funds for NPS crowd counting activities in Washington, D.C. when it prepared legislation making 1997 appropriations for the U.S. Department of the Interior. As of 2009, the NPS had not provided any further official crowd estimates for Mall events.
On April 25, 2004, the March for Women's Lives filled the Mall.  On January 27, 2007, tens of thousands of protesters opposed to the Iraq War converged on the Mall (see: January 27, 2007 anti-war protest), drawing comparisons by participants to the Vietnam War protest.
During presidential inaugurations, people without official tickets gather at the National Mall.  Normally, the Mall between 7th and 14th Streets, NW is used as a staging ground for the parade.  On December 4, 2008, the Presidential Inaugural Committee (see United States presidential inauguration#Organizers) announced that "for the first time, the entire length of the National Mall will be opened to the public so that more people than ever before will be able to witness the swearing-in of the President from a vantage point in sight of the Capitol."  The Committee made this arrangement because of the massive attendance     projected to be as many as 2 million people     that it expected for the inauguration of Barack Obama on January 20, 2009. Despite the arrangement, a throng of people seeking access to the event climbed and then removed temporary protective fences around the Smithsonian's Mary Livingston Ripley Garden, six blocks from the site at which Obama took his inaugural oath. Hordes then trampled the garden's vegetation and elevated plant beds when entering and leaving the event. Others could not find a way to enter the Mall in time to view the ceremony.  More than a thousand people with tickets missed the event while being stranded in the I-395 Third Street Tunnel beneath the Mall after police directed them there (see Purple Tunnel of Doom). The Joint Congressional Committee on Inaugural Ceremonies subsequently announced that ticket holders that were not admitted would receive copies of the swearing-in invitation and program, photos of Obama and Vice President Joe Biden, and a color print of the ceremony.
The National Mall has long served as a spot for jogging, picnics, and light recreation for the Washington population.  The Smithsonian Carousel, located on the Mall in front of the Arts and Industry Building, is a popular attraction that operates seasonally.  The carousel was constructed in Gwynn Oak Park near Baltimore, Maryland, in 1947 and was moved to the Mall in 1975.
A number of large free events recur annually on the Mall. A kite festival, formerly named the "Smithsonian Kite Festival" and now named the "Blossom Kite Festival", usually takes place each year on the Washington Monument grounds during the last weekend of March (the first weekend of the National Cherry Blossom Festival).  The 2011 Blossom Kite Festival took place on Sunday, April 10, 2011. 
An Earth Day celebration takes place on the Mall each year around April 22. A week-long series of rallies, exhibits, observances and performances occurred on the Mall from April 17 to April 25, 2010 to commemorate Earth Day's 40th anniversary. The final day's events featured performances by Sting, Mavis Staples, The Roots, John Legend, Jimmy Cliff and others.  In 2011, the United States Environmental Protection Agency sponsored a two-day Earth Day event on the Mall that featured more than 40 interactive exhibits and activities. 
A four-day exhibition usually takes place each year on the Mall during Public Service Recognition Week (the first full week of May).  Government agencies participating in the event sponsor exhibits that display the works of public employees and that enable visitors to learn about government programs and initiatives, discuss employee benefits, and interact with agency representatives. However, the 2011 United States federal budget ( ), which was belatedly enacted on April 15, 2011, contained no funding for that year's event, forcing the event's cancellation. 
The National Symphony Orchestra presents each year its ''National Memorial Day Concert'' on the west lawn of the United States Capitol during the evening of the Sunday before Memorial Day (the last Monday of May). The National Gallery of Art hosts a ''Jazz in the Garden'' series each year in the museum's Sculpture Garden on Friday evenings from late May through mid-September. 
Components of the United States Navy Band, the United States Air Force Band, the United States Marine Band and the United States Army Band perform on the west steps of the United States Capitol on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Friday evenings, respectively, during June, July and August.  The Marine Band repeats each Wednesday Capitol performance on the following evening (Thursday) at the Sylvan Theater on the grounds of the Washington Monument. 
The Smithsonian Folklife Festival takes place on the Mall each year for two weeks around Independence Day (July 4). On that holiday, the ''A Capitol Fourth'' concert takes place in the late afternoon and early evening on the west lawn of the Capitol.  This and other Independence Day celebrations on and near the Mall end after sunset with a fireworks display between the Washington Monument and the Lincoln Memorial.
On Monday nights during July and August, the annual Screen on the Green movie festival takes place on the Mall between 4th and 7th Streets. The free classic movies are projected on large portable screens and typically draw crowds of thousands of people.
The National Symphony Orchestra presents each year its ''Labor Day Capitol Concert'' on the west lawn of the United States Capitol during the evening of the Sunday before Labor Day (the first Monday of September). The National Book Festival takes place on the Mall each year in late September or early October.
On Sunday, October 9, 1979, Pope John Paul II celebrated Mass on the National Mall during a visit to Washington. The celebration took place after an appellate court denied a motion for an injunction that atheists Madalyn Murray O'Hair and Jon Garth Murray had filed to prevent the event from occurring.
From 1980 through 1982, The Beach Boys and The Grass Roots performed Independence Day concerts on the Mall, attracting large crowds. However, in April 1983, James G. Watt, President Ronald Reagan's Secretary of the Interior, banned Independence Day concerts on the Mall by such groups.  Watt said that "rock bands" that had performed on the Mall on Independence Day in 1981 and 1982 had encouraged drug use and alcoholism and had attracted "the wrong element", who would mug individuals and families attending any similar events in the future. Watt then announced that Las Vegas crooner Wayne Newton, a friend and supporter of President Reagan and a contributor to Republican Party political campaigns, would perform at the Mall's 1983 Independence Day celebration. During the ensuing uproar, Rob Grill, lead singer of The Grass Roots, stated that he felt "highly insulted" by Watt's remarks, which he called "nothing but un-American". The Beach Boys stated that the Soviet Union, which had invited them to perform in Leningrad in 1978, "obviously .... did not feel that the group attracted the wrong element". Vice President George H. W. Bush said of The Beach Boys, "They're my friends and I like their music".  When Newton entered an Independence Day stage on the Mall on July 4, 1983, members of his audience booed. Watt apologized to The Beach Boys, First Lady Nancy Reagan apologized for Watt, and in 1984 The Beach Boys gave an Independence Day concert on the Mall to an audience of 750,000 people.
On September 4, 2003, Britney Spears, Mary J. Blige, Aretha Franklin, Aerosmith and others performed in a nationally-televised "NFL Kickoff Live from the National Mall Presented by Pepsi Vanilla" (see National Football League Kickoff game#Pre-game concerts). Preceded by a three-day National Football League "interactive Super Bowl theme park", the event had primarily commercial purposes, unlike earlier major activities on the Mall. Three weeks later, the United States Senate overwhelmingly passed legislation that was intended to limit displays of commercial sponsorship on the Mall. 
On July 7, 2007, one leg of Live Earth was held outdoors at the National Museum of the American Indian on the Mall.  Former Vice President Al Gore presented, and artists such as Garth Brooks and Trisha Yearwood performed.
  Reports of the event stated that the players who represented India were actually of Pakistani origin and were from Florida. A spokesman for the Embassy of India stated that neither the Embassy nor the government of India had any association with the event.  The event's website reportedly identified an Indian company, Kingfisher Beer, as a sponsor.  However, Kingfishers' chief executive denied that the company had sponsored the event.  Yashpal Singh, the president and chief executive of Mendocino Brewing Company, Kingfisher's parent company, reportedly stated, "We are not sponsoring this event and have informed the people managing this event of that, .... We have sent legal notices to this effect, and he keeps on advertising us as a sponsor. I don't know what world he's living in."
The inaugural USA Science and Engineering Festival Expo took place on the National Mall and surrounding areas on October 23 and 24, 2010.  More than 1,500 free interactive exhibits reportedly drew about 500,000 people to the event, which had over 75 stage shows.
Occurring once every two to three years on the Mall in the early fall from 2002 to 2009, the U.S. Department of Energy Solar Decathlon displayed solar-powered houses that competitive collegiate teams designed, constructed and operated. Igniting a controversy, the Department of Energy (DOE) decided to move the 2011 Decathlon off the Mall, claming that this would support an effort to protect, improve and restore the park. Federal officials stated that heavy equipment that had placed two-story houses on the Mall during earlier Decathlons had cracked walkways and killed grass to a greater extent than had most other Mall events. On February 4, 2011, a Washington Post editorial criticized attempts to have President Obama restore the event to the Mall.  Nevertheless, by February 12, 2011, at least thirteen  U.S. Senators had signed a letter asking the DOE to reconsider its decision.  On February 23, 2011, the DOE and the Department of the Interior announced that the 2011 Solar Decathlon would take place in West Potomac Park,   along Ohio Drive southeast of the Franklin Delano Roosevelt Memorial.
The Plan proposes a number of changes to the Mall.  The NPS would construct at the east end of the Mall a wide expanse of paved surface in Union Square to accommodate demonstrations and other events by reducing the size of the Capitol Reflecting Pool or by replacing the pool with a fountain or other small water feature.  Additional proposed changes include the replacement of the Sylvan Theater on the Washington Monument grounds with a facility containing offices, restaurants and restrooms.  
On December 2, 2010, the National Capital Planning Commission (NCPC) unanimously approved the final National Mall Plan at a public hearing. The NCPC's approval allows the NPS to move forward with implementation of the Plan's recommendations.  According to the NCPC, a possible next step is the development of a design competition for Union Square, the area connecting the National Mall with the U.S. Capitol complex.
The National Mall is accessible via Washington Metro, with the Smithsonian station located on the south side of the Mall, near the Smithsonian Institution Building between the Washington Monument and the United States Capitol. The Federal Triangle, Archives   Navy Memorial   Penn Quarter, and Union Station Metro stations are also located near the Mall, to the north. The L'Enfant Plaza, Federal Center Southwest and Capitol South Metro stations are located several blocks south of the Mall. Metrobus and the DC Circulator make scheduled stops around the Mall.
 From March to October, an NPS concessionaire rents out bicycles at the Thompson Boat Center, located near the intersection of Virginia Avenue, NW and Rock Creek and Potomac Parkway,  north of the Lincoln Memorial along the Potomac River-Rock Creek Trail.
General visitor parking is available along Ohio Drive, Southwest (SW), between the Lincoln and Thomas Jefferson Memorials. Bus parking is available primarily along Ohio Drive, SW, near the Lincoln and Thomas Jefferson Memorials and along Ohio Drive, SW, in East Potomac Park. There is limited handicapped parking at the Franklin Delano Roosevelt and World War II Memorials and near the Washington Monument and the Thomas Jefferson, Lincoln, Korean War Veterans, and Vietnam Veterans Memorials; otherwise, parking is extremely scarce in and near the Mall.