The story chronicles the travels of a group of people trying to survive in a world stricken by a zombie apocalypse. The series won the 2010 Eisner Award for Best Continuing Series at San Diego Comic-Con International. A television series was announced to be in production on August 11, 2009 and premiered on October 31, 2010 on AMC.
In the beginning of the series, Rick and partner Shane are caught in a gunfight against an escaped convict from a nearby jail. Rick is shot down and rendered comatose. Upon waking in a hospital, he discovers the undead are in the building and all over town. Rick returns home and shortly decides to go to Atlanta, where the survivors were told to await help, to find his wife Lori and son Carl. He discovers the city is over run with zombies and assisted by Glenn, a scavenger for a band of survivors. Following Glenn, Rick discovers Lori and Carl are okay along with Shane. However Shane is less than happy that his former partner has returned, having made romantic advances on Lori in Rick's absence. Eventually, this results in a confrontation that causes Rick's son Carl to shoot and mortally wound Shane, even as Shane was about to kill Rick instead.
After this, the group searches for a place to call home, settling in a couple of temporary camps, including a prison, which comes to the attention of an insane man calling himself the Governor. The Governor runs his local city, Woodbury, Georgia, like a dictator and tortures Rick (including cutting off his right hand) and other members of his group, culminating in an all-out assault on the prison. Several of the main characters die in the battle, including Lori, her new baby Judith (possibly fathered by Shane) and the Governor himself. After the prison is made insecure by the attack, Rick and the surviving members leave with others to Washington, D.C.
On the way to the capital, they find out that the man leading them, claiming to be in contact with DC scientists, is lying and find that DC is just as badly off as the other major cities. They are eventually recruited to stay in a secluded and secure township on the outskirts of Washington DC, called the "Alexandria Safe-Zone". Each person tries to find a semblance of real life, but Grimes doesn't trust the leader of the town, a former US Congressman named Douglas. Rick becomes the Constable, attempting to keep the peace in the town, but eventually kills a man that was hurting his own wife. The town becomes endangered after a skirmish with a group of bandits attracts a horde of zombies from DC, who quickly surround the outer walls. Rick is then named the new leader of Alexandria.
Later a weak section of the wall gives way, allowing zombies to pour in and force the surviving residents into holing up in their houses. Gabriel and Eugene are secluded in a church. Glenn, Andrea, Heath, and Spencer are stuck in a watch tower.  Abraham and Rosita narrowly escape being bitten, while Holly is knocked unconcious.  Unable to reach the other residents, Rick plans an escape with a small group while being holed up in a house. Maggie decides to stay behind with Sophia and Denise as she worries for Glenn.  Rick's escape attempt goes awry when two members of the group get killed and eaten. Douglas also gets devoured during this attempt and accidentally shoots Carl in the right eye. After saying her last goodbyes to Morgan, Michonne assists Rick outside clearing out zombies. While back at one of the safe houses, Denise answers the door to a desperate Rick who is holding a badly wounded Carl. Using the combined strength of all of those remaining in the community the survivors fend off the horde and Rick returns to Carl, whose condition is very dire. Following the attack, however, Rick concludes that the undead can be beaten if the survivors put their differences aside and work together. Rick mentions that this is the first time in a very long time that he has hope for the future.
The series has so far been collected into the following collections:
The trade paperbacks collect six issues each, but contain only the story and no cover art. Each paperback follows the custom of having a three-word title.
All hardcovers contain the material from the comics including the covers, and in some cases, bonus material. The trim size of the books are larger than the paperbacks. Each hardcover contains two story arcs from the series. There are signed versions of the books available, each of which are limited to 310 pieces.
Limited Edition Omnibus editions collect 24 issues in a slipcase with several extras. As limited edition versions, the first volume is autographed by Robert Kirkman and Charlie Adlard with 300 pieces available. The second volume has a standard release of 300 pieces, and there is also a deluxe limited edition (signed by Kirkman/Adlard) with 300 pieces available.
The Limited Edition retailer giveaway is a limited hardcover of the softcover Vol. 1, with black faux leather cover and red foil highlights.
These are 48 issue paperback editions.
The series received generally positive reviews. Max Brooks told Kirkman that he had read ''The Walking Dead'' and liked it. Eric Sunde of IGN comics said, "This series is one of the best monthly comics available". The series also received the Eisner Award for Best Continuing Series in 2010. 
The characters of the series received positive reviews as well. Rick Grimes, the series main protagonist, was ranked as IGN's 26th Greatest Comic Book Hero of All Time in 2011 stating that Robert Kirkman seemingly has an endless supply of ringers to run Rick through and as the body count rises, so do the chances of Rick losing more pieces of his soul.  Also Michonne, another one of the series' protagonists, was ranked as IGN's 86th Greatest Comic Book Hero of All Time in 2011 stating that it takes a special kind of person to eke out in the existance of ''The Walking Dead'' world and that Michonne is that kind of person.  The Governor, one of the series' antagonists, was ranked as IGN's 86th Greatest Comic Book Villain of All Time in 2009 describing him as the sadistic evil that ''The Road Warrior'' forgot.  ''Wizard'' magazine also ranked The Governor as the 131st greatest comic book character of all time. 
On August 12, 2009, it was announced that AMC had picked up the rights to produce a show based on the comic. Frank Darabont wrote, directed and serves as an executive producer. Charles H. Eglee is writer and executive producer. Robert Kirkman is writer and executive producer. A pilot episode was officially ordered on January 21, 2010 and filming began on May 15, 2010.
The series premiered on October 31, 2010 on AMC to highly positive reviews. On November 8, 2010, after broadcasting only two episodes, ''The Walking Dead'' was renewed for a second season, to consist of 13 episodes, which is scheduled to begin airing on October 17, 2011.
AMC released the animated film of the first part of Issue #1 of the comic with animation by Juice Films and voice acting from Phil LaMarr and art from Tony Moore.
On February 18, 2011, Telltale Games has announced their plans to create an episodic video game based on ''The Walking Dead''. It will debut in the fall of 2011. Kirkman has said that, unlike typical zombie games such as ''Left 4 Dead'', it will focus more on characterization and emotion than action.
Taverncraft has produced '''TWD''' pint glasses and steins, and has a license to release lighters for the series as well.
Robert Kirkman's ''The Walking Dead Board'' Game from Z-Man Games is scheduled for release late summer 2011. 
Action figures designed to resemble the characters as drawn in the comic book manufactured by McFarlane Toys for September 2011 release. In addition, action figures made to resemble actors from the TV series, including Rick Grimes, Daryl Dixon and a dismemberable Walker and Bitter, were created for release in November 2011.
In 1989, a four-issue limited series named ''The Walking Dead'' was published by Aircel Comics. It was followed by a one issue special in 1990. Other than the shared zombie theme, there is no direct relationship between the Aircel and Image titles.