Lithium primary batteries account for 28% of all primary battery sales in Japan but only 1% of all battery sales in Switzerland. In the UK and EU only 0.5% of all battery sales including secondary types are lithium primaries.
The term "lithium battery" refers to a family of different chemistries, comprising many types of cathodes and electrolytes. 
The most common type of lithium cell used in consumer applications uses metallic lithium as anode and manganese dioxide as cathode, with a salt of lithium dissolved in an organic solvent.
Another type of lithium cell having a large energy density is the '''lithium-thionyl chloride cell'''. Lithium-thionyl chloride batteries are generally not sold to the consumer market, and find more use in commercial/industrial applications, or are installed into devices where no consumer replacement is performed. In this cell, a liquid mixture of thionyl chloride (SOCl2) and lithium tetrachloroaluminate (LiAlCl4) acts as the electrolyte and cathode respectively.  A porous carbon material serves as a '''cathode current collector''' which receives electrons from the external circuit.   Lithium-thionyl chloride batteries are well suited to extremely low-current applications where long life is necessary, e.g. wireless alarm systems.
Addition of bromine monochloride can boost the voltage to 3.9 V and increase energy density. 
Addition of copper(II) oxide to the cathode material results in the Li-CSVO variant.
The liquid organic electrolyte is usually a solution of an ion-forming inorganic lithium compound in a mixture of a high-permittivity solvent (eg. propylene carbonate) and a low-viscosity solvent (eg. dimethoxyethane).
Lithium batteries find application in many long-life, critical devices, such as artificial pacemakers and other implantable electronic medical devices.  These devices use specialized lithium-iodide batteries designed to last 15 or more years. But for other, less critical applications such as in toys, the lithium battery may actually outlast the device. In such cases, an expensive lithium battery may not be cost-effective.
Lithium batteries can be used in place of ordinary alkaline cells in many devices, such as clocks and cameras. Although they are more costly, lithium cells will provide much longer life, thereby minimizing battery replacement.  However, attention must be given to the higher voltage developed by the lithium cells before using them as a drop-in replacement in devices that normally use ordinary zinc cells.  
Small lithium batteries are very commonly used in small, portable electronic devices, such as PDAs, watches, camcorders, digital cameras, thermometers, calculators, laptop BIOS, communication equipment and remote car locks. They are available in many shapes and sizes, with a common 
The heavy electrical demands of many of these devices make lithium batteries a particularly attractive option. 
In particular, lithium batteries can easily support the brief, heavy current demands of devices such as digital cameras, and they maintain a higher voltage for a longer period than alkaline cells. 
The computer industry's drive to increase battery capacity can test the limits of sensitive components such as the membrane separator, a polyethylene or polypropylene film that is only 20-25&nbsp;  m thick. The energy density of lithium batteries has more than doubled since they were introduced in 1991. When the battery is made to contain more material, the separator can undergo stress.
Button cell batteries are attractive to small children and often ingested. In the past 20 years, although there has not been an increase in the total number of button cell batteries ingested in a year, researchers have noted a 6.7-fold increase in the risk that an ingestion would result in a moderate or major complication.  The primary mechanism of injury with button battery ingestions is the generation of hydroxide ions at the anode. The hydroxide ions result in a chemical burn. Complications include oesophageal strictures, tracheo-oesophageal fistulas, vocal cord paralysis, aorto-oesophageal fistulas, and death. The reasons for the increasing frequency of devastating complications is complex. Public and physician awareness is poor, and many products using button batteries are not child-proofed. In fact, 61.8% of batteries that were ingested by young children were obtained from products. The majority of ingestions are not witnessed; presentations are non-specific; battery voltage has increased; the 20-to 25-mm button battery size are more likely to become lodged at the cricopharyngeal junction; and severe tissue damage can occur in 2 hours. The 3-V 20-mm lithium battery has been implicated in many of the complications from button battery ingestions by children less than 4 years of age.  Button batteries can also cause significant necrotic injury when stuck in the nose or ears.
Lithium batteries can provide extremely high currents and can discharge very rapidly when short-circuited. Although this is useful in applications where high currents are required, a too-rapid discharge of a lithium battery can result in overheating of the battery, rupture, and even explosion.  Lithium-thionyl chloride batteries are particularly susceptible to this type of discharge.  Consumer batteries usually incorporate over current or thermal protection or vents in order to prevent explosion.
Because of the above risks, shipping and carriage of lithium batteries is restricted in some situations, particularly transport of lithium batteries by air.
The United States Transportation Security Administration announced restrictions effective January 1, 2008 on lithium batteries in checked and carry-on luggage.  The rules forbid lithium batteries not installed in a device from checked luggage and restrict them in carry-on luggage by total lithium content.
Australia Post prohibited transport of lithium batteries in air mail during 2010.
Unused lithium batteries provide a convenient source of lithium metal for use as a reducing agent in methamphetamine labs.  Some jurisdictions have passed laws to restrict lithium battery sales or asked businesses to make voluntary restrictions in an attempt to help curb the creation of illegal meth labs.  In 2004 Wal-Mart stores were reported to limit the sale of disposable lithium batteries to three packages in Missouri and four packages in other states.  High demand for lithium batteries for use in power-hungry devices such as digital cameras conflicts with such restrictions in stores, but internet retailers are an alternate source.
UK regulations for the transport of lithium batteries were amended by the National Chemical Emergency Centre in 2009.
On 2009 fall, at least some postal administrations restricted airmail shipping (including EMS) of lithium batteries, lithium-ion batteries and products containing these (e.g. laptops, cell phones etc). Among these countries are Hong Kong, USA and Japan.