Wentz was born Peter Lewis Kingston Wentz III, in Wilmette, Illinois, a suburb of Chicago, Illinois. He is the son of Dale, a high school admissions counselor, and Pete Wentz II, an attorney., by Shannon Moore, 10/6/2009, , All Headline News, CBC News, Wednesday, November 5, 2008 His parents met while campaigning for now-Vice President Joe Biden in the 1970s.  Wentz attended New Trier High School and North Shore Country Day School, where he was an all-state soccer player. He considered pursuing a professional career in the sport, but decided that music was a more fulfilling choice; he says that he "always had a magical connection to the ball. But it didn't feel like an adventure. Music was more of a challenge and, in the end, felt more interesting." 
During his freshman year of high school, he began skipping school regularly and a school counselor convinced his parents to send him to boot camp to straighten him out.  During this time, Wentz began writing songs as a way to vent out his frustrations.  He began taking piano lessons afterwards, and adopted a straight edge lifestyle.  However, he now drinks occasionally.  After graduating from high school in 1997, he attended DePaul University where he studied political science, dropping out one quarter shy of graduation to focus on his music career. Wentz recalled in a ''Rolling Stone'' interview that his earliest musical memory was listening to The Foundations' song "Build Me Up Buttercup" in the back of his dad's car.
Wentz was primarily involved in the Chicago hardcore punk scene and was in several bands in the late 1990s. These included First Born, Extinction, Arma Angelus (alongside Tim McIlrath, frontman of Rise Against), Yellow Road Priest, and Racetraitor. He and Arma Angelus' bassist Joe Trohman founded the pop-punk band Fall Out Boy after Trohman introduced Pete to a musical acquaintance, Patrick Stump. Andy Hurley agreed to drum part-time, but only joined the band full-time later. In 2004, Arma Angelus, the band in which Wentz was the vocalist/screamer, played its last show.Norris, John (June 5, 2006).  MTV.com. Accessed 2006-07-18.
In 2002, Fall Out Boy released an EP called ''Fall Out Boy/Project Rocket Split EP''. Soon after, in 2003, the band released their mini-LP ''Fall Out Boy's Evening Out with Your Girlfriend'' on Uprising Records.Loftus, Johnny. . ''All Music Guide''. Accessed April 14, 2006. This album would later be digitally remastered and reissued after the band's third, successful full-album release ''From Under the Cork Tree'', on the major label Island/Def Jam. In 2003 the band released their first full-length album, Take This to Your Grave though Fueled By Ramen. 
Later in 2003, his bandmates signed with Island Records and in 2004 released an acoustic EP and DVD entitled, ''My Heart Will Always Be the B-Side to My Tongue'' through the new label.
After Fall Out Boy released the My Heart EP, they released their third album, ''From Under the Cork Tree'', in 2005.
Wentz wrote the lyrics to the first single, "Sugar, We're Goin Down" with his dad in Chicago; the song peaked at #8 on the Billboard Hot 100). The album has been since been certified 2x Platinum by RIAA. February 6, 2007, was the release date for Fall Out Boy's fourth album, ''Infinity On High''. The album received major charting success, debuting at #1 on the Billboard 200 with a sales total 260,000, spurred by the #2 charting lead single, "This Ain't a Scene, It's an Arms Race". Folie a Deux was released on December 13 2008, and debuted at #8 on the Billboard 200.
On November 20, 2009, the four band members announced they will be taking an indefinite hiatus, saying they were unsure of the future of the band. Wentz has said that his personal reason for taking a break is that he feels that his name and marriage to pop singer Ashlee Simpson had become a hindrance for the band. He added: "I think the world needs a little less Pete Wentz".
Pete Wentz currently has a new musical project called Black Cards. In July 2010 he released two snippets of songs, "Club Called Heaven" and "Beating in my Chest", on blackcardsmusic.com along with a message about the project. It has been revealed that Sam Hollander is producing.
Wentz has said that during the time he took off to spend with his family, he began to be inspired again by Jamaican reggae songs such as Culture's "Two Sevens Clash" and The Gladiators's "Warriors". Wentz then contacted producer Sam Hollander (Gym Class Heroes, Cobra Starship, Hey Monday) and discussed the idea with him to mash up ska, dance and reggae with 80s British rock and pop to create a new experimental sound. Wentz did not want to attempt to replace Patrick Stump (his bandmate in Fall Out Boy), and decided to go in a new direction taking a female vocalist instead - amateur singer Bebe Rexha.
In an interview with MTV.com on July 20, 2010, Wentz denied rumors that either ex-Chiodos member Craig Owens or Panic! at the Disco's Brendon Urie are part of the new project. Wentz later revealed the identity of the band's drummer as Spencer Peterson (of Saves the Day and formerly of Hidden in Plain View) and the band's guitarist as Nate Patterson (of The Receiving End of Sirens) through his blog.
Apart from his musical career, Wentz has been involved in various entrepreneurial ventures. Fall Out Boy bandmate Patrick Stump says of Wentz' endeavors: "It scares me sometimes, watching him. The two seconds you're not with that dude he's made 30 decisions that are going to affect  for the rest of the year."  Wentz's company, Clandestine Industries, distributes books, clothing, and other merchandise.  On August 2, 2007, fashion company DKNY joined a partnership with Clandestine Industries. Wentz himself has served as a model on the DKNY/Clandestine promo website.
In April 2007, Pete came out with his own signature Squier Precision Bass. It has a black body with a red shell pickguard and special graphics that include Wentz   s own red bat/heart design on the body, plus a black bat/diamond fingerboard inlay at the 12th fret. It also features Wentz   s signature on the back of the headstock. Wentz also owns a very similar custom Fender bass with a purple pickguard and bat/heart. In 2008 Fender gifted his son, Bronx Wentz, with a three quarter sized modified version of his guitar.
  In June 2007, Wentz celebrated the opening of Angels & Kings' second location, in Chicago.
On December 13, 2008, Wentz, along with Travis McCoy of Gym Class Heroes, created several pieces for an art exhibit at Gallery 1988 in Los Angeles, CA called "Without You, I'm Just Me."  The exhibit closed on December 24, 2008. Wentz appeared in the season 5 episode of '' '', "Point Of No Return", along with wife Ashlee. Wentz also hosted the Australia MTV VMAs on March 27, 2009.
Wentz collaborated with Mark Hoppus on the track "In Transit" on the ''Almost Alice'' soundtrack for the 2010 movie, ''Alice in Wonderland''.  He was also a judge for the 10th annual Independent Music Awards to support independent artists' careers.
 The title is a reference to a track on The Smiths' album ''The Queen Is Dead''.  Wentz explained that writing books serves as another mode of self-expression other than songwriting: "My inspiration and my ideas don't begin and end at the beginning and the ending of a song. It is too limiting."  It was reported that he was to publish another book entitled "Rainy Day Kids", but he recently confirmed via his Twitter account that this book will never come to fruition. In addition, Wentz is currently co-writing a book with William Beckett of The Academy Is....
In June 2009, it was announced Wentz is working on a five-issue comic book mini-series called ''Fall Out Toy Works'', to be published by Image Comics. The idea was conceived by Wentz and designer Darren Romanelli. The plot is loosely based on the Fall Out Boy song "Tiffany Blews" and focuses on "a mysterious toymaker, a cyborg gal named Tiffany and a kid in a bear suit that looks lifted from the cover of Fall Out Boy's ''Folie a Deux''". It is to be written by writer Brett Lewis, art from Sam Basri and the first issue will be released on September 2, 2009. In recent years, he has hosted the MTV program ''FNMTV''.
Wentz also has a film production company called Bartskull Films, which put out the DVD ''Release the Bats'', starring Wentz, his fellow bandmates, and several of his personal friends. Wentz has told several sources that he has all the footage to release a sequel, but editing and time constraints have kept him from doing so, and therefore the fate of the project is still up in the air.
Wentz was in a multi-episode arc of the show ''One Tree Hill'', appearing second at Tric (the local all-ages club in Tree Hill) with the entire band. The band first appeared in an episode "An Attempt to Tip the Scales", where they played their single "Dance, Dance" and went on to appear on Peyton and Ellie's (also One Tree Hill's album) tribute album, "Friends with Benefit" to support  cancer awareness. Pete made his first solo cameo in the episode "When It Isn't Like It Should Be" as the romantic interest of Peyton Sawyer, a senior at Tree Hill who had booked the band to play at Tric. The band continued to influence the One Tree Hill musical soundtrack, but the show no longer had a role for Wentz except in name and reference only.
He also made a brief cameo appearance in the show ''Californication''. On February 6, 2008, it was reported that Wentz was the leading candidate for writer Diablo Cody's follow-up film to ''Juno'', ''Jennifer's Body''. The role ended up being given to Adam Brody. On February 24, 2008, Wentz appeared in comedian Jimmy Kimmel's video "I'm Fucking Ben Affleck" as a chorus member (along with many other celebrities). The video was in response to one made by Kimmel's then girlfriend, Sarah Silverman, "I'm Fucking Matt Damon".
Most recently, Wentz directed a music video for the song "If It's Love" by American rock band Train.
Wentz has bipolar disorder, and has taken medication for this condition since he was 18. In February 2005, Wentz attempted suicide by taking an overdose of the anxiety medication Ativan, and as a result, spent a week in the hospital. Commenting on the event to a magazine, he said:
Wentz later spoke of his suicide attempt to the support site Halfofus.com and cites Jeff Buckley's version of the Leonard Cohen classic "Hallelujah" as a song that saved his life.
In March 2006, nude photos of Wentz were posted on the Internet to the LiveJournal celebrity gossip community Oh No They Didn't. The LiveJournal poster reported that she received the photos third-hand, and that Wentz originally sent the pictures to a woman with whom he allegedly had romantic interests. After the pictures spread across the Internet, Wentz posted a response on Fall Out Boy's website and blog asserting that the pictures were stolen from his T-Mobile Sidekick, and that after "feeling badly about this for about 24 hours, I am now ready to get back to laughing." The video for the single "This Ain't a Scene, It's an Arms Race" contains a scene that references the incident.
In a ''Rolling Stone'' photo shoot, Wentz and Ashlee Simpson took a picture together for the opening of Wentz's bar, Angels & Kings, and were labeled as a couple. Eventually the two began to acknowledge the relationship. On April 9, 2008, Simpson confirmed on an episode of TRL that she and Wentz were engaged.  On April 14, 2008, rumors surfaced that the couple was expecting a baby but soon after these rumors appeared, Pete emailed MTV News to say that these rumors resulted from a "witch hunt" and that Simpson was not pregnant.  Wentz married Simpson in Encino, California on May 17, 2008 at Simpson's parents' residence, where Joe Simpson officiated at the ceremony.
On May 28, 2008, Wentz and Simpson announced on Fall Out Boy's official website that they were expecting their first child. "While many have speculated about this, we wanted to wait until after the first trimester to officially confirm that we are expecting our first child. This is truly the most joyous time in our lives and we are excited to share the happy news and start our family." On November 20, 2008, Simpson gave birth to their son, Bronx Mowgli Wentz.  He said that the reason behind the name Bronx "comes back to a very specific story between me and my wife. But I would just like to say that it wasn't because either of us were trying to give our son street cred. At the end of the day, we like the name. Brooklyn gets a lot of love. It's time for the Bronx to get a little bit of love too."
 However, a later report said that Simpson believed the couple simply "married too young", with the source stating that "It was honestly a classic case of marrying young, having a kid young and growing apart over the years". Wentz reportedly did not want the divorce. 
Wentz is a supporter of Invisible Children, an organization dedicated helping the cause of displaced refugees in Uganda.  He and Fall Out Boy traveled to the nation, and filmed the music video for the song "I'm Like a Lawyer... (Me & You)" which featured a love story between child soldiers.  He explained that when he discovered the struggle of the children in Uganda, he "felt sad and I realized that I hadn   t felt sad for something outside of myself or one of my friends in a really long time."  Prior to the trip, he participated in an event organized by Invisible Children called "Displace Me", in which 67,000 activists throughout the United States slept in the streets in makeshift cardboard villages, hoping to raise awareness about those displaced by the Ugandan government. Wentz said of the experience, "I don't feel like we got anywhere near what it's actually like, but it was an attempt at empathy. So we got the shots  Africa, and we're going to go to Uganda in July. I'm pretty excited, but also a little nervous. I feel like I won't really understand it until I go there, and I think that there's no other chance for me to do that."
Wentz was also an outspoken critic of California's Proposition 8, and attended many anti-Prop 8 rallies.  He believes that voters were "tricked into" voting for the proposition. In a statement, he said that "Many people were intimidated on this issue due to the scary misleading communications on the other side.  I believe that this is, and has always been, a civil rights issue. We should not allow inequality like this in America." He was also vocal in his support of Barack Obama in the 2008 Presidential Election, designing a shirt promoting Obama's campaign through his clothing line, Clandestine Industries.
Along with Mary J. Blige and Billy Corgan, Wentz is a spokesperson for the Jed Foundation's Half of Us campaign, a program aimed at lowering the rate of teenage suicide.
Wentz is reported to be a vegetarian, and appeared on the ballot of Peta2's third annual "Sexiest Vegetarian" awards.