In 1988, Nick Warren began DJ-ing in Bristol, playing mainly reggae and indie music until house music became more popular in the UK.  By the early 1990s, Warren had become one of the more popular DJs in Bristol, performing regularly at the superclub Vision and DJ-ing for Massive Attack.
While working at a record store in 1994, Nick Warren met producer Jody Wisternoff and the two decided to work together.  Their first collaboration was on the track "Paradise is the Sound" which they released under the artist name ''Sub-Version 3''.  Warren describes Wisternoff as being the more technical of the two, while Warren states that he "bring most of the sounds into our projects" and an understanding of what music needs to be successful at dance clubs.  Their next two releases were issued under the name ''Echo'', with ''Way Out West'' being the name of their remix project.  The duo soon adopted the name for their act and signed a deal with Deconstruction Records.
In the mid 1990s, Nick Warren began a residency at Liverpool dance club Cream.  In 1997, Warren was given the opportunity to mix the second entry in the still young ''Global Underground'' series.  The album, '' '', is a live set of Warren's from Prague.  Although labelled as 003, this was actually only the second release on the ''Global Underground'' label.   This began a relationship with Global Underground which led to Warren creating seven additional mix albums for the series, including '' '', '' '', '' '', '' '', '' '', '' '',  and '' ''.  Warren stated that he feels comfortable working with Global Underground due to an underlying trust between himself and the label.
  As of early 2007, Way Out West had begun work on new material. Warren made this possible because he is now head A&R of Hope Recordings, the label in which their last single "Spaceman" was released in 2008.  In 2008, Global Underground released Warren's next compilation, '' ''.  Before this album, Warren had sold over 110,000 compilations in the Global Underground series.
For in-studio mixing, Nick Warren uses Ableton Live, ProTools, and some Logic Pro on a Macintosh.
Way Out West's fourth album, titled "We Love Machine," was released on October 6, 2009. The song "Only Love" featuring Jonathan Mendelsohn on vocals (the album marks their first collaboration with a male vocalist) was the first single off the album, released August 31, 2009. The deluxe edition of the album on Hope Recordings is available at their own .
Nick's recent ventures have been a remix of Grafiti's song ''Spooky Trains'', out now on Hope Recordings and a remix of General Midi's song 'Absinth'. Nick's next project is a release on Bedrock Recordings, titled ''In Search Of Silver''.
His love to Argentina:
Since he met for the very first time the argentinean crowds, he felt in love with them. Nick has played several times all around the country. But he didn't only said he loves the argentinean ones more than any other crowds in the world, in 2010 Nick made a tribute with his single 'Buenos Aires' which was released on may 2011 being the 100th release on his own label, Hope Recordings. Together with the tracks, he invited the argentinean fans to send him videos about Buenos Aires, and the result was a videoclip he released on his youtube channel a few days before the release.