The term '''''Reconquista''''' (in English, "reconquest") was popularized by contemporary Mexican writers Carlos Fuentes and Elena Poniatowska to describe the increased demographic and cultural presence of Mexicans in the Southwestern United States., Washington Post, April 16, 2006. by Samuel P. Huntington, Foreign Policy March/April 2004.
It was originally a jocular analogy to the Spanish Reconquista of Moorish Iberia, since the areas of greatest Mexican immigration and cultural diffusion are conterminous with northern New Spain and former Mexican territories.
The concept, but not the term "reconquista" itself, has been advanced by Chicano nationalists of the 1970s to describe plans for the creation of a mythical Aztec homeland called Aztlan.  Aztlan having been the northern origin of the Azteca people whom migrated south into Mexico and created Mexico, Tenochtitlan. The map used to illustrate the made up "Aztlan" has nothing at all to do with the "Aztec" (or "Mexica") tribe, which lived far south in what is now central Mexico, but it is rather, a map of land explored by the Spanish, and claimed by the Spanish, for Spain (New Spain) after their arrival from Europe, land which covers the homelands of a multitude of native tribes, which were many where related through the wide uto nahuatl family of languages. Many Chicanos point to this fact as a concrete connection between the southwestern section of the United States and the rest of Meso-America. The word properly applies to immigration inside territories taken from Mexico in the Texas Revolution and the Mexican-American War.
Other groups, like the National Will Organization, do not support the concept of the imagined "Aztlan", and identify themselves with the modern Hispanic Mexico, which they see as deprived of its northern territories after the Mexican War. Other groups that support the concept of Reconquista include the Mexica Movement and Voz de Aztlan.
In an interview with ''In Search of Aztlan'' on August 8, 1999, Jose Angel Gutierrez, a political science professor at the University of Texas at Arlington, stated that: 
He further stated that:
In an interview with the Star-Telegram in October 2000, Gutierrez stated that many recent Mexican immigrants "want to recreate all of Mexico and join all of Mexico into one...even if it's just demographically... They are going to have political sovereignty over the Southwest and many parts of the Midwest." 
In a videotape made by the Immigration Watchdog Web site (as cited in the ''Washington Post''), Gutierrez is quoted as saying:
However, in a subsequent interview, Gutierrez said there was "no viable" reconquista movement, and blamed interest in the issue on closed-border groups and "right-wing blogs"  
Felipe Gonzales, a professor at the University of New Mexico (UNM), who is director of UNM's Southwest Hispanic Research Institute, has stated that while there is a    certain homeland undercurrent    among New Mexico Hispanics, the "educated elites are going to have to pick up on this idea  and run with it and use it as a point of confrontation if it is to succeed.    Juan Jose Pena, who heads the Hispano Round Table (a Hispanic advocacy group in New Mexico) believes that Mexican Americans currently lack the political consciousness to form a separate nation, stating that    Right now, there's no movement capable of undertaking it.    
Illegal immigration into the southwest states is sometimes viewed as a form of reconquista, in light of the fact that Texas statehood was preceded by an influx of U.S. settlers into that Mexican province until United States citizens outnumbered Mexicans 10-1 and were able to take over governance of the area. The theory is that the reverse will happen as Mexicans eventually become so numerous in that region that they can wield substantial influence, including political power. Even if not intended, some analysts say the significant demographic shift in the American Southwest may result in "a de facto reconquista." A 2002 Zogby poll reported revealed that 58% of Mexicans believe that the southwestern US belongs to Mexico.
Harvard University professor Samuel P. Huntington stated in 2004 that:
Demographically, socially and culturally, the reconquista of the Southwest United States by Mexico is well under way. No other immigrant group in U.S. history has asserted or could assert a historical claim to U.S. territory. Mexicans and Mexican-Americans can and do make that claim."
Neo-liberal political writer Mickey Kaus has remarked,
Other Hispanic rights leaders insist that Reconquista is nothing more than a fringe element. Nativo Lopez, president of the Mexican American Political Association in Los Angeles, when asked about the concept of Reconquista by a reporter, angerly responded "I can't believe you're bothering me with questions about this. You're not serious. I can't believe you're bothering with such a minuscule, fringe element that has no resonance with this populous."
Reconquista sentiments are often jocularly referred to by media targeted to Mexicans, including a recent Absolut Vodka ad that generated significant controversy in the United States for its printing of preMexican-American war Mexico.
According to the United States Census Bureau, as of 2009 and 2010, six out of seven U.S. states with highest densities of people of Hispanic origin were in the Southwestern United States, including the 7 modern-day states that used to be part of Mexico - California (38%), Arizona (30%), New Mexico (46%), Texas (38%), Nevada (27%), Colorado (21%), and Utah (13%) (substantial Hispanic populations also exist in the parts of Oklahoma, Kansas, and Wyoming that were once part of Mexico). 31% of Hispanic residents of the six states (CA, AZ, NM, TX, NV, CO) were born in Mexico, the majority of the remaining 69% being second- and higher-generation Americans of Hispanic ancestry. The four southwestern border states had only 23% of population of the country, but were home to 65% of all first-generation Mexican immigrants.