A '''mile''' is a unit of length in a number of different systems. In contemporary English, a ''mile'' most commonly refers to the '''statute mile''' of 5,280 feet (1,760 yards, or 1,609.344 metres) or the '''U.S. survey mile''' of 5,280 U.S. survey feet (1609.3472&nbsp;m).  It is about a third of the old measurement, the league. A ''mile'' sometimes refers to the '''nautical mile''' () used for aerial and navigation purposes.
The use of the mile as a unit of measurement is now largely confined to the United States and the United Kingdom. There are many other historical miles and similar units in other systems translated as miles in English, varying between one and fifteen kilometres. 
There have been several abbreviations for mile (with and without trailing period): mi, ml, m, M. In the United States, the National Institute of Standards and Technology now uses and recommends mi,
Tina Butcher et al. ed. (2007) Appendix C, p. C-13. but in everyday usage (at least in the United States and in the United Kingdom), units such as miles per hour and miles per gallon are almost always abbreviated as mph or mpg (rather than mi/h or mi/gal).
The word ''mile'' originally derives from the Old English word ''mil'' which in turn was ultimately derived from the Latin word millia meaning "thousand".
The '''statute mile''' was defined by an English Act of Parliament (hence the name) in 1592, during the reign of Queen Elizabeth I as being 1,760&nbsp;yards (5,280&nbsp;feet, about 1609&nbsp;metres).Klein (1974, corrected 1988), p.&nbsp;69. For surveying, the statute mile is divided into eight furlongs; each furlong is ten chains; each chain is four rods (also known as ''poles'' or ''perches''); and each rod is 25&nbsp;links. This makes the rod equal to 51/2&nbsp;yards or 161/2&nbsp;feet in both Imperial and U.S. usage.
The exact conversion of the mile to SI units depends on which definition of the yard is used. Different English-speaking countries maintained independent physical standards for the yard that were found to differ by small, but measurable, amounts and even to slowly shorten in length. The United States redefined the U.S. yard in 1893, but this resulted in U.S. and Imperial measures of distance having very slightly different values. The difference was resolved in 1959 with the definition of the international yard in terms of the metre by Australia, Canada, New Zealand, South Africa, the United Kingdom, and the United States. The "international mile" of 1,760&nbsp;international yards is exactly 1,609.344&nbsp;metres.
 and the old Imperial value of the yard was used in converting measurements to metric values in India in a 1976 Act of the Indian Parliament. However, The current National Topographic Database of the Survey of India is based on the metric WGS-84 datum, which is also used by the Global Positioning System.
For most applications, the difference between the two definitions is insignificant     one international foot is exactly 0.999998 of a U.S. survey foot. However, a difference of about 3.2&nbsp;millimetres (1/8&nbsp;inch) per mile affects the definition of the State Plane Coordinate Systems (SPCSs), which can stretch over hundreds of miles.. When international measure was introduced in the English-speaking countries, the basic geodetic datum in North America was the North American Datum of 1927 (NAD27), which had been constructed by triangulation based on the definition of the foot in the Mendenhall Order of 1893, that is 1&nbsp;foot&nbsp;=&nbsp;&nbsp;metres. This definition was retained for data derived from NAD27, but renamed the '''U.S. survey foot''' to distinguish it from the international foot.
State legislation in the U.S. is important for determining which conversion factor from the metric datum is to be used for land surveying and real estate transactions, even though the difference (2&nbsp;ppm) is hardly significant, given the precision of normal surveying measurements over short distances (usually much less than a mile). Twenty-four states have legislated that surveying measures be based on the U.S. survey foot, eight have legislated that they be based on the international foot, and eighteen have not specified which conversion factor to use.
The statute of Elizabeth&nbsp;I was not the only definition of the mile in Britain and Ireland. Perhaps the earliest tables of English linear measures, Arnold's ''Customs of London'' (c.&nbsp;1500) indicates a mile consisted of 8&nbsp;furlongs, each of 625&nbsp;feet, for a total of 5,000&nbsp;feet (1,666   &nbsp;yards, 0.947&nbsp;statute miles, 1524 metres): this is the same definition of the mile in terms of feet as used by the Romans. The "old English" mile of medieval and early modern times appears to have measured approximately 1.3 statute miles (1.9&nbsp;km).
 Again, the difference arose from a different length of the rod in Ireland (usually called the ''perch'' locally): 21&nbsp;feet as opposed to 161/2&nbsp;feet in England.  
From 1774, through the 1801 union with Britain, until the 1820s, the grand juries of 25 Irish counties commissioned surveyed maps at scales of one or two inches per Irish mile.
In 1894, Alfred Austin complained after visiting Ireland that "the Irish mile is a fine source of confusion when distances are computed. In one county a mile means a statute mile, in another it means an Irish mile". When the Oxford English Dictionary definition of "mile" was published in 1906, it described the Irish mile as "still in rustic use". A 1902 guide says regarding milestones, "Counties Dublin, Waterford, Cork, Antrim, Down, and 
Armagh use English, but Donegal Irish Miles; the other counties either have both, or only one or two roads have Irish". Variation in signage persisted till the publication of standardised road traffic regulations by the Irish Free State in 1926. In 1937, a man prosecuted for driving outside the 15-mile limit of his licence offered the unsuccessful defence that, since the state was independent, the limit ought to use Irish miles, "just as no one would ever think of selling land other than as Irish acres". A 1965 proposal by two TDs to replace statute miles with Irish miles in a clause of the Road Transport Act was rejected. The term is now obsolete as a specific measure, though an "Irish mile" colloquially is a long but vague distance akin to a "country mile".
The term metric mile is used in sports such as track and field athletics and speed skating to denote a distance of 1500 metres (about 4921&nbsp;ft). In United States high school competition, the term is sometimes used for a race of 1600&nbsp;metres (about 5249&nbsp;ft).
The '''nautical mile''' was originally defined as one minute of arc along a meridian arc of the Earth. It is a convenient reference, since it is fairly constant at all latitudes, in contrast with degrees of longitude which vary from 60&nbsp;NM at the equator to zero at the poles.
Navigators use dividers to step off the distance between two points on the navigational chart, then place the open dividers against the minutes-of-latitude scale at the edge of the chart, and read off the distance in nautical miles. Since it is now known that the Earth is not perfectly spherical but an oblate spheroid, the length derived from this method varies slightly from the equator to the poles. For instance, using the WGS84 Ellipsoid, the commonly accepted Earth model for many purposes today, one minute of latitude at the WGS84 equator is 6,087 feet and at the poles is 6,067 feet. On average, it is about 6,076&nbsp;feet (about 1852&nbsp;metres or 1.15&nbsp;statute miles).
In the United States, the nautical mile was defined in the nineteenth century as 6,080.2&nbsp;feet (1,853.249&nbsp;m), whereas in the United Kingdom, the '''Admiralty nautical mile''' was defined as 6,080&nbsp;feet (1,853.184&nbsp;m) and was approximately one minute of latitude in the latitudes of the south of the UK. Other nations had different definitions of the nautical mile, but it is now internationally defined to be exactly 1,852&nbsp;metres.
The nautical mile per hour is known as the knot. Nautical miles and knots are almost universally used for aeronautical and maritime navigation, because of their relationship with degrees and minutes of latitude and the convenience of using the latitude scale on a map for distance measuring.
The data mile is used in radar-related subjects and is equal to 6,000 feet (1.8288 kilometres). The radar mile is a unit of time (in the same way that the light year is a unit of distance), equal to the time required for a radar pulse to travel a distance of two miles (one mile each way). Thus, the radar statute mile is 10.8&nbsp;  s and the radar nautical mile is 12.4&nbsp;  s.
The Romans were first to use a unit of long distance '''' (literally "a thousand paces" in Latin, each pace being two steps). It denoted a distance of 1,000&nbsp;paces or 5,000&nbsp;Roman feet, and is estimated to be about 1,479&nbsp;metres (1,617&nbsp;yards). This unit is now known as the ''' '''. The Roman mile spread throughout the Roman Empire, often with modifications to fit local systems of measurements.
Cities in the continental United States often have streets laid out by miles. Detroit, Indianapolis, Chicago, Phoenix, Philadelphia, Las Vegas, Los Angeles, and Miami, and Stone Harbor, New Jersey, are several examples. Typically the largest streets are about a mile apart, with others at half-mile and quarter-mile intervals. Also in the Manhattan borough of New York City, "streets" are almost exactly 20 per mile, while the major numbered "avenues" are about six per mile.
Even in English-speaking countries that have moved from the Imperial to the metric system (for example, Australia and New Zealand), the mile is still used in a variety of idioms. These include: