As an Assistant District Attorney in Orange County, Spitzer handled criminal matters and supervised line prosecutors.  He has prosecuted felonies including attempted murder, attempted rape, kidnapping, robbery, extortion, and reckless driving causing serious bodily injury.  Spitzer has tried nearly 100 jury trials to verdict.  
Spitzer joined the Orange County DA   s Office in 1990 and served until 1997. During this period Spitzer developed his interest in victims    rights.  Mothers Against Drunk Driving honored Spitzer with its Outstanding Prosecutor Award (1995), and he was voted Outstanding Prosecutor by the Orange County DA   s office (1994).
Spitzer was born in Whittier, California and raised in nearby Montebello, 10 miles east of downtown Los Angeles.  He excelled in academics, student government, music and theatre, and graduated from Schurr High School in 1978. On November 7, 2008, Spitzer was inducted into the Schurr High School Hall of Fame for his achievements in law and politics.
In 1984-85, Spitzer worked as an English teacher at Theodore Roosevelt High School in the Los Angeles Unified School District.
In 2002, Spitzer was elected to the State Assembly from the 71st District, followed by two additional two-year terms. He served on the Assembly Judiciary and Public Safety Committees.  He was the only Republican to serve as Chairman of an Assembly standing policy committee   the Select Committee on Prison Construction and Operations.  Spitzer also served as Republican Whip, the lead policy spokesman for his Caucus. 
On August 24, 2004, Governor Schwarzenegger signed legislation, AB 488, authored by Spitzer and Nicole Parra (D-Hanford), which put  on the Internet.  Spitzer also was appointed by the Governor to serve as Co-Chair the state   s first High-Risk Sex Offender and Sexually Violent Predator Task Force.  The recommendations from that policy work resulted in AB 1015 (Chu and Spitzer), which created the Sex Offender Management Board, the first sex offender oversight board in California.
In 2008, Spitzer served as statewide Chair of the campaign to pass Marsy   s Law, a ballot initiative that amended the California Constitution to enact the California Victims    Bill of Rights.
In March 2011, Spitzer announced his candidacy for the 2012 Orange County Board of Supervisors Third District seat.
Spitzer has received numerous awards and recognition.  In 2000, the Orange County Republican Party named him Local Elected Official of the Year.   In 2004, the California Coalition Against Sexual Assault named him its    Legislator of the Year,    citing his extensive work with Megan   s Law and his dedication to protecting victims of sexual assault.   In 2006, the California State Sheriff   s Association named Spitzer    Outstanding Assembly Member    for his service on the Assembly Public Safety Committee.  In 2005, Crime Victims United of California named him    Legislator of the Year   .  
In 2005, the Los Angeles County Deputy District Attorney   s Association presented Spitzer with a Special Distinction Award for his efforts to defeat Proposition 66.   In addition, the California Narcotics Officers Association named him Legislator of the Year in 2006 for his support of crackdowns on methamphetamine use and production.
Spitzer serves as an Honorary Board Member of the Doris Tate Crime Victims Bureau (Renamed Crime Victims Action Alliance) and as a Board Member of Crime Survivors, Inc., and the Orange County   s Trauma Intervention Program (TIP).  He also served as a member of the Orange County Bar Association Administration of Justice Committee.  He is a Board Member of the Orange County Council Boy Scouts of America.  In 2003, he received that organization   s Visionary Award, given annually to a person who exemplifies the attributes of the Scout Oath and Law, and who has demonstrated leadership and philanthropy in the Hispanic and Latino communities. 
From 1990 to 2000 , Spitzer served as a Level 1 Line Reserve Police Officer  in the Los Angeles Police Department   s Hollenbeck Division in East Los Angeles, where he founded   the Driving Under the Influence Task Force.  In 1999, Assemblyman Spitzer was named Reserve Officer of the Year for his Division and for the LAPD Central Bureau.