In 1991, Matt Berninger and Scott Devendorf met while attending the University of Cincinnati where they also met Mike Brewer, Casey Reas and Jeff Salem, to make the lo-fi garage band Nancy (which was named after Matt's mother), aspiring to sound like Pavement. The band was together for five years, but only released one album, titled ''3429 Ruther'', on Wife Records. The group slowly dissolved when Matt, Scott, Jeff and Casey moved to Brooklyn.
Bryan, Bryce and Aaron were childhood friends who played in several bands together over the years. When their last effort Project Nim broke up in 1998, they joined Matt and Scott in Brooklyn via the Devendorf relationship.
When the band was formed in 1999, it was called The National (although the domain name of the band's website is americanmary.com because, according to Matt Berninger in an interview with ''Better Propaganda'', "t's a song off our first record. We never thought of changing the (website) name, although we should have.") Several of the members continued to work day jobs throughout the early years, including being involved in New York's dot-com boom in the late 1990s.
Their first album ''The National'' was eventually released in 2001 on Brassland Records, a label founded by band members Aaron and Bryce Dessner, along with their friend Alec Hanley Bemis. When reviewing the album, Jason MacNeil of No Depression (magazine) wrote, "...The National has created nearly a dozen picture-perfect Americana bar-soaked gems with its debut album. From the opening notes of "Beautiful Head", the delicate line between polished roots-oriented pop and alt-country has rarely been walked so deliberately with the payoff so favorable." 
The National's second album ''Sad Songs for Dirty Lovers'', released in 2003, was the band's first collaboration with record producers, Paul Heck and Peter Katis, who would later also produce the band's critically acclaimed albums, ''Alligator'' and ''Boxer''. After the release of the album, renowned DJ Bernard Lenoir invited them to perform on his Black Sessions twice on France Inter. Publications such as ''Uncut'' and the ''Chicago Tribune'' named it an album of the year.
In 2004, they released the ''Cherry Tree'' EP which included live favorite "About Today," as well as "All the Wine," which would appear on their next record. The release of the EP garnered further success and landed them on a successful tour with The Walkmen.
Also in 2004, the band quit their day jobs and signed to a new label, Beggars Banquet Records, because the process of running their own label was becoming "too complicated."
The album allowed the band increased exposure. ''NME'' and Pitchfork Media ranked ''Alligator'' as a top album of the 2000s. 
Their fourth album, ''Boxer'', was released on May 22, 2007, and also received widespread critical praise. The album features contributions from various guest artists, including Sufjan Stevens and Doveman (a.k.a. Thomas Bartlett). It was voted as the #2 best album of the year by Stereogum.com and the #1 album of the year by ''Paste Magazine''. The song "Slow Show" from ''Boxer'' was featured on the NBC series ''Chuck'' and ''Southland'', as well as on The CW's ''One Tree Hill'' in its fifth season. The track "Fake Empire" was featured the Season 2 Premiere of the HBO Series Hung. The song "Start a War" was featured on the international science fiction series ''Defying Gravity'', ABC's ''Brothers and Sisters'', 
FOX's ''House'', NBC's ''Parenthood'', and NBC's ''Friday Night Lights (TV series)''.
On September 26, 2007, the band performed "Apartment Story" on ''The Late Late Show with Craig Ferguson''.
In the summer of 2008, along with Modest Mouse, they opened for R.E.M. on the promotional tour for the R.E.M. album ''Accelerate''. That summer they also played many festivals in North America and Europe, including Coachella, Roskilde, Sasquatch, Glastonbury, Haldern Pop, Rock Werchter, Optimus Alive!, Oxegen, Benicassim, Lowlands, O2 Wireless, T in the Park, All Points West, and Lollapalooza.
In May 2008, the band released their first feature-length documentary film entitled ''A Skin, a Night'' on DVD. The film, directed by filmmaker Vincent Moon, documents the lives of the band surrounding the recording of ''Boxer'' and just before a show at the London venue Koko. Vincent Moon's film was widely disregarded by fans who had hoped the film would feature the band and their music more directly, rather than artful attempts. Along with the release of the DVD was a CD collection of B-sides and rarities titled ''The Virginia EP''.
The National's collaboration with Vincent Moon began long before the filming of ''A Skin, a Night''. Vincent Moon discovered the band after the release of their first album and became friends with its members after a show at Paris's La Guinguette Pirate. Soon after this meeting, Moon filmed his first music videos ever, which were for The National's songs "Daughters of the Soho Riots" and "Lit Up". Moon's photography also appears on the cover for ''Alligator''.
On December 17, 2008, the band released a letter to members of their mailing list letting it be known that they were in the beginning stages of recording a new album that could be expected in late 2009 or early 2010. During a Pitchfork interview in late March 2009, Aaron Dessner said the album was still unnamed, though lightheartedly suggested it would start with a "C" in the tradition of their previous two albums. During this time, tracks that were performed live prior to the new album were "Wake Up Your Saints", "England", "Bloodbuzz Ohio", "Vanderlylle Cry Baby" (later retitled "Vanderlyle Crybaby Geeks"), "Terrible Love", "Conversation 16", "You and Your Sister" (later retitled "Lemonworld"), "Sorrow", "Anyone's Ghost", "Believe Me" (previously called "The Blue Sky" and "A Thousand Black Cities"), and "Karamazov" which was retitled on the album as "Runaway".
On February 17, 2009, a compilation album titled ''Dark Was the Night'' was produced by Aaron and Bryce Dessner and released by 4AD (the band's new label after Beggars Banquet Records merged into 4AD). The two-disc, 31-track compilation was released for the benefit of the Red Hot Organization, and featured a new song by The National and Nico Muhly titled "So Far Around the Bend." In the same year, The National collaborated with St. Vincent to contribute a cover of Crooked Fingers' "Sleep All Summer" to the Merge Records compilation ''Score! 20 Years of Merge Records: The Covers!''. On May 6, 2009, The National performed "So Far Around the Bend" on ''Late Night with Jimmy Fallon''.
The National contributed a track to '' '' in September 2009, an album in support of the former Polaris frontman, who lost his wife. They covered the Polaris track "Ashamed of the Story I Told", from their album ''Music from The Adventures of Pete & Pete''.
On January 25, 2010, the band released a letter to members of their mailing list stating that their new album, later announced as ''High Violet'', would be released on May 11, 2010 in the US, and a tour supporting the new album would take place in Spring/Summer 2010.http://highviolet.com/ On March 10, 2010, the band performed "Terrible Love", the lead track from ''High Violet'', on ''Late Night With Jimmy Fallon''. On March 24, the band released "Bloodbuzz Ohio", the first single from the album, for free download at the official ''High Violet'' website.http://highviolet.com/
 On May 13, 2010, the band  appeared on the ''Late Show with David Letterman'', performing "Afraid of Everyone".http://www.cbs.com/late_night/late_show/video/?pid=_kL2O5tXB4_1Y9Jki5grV6DztCqaO0aY&vs=Default&play=true/ On June 16, 2010, The National performed at Radio City Music Hall.  On July 7, 2010, the band debuted a new, unreleased track titled "You Were a Kindness" at the Tivoli in the Netherlands.
On October 25, 2010, ''High Violet'' was awarded a Q award for Best Album.  The award was presented by Bernard Sumner of Joy Division and New Order.
On January 14, 2011, The National were nominated for a Brit Award for International Breakthrough Act alongside Justin Bieber, Bruno Mars among others. 
On February 1, 2011 ''High Violet'' were nominated for an MTV Performing Woodie.
On March 9, 2011 they released a music video for Conversation 16 featuring John Slattery and Kristen Schaal with James Urbaniak.
On March 11, 2011 Valve Corporation announced the band would be contributing an original song, titled "Exile Vilify", for the video game Portal 2.
On March 14 it was announced that they will be headlining Latitude Festival 2011, along with Suede and Paolo Nutini
On April 2, 2011, The National played the Lollapalooza festival in Santiago, Chile.
On April 10, 2011, The National played the Vive Latino festival in Mexico City.
They will also be supporting The Strokes at the 2011 Reading and Leeds Festival.
The band supported Barack Obama's presidential candidacy in 2008. In July of that year, the band designed and sold a t-shirt featuring Obama's image above the words "Mr. November," a reference to both their song from ''Alligator'' and the month of the U.S. presidential election. All proceeds were donated to Obama's campaign. 
On October 16, 2008, The National played a rally for Barack Obama on Fountain Square in their hometown of Cincinnati with The Breeders. Buses for early voting were available before the show to take voters to the Hamilton County Board of Elections.
On September 28, 2010, The National played in front of over 25,000 people before a speech by President Obama at a rally in Madison, WI.
On February 17, 2009, ''Dark Was the Night'', the twentieth Red Hot Organization compilation, was released by 4AD. Curated by Aaron and Bryce Dessner, this album comprised songs by bands and artists such as Arcade Fire, Grizzly Bear, Beirut, David Byrne, Sufjan Stevens, Spoon, The Dirty Projectors, Feist, and The National, among others. Over one million dollars of the proceeds from album sales were donated to the Red Hot Organization which is an international organization dedicated to fighting AIDS. 
On May 3, 2009, Aaron and Bryce Dessner curated a concert for ''Dark Was the Night'' at Radio City Music Hall in New York City. Performers included David Byrne, The Dirty Projectors, Feist, The National, and several other artists who contributed to the compilation.
To date, Dark Was The Night has raised over $1.2 million, a sum that represents all the profits from worldwide sales. Red Hot Organization founder and director John Carlin was quoted as saying "''Dark Was the Night'' encapsulated the spirit and creativity of a new generation of musicians whose work struck a chord and got people to actually purchase the album and raise hundreds of thousands of dollars to fight AIDS."
On February 3, 2009, The National played at a benefit show for Philip Glass's Tibet House at New York's Carnegie Hall.