Regional disambiguation is done the same way as for cities namely with comma. "X Term" is used as for other geographical features e.g. "X Peninsula", "X River", "X Mountains", "X Island", "X Desert", "X Valley" and "X Empire". For maybe 80% of all entities only three (the first three) naming formats will be used:
The Cliff's Notes version: '''Respect for local short naming standards; consistency within each country; disambiguate with parentheses rather than commas; fits most existing naming standards; locals know more than we or Google do.'''
Elaborations to the above that should always lead to "X Term" usage or "Term of X" usage, unless we are informed differently by people who know better: (Minor in most cases, just mentioned as a general guideline):
Based on '''U'''sage and '''P'''arenthesis (for piping).  Very similar to B, but with a different emphasis. 
The Cliff's Notes version: '''Disambiguate with parentheses where most likely short name, and commas where most likely long name; respect for local short naming standards; locals know more than we or Google do; consistency within each country; fits most existing naming standards.'''
X is a name, like "Orange" or "Nevada". Term is term for subnational entities, e.g. state, province, county. Y is a higher level division with respect to X.
Example: X Term, Y could be "Orange County, Florida"
I added this section at 08:59, August 15, 2005 (UTC); I'm not sure if this is the proper method, but notice HAS been posted on both VP:Policy and RFC. --  08:59, August 15, 2005 (UTC)
Always ''' ''' for the shortest form of the name. When the short form does not yet exist, while  , always check the ''What links here'' link on the creation page '''before''' saving it. If the name has already been used in articles for another purpose, use a   page instead.	 
This will give some inkling about how the name has already been used in existing articles, and whether a long form has already been established for that particular country.
It is important to note that these are ''conventions'', not rules written in stone. As Wikipedia grows and changes, some conventions that once made sense may become outdated, and there may be cases where a particular convention is "obviously" inappropriate. But when in doubt, follow convention.
Generally,   should give priority to what the majority of English speakers would most easily recognize, with a reasonable minimum of ambiguity, while at the same time making linking to those articles easy and second nature. 
In addition to following the naming conventions it is also important to follow the  . Following consistent conventions in both naming and linking makes it more likely that links will lead to the right place.
Always ''' ''' for the shortest form of the name.  When the short form does not yet exist, while  , always check the ''What links here'' link on the creation page '''before''' saving it. If the name has already been used in articles for another purpose, use a   page instead.
This will give some inkling about how the name has already been used in existing articles, and whether a long form has already been established for that particular country.
There are two methods in primary use for the long form of disambiguating place names. One uses commas between the administrative divisions, the other uses parenthesis enclosing the administrative divisions. There are also hybrid variations.
Is the place name mostly used as a full named link in other articles? 
Is the place name mostly used as a short name reference in other articles?
For other kinds of articles, the most common method uses a disambiguating term in parenthesis.  This simple method distinguishes "(steel)" from "(city)", "(district)", "(province)", "(town)", or "(village)" with a minimum of effort.
Experience has shown that place names needing disambiguation will likely have many counterparts elsewhere, both within the same country and between several countries. Later disambiguation at higher levels can require hundreds of edits. It is best to nip the problem in the bud &mdash; use the most complete form of disambiguation at the earliest opportunity &mdash; thus helping future editors in advance.
For place names, the use of simple parenthetical terms alone is deprecated (not recommended).
There are several methods in common use for the form of place names. Usually, the shortest form is preferred. However, certain place names always have a disambiguating term as well.
Generally, use the official English name for the place and its type.
If there is not an official translation, then a general equivalent or obvious cognate should be used, until a better solution is found.
When there is any confusion, use "ShortName" or "ShortName Term" (capitalized) as appropriate, until locals or someone familiar with the country can offer a more correct version. Either form an easily be changed to a disambiguation page later.
When the place has an official English form that includes a lowercase "term", or the native language usually appends a descriptor that is lowercase, then that form of the term should be used in articles.
When the place has an official English form that includes a capitalized "Term", or the native language usually appends a descriptor that is capitalized, then that form of the term should be used in articles.
When the place has an official English form that includes a capitalized "Term of", or the native language usually prefixes a descriptor that is capitalized, then that form of the term should be used in articles.
Where a place name article is found to be ambiguous, choose a fully disambiguated name, move the article, and change the old page (now a redirect page) to a disambiguation page, or a redirect to a "(disambiguation)" page. Don't forget to check the ''What links here'' for double redirects, and update any articles that reference the old page.
A notice should be posted on the appropriate talk page (such as: Administrative divisions of France, Provinces of Pakistan, States and territories of India) that asks for discussion about the move, and possibly a notice and vote at  .
All place names in an administrative division should share the same form.  For example, when one article has been moved to "X District", then all the districts within a country should be moved to the same form.
There is no expectation of consistency between countries. Sometimes disambiguation will require several administrative divisions, followed by the country. However, in most instances, one or two administrative divisions will be sufficient.