Various terms are used to describe the different (and sometimes overlapping) geographical and political areas of the islands of Great Britain, Ireland, and surrounding islands. The terminology is often a source of confusion, partly owing to the similarity between some of the actual words used, but also because they are often used loosely. The purpose of this article is to explain the meanings of and relationships among those terms.
In brief, the main terms and their simple explanations are as follows.
Below is a visual reference guide to some of the main concepts and territories described in this article:
Image:British Isles all.svg|The British Isles
Image:British Islands.svg|The British Islands
Image:British Isles United Kingdom.svg|The United Kingdom
Image:Great Britain.svg|Great Britain
Image:Island of Ireland.svg|Ireland
Image:British Isles England.svg|England
Image:British Isles Scotland.svg|Scotland
Image:British Isles Wales.svg|Wales
Image:Republic of Ireland.svg|Republic of Ireland (officially Ireland)
Image:British Isles Northern Ireland.svg|Northern Ireland
Image:British Isles Isle of Man.svg|The Isle of Man
Image:British Isles Channel Islands.svg|The Channel Islands (Jersey, Guernsey)
The British Isles, is an archipelago in the Atlantic Ocean off the coast of Continental Europe. It includes Ireland, Great Britain, and the Isle of Man. In a technical geographical sense, the British Isles does not include the Channel Islands, but in practice, and despite the fact that "British Isles" is a geographical term, the British-owned Channel Islands are often included because of their political associations with and relative proximity to Britain. Also included are the thousands of small islands off the coast of both the larger islands such as Shetland and Orkney.  The term is not universally accepted (see British Isles naming dispute).
The '''United Kingdom''' is a sovereign state. Its four constituent countries are sometimes considered to be of different status. This view may be supported by the existence of devolved governments with different levels of power in Scotland, Northern Ireland and Wales (see Asymmetrical federalism). Wales is also often described as a principality of the United Kingdom (Prince of Wales is a title usually given to the heir apparent to the British throne but has no political or other role in respect of Wales). Northern Ireland is sometimes described by United Kingdom citizens as a province of the United Kingdom, which derives from the Irish province of Ulster, which Northern Ireland is part of. This epithet is also applied  because it originally was part of the UK as part of Ireland rather than as a constituent country or nation in its own right. Northern Ireland also had, until 1972, a far greater degree of self-government than the other constituent parts of the UK.
The abbreviation ''GB'' is sometimes officially used for the United Kingdom, for example in the Olympics, or as the vehicle registration plate country identification code for UK-registered cars ''(see also British car number plates)''. The GB code is not always accepted, and unofficial alternatives are sometimes used for protest (such as ''SCO'' in Scotland, CYM for Wales (Cymru) ''NI'' in Northern Ireland, or ''ENG'' for England).
The internet code ''".gb",'' although allocated to the UK, is virtually unused and UK web domains use ''".uk"''.
The four constituent parts of the UK are also known, particularly in sporting contexts, as ''Home Nations'' or the "Four Nations". The BBC refers to its UK-wide broadcasting operation as ''Nations and Regions'' 
In sport, the UK Nations mostly have their own separate national teams     England, Wales, Scotland, Northern Ireland, for example in football. Sporting contests between the Four Nations are known as "Home internationals" (an example is the British Home Championship in football).
The governing body for football in Northern Ireland is called the Irish Football Association (the IFA), having been in existence since some forty years before Partition. Its counterpart in the Republic (plus Derry City FC) is the Football Association of Ireland (the FAI). The Northern Ireland national team retained the name "Ireland" for some fifty years after partition. Since around 1970 the two teams have been consistently referred to as "Northern Ireland" and "Republic of Ireland" respectively.
UK teams in the Olympics have competed under several different names     most recently in Beijing the athletes were presented at the Opening Ceremony under a banner which said simply Great Britain, rather than the full Great Britain and Northern Ireland. Olympic athletes from Northern Ireland may choose whether to represent the UK or the Republic of Ireland.
Since the Good Friday Agreement (the G.F.A.), and the subsequent implementation legislation, sporting organisation (and several other organisations, e.g. tourism, Irish Gaelic and Ulster Scots language boards) on the island of Ireland has increasingly been cross-border.
Citizens of the UK are called ''British'' or ''Britons''. The term ''Brits'' may also be used, sometimes pejoratively, for example by supporters of Scottish independence when referring to supporters of the Union. Some older slang names for Britons are ''Tommy'' (for British soldiers), ''Anglo'' and ''Limey''. Anglo properly refers only to England, but it is sometimes used as a broader reference as an element in compound adjectives: for example, ''"Anglo-French relations"'' may be used in newspaper articles when referring to relations between the political entities France and the United Kingdom. ''Anglo-Saxon'' may be used (particularly in Continental European languages) when referring to the whole English-speaking world, the Anglosphere, although ethnically very few of the world's one billion English-speakers are of Anglo-Saxon origin.
Since the adoption of the Constitution of Ireland in 1937, '''Ireland''' has been the constitutional name of the state which covers approximately five-sixths of the island of Ireland.  (Northern Ireland covers the remaining sixth  of the island, in its north-east.  Northern Ireland remains a constituent part of the United Kingdom.)
Since the Republic of Ireland Act 1948, the term "Republic of Ireland" is the term used as the additional ''description'' of the state. This term is useful in avoiding ambiguity between the name of the island and the name of the state.  However, the term "Ireland" is always used in formal diplomatic contexts such as the European Union or the United Nations. The passport of the Republic of Ireland bears the name ''Eire     Ireland''.
Before the introduction of the 1937 constitution and the new name, the Irish Free State occupied the same territory as the modern state of Ireland. The Irish Free State became an autonomous dominion of the British Empire in 1922 when it seceded from the United Kingdom through the Anglo-Irish Treaty. The King ceased to be its Head of State in 1936 and the state ceased to be a Dominion and left the Commonwealth in 1948.
Traditionally, the island of Ireland is divided into four provinces     Leinster, Connacht, Munster and Ulster, with each of the provinces further divided into counties. The Republic of Ireland takes up 83% of the island, and twenty-six of the thirty-two traditional counties of Ireland. Northern Ireland takes up the remaining area and six of the traditional nine counties of Ulster.
On the island of Ireland the naming of places often raises political issues. The usage of "Ireland" as the official name of the state causes offence to some Unionists in Northern Ireland, who believe it implies that the state still has a territorial claim to the whole island     the terminology of "Republic of Ireland" or "Eire" is much preferred by Northern Irish unionists when referring to that political state. Similarly, some Nationalists in Northern Ireland also prefer to reserve the usage of "Ireland" to refer to the whole island.
In Northern Ireland, Irishness is a highly contested identity, with fundamentally different perceptions between unionists who perceive themselves as being both British and Irish, and nationalists who consider both communities to be part of the Irish nation.
The Republic of Ireland is often referred to by the Nationalist and Republican communities by the term "the Twenty-six Counties", with the connotation that the state constituted as such forms only a portion of the ideal political unit of the Irish Republic, which would consist of all of the thirty-two counties into which the island is divided. Additionally, the term ''"the Six Counties"'' (in reference to Northern Ireland's six counties) is also used. Other Nationalist terms in use include: ''"the occupied six counties"'', but more popularly, ''"the North of Ireland"'' and, ''"the North"'', these are terms also used by the Irish national broadcaster RTE.
The Irish passport is available to Irish citizens and can also be applied for abroad through Irish Consular services and the local Irish Embassy. As per the Irish nationality law, any person born on the island of Ireland before 2005, or otherwise a first generation descendant of such a person, is allowed to apply for an Irish passport. As such, people born in Northern Ireland and their children may be Irish citizens and hold an Irish passport if they choose.
The terminology and usage of the name ''Ulster'' in Irish and British culture varies. Many within the unionist community and much of the UK press refer to Northern Ireland as ''Ulster'' whereas the nationalist community refer to the traditional Irish province of Ulster, which is a nine county entity that incorporates the three counties of Donegal, Cavan and Monaghan  (which are in the Republic) along with the counties of Armagh, Antrim, Down, Fermanagh, Londonderry and Tyrone in Northern Ireland.
The earliest known names for the islands come from ancient Greek writings. Though the original texts have been lost, excerpts were quoted or paraphrased by later authors. Parts of the Massaliote Periplus, a merchants' handbook describing searoutes of the 6th century BC, were used in translation in the writings of Avienus around AD 400. Ireland was referred to as ''Ierne'' (''Insula sacra'', the ''sacred island'', as the Greeks interpreted it) "inhabited by the race of ''Hiberni''" (''gens hiernorum''), and Britain as ''insula Albionum'', "island of the Albions".
The Romans called the inhabitants of Gaul (modern France) ''Galli'' or ''Celtae''. The latter term came from the Greek name              for a central European people, and 17th century antiquarians who found language connections developed the idea of a race of Celts inhabiting the area, but this term was not used by the Greeks or Romans for the inhabitants of Britain or Ireland, nor is there any record of the inhabitants of the British Isles referring to themselves as such. Nevertheless, Roman administration would later incorporate the province of Britannia into the praetorian prefecture of Gaul, in common with Hispania, which had Celtiberians. Armorica, where the Bretons would settle, was part of ''Gallia Celtica'', so there were tertiary relations between the Britons and Gallic Celts at least. In addition, the Parisii of Gallia Celtica are thought to have founded Aldborough in Britain. Belgae and Silures also came from Gallic areas, although not strictly "Celtic", but from ''Gallia Belgica'' and ''Aquitainia''.
Caesar's invasions of Britain brought descriptions of the peoples of what he called ''Britannia pars interior'', "inland Britain", in 55 BC. Throughout Book 4 of his ''Geography'', Strabo is consistent in spelling the island Britain (transliterated) as ''Prettanikee''; he uses the terms ''Prettans'' or ''Brettans'' loosely to refer to the islands as a group     a common generalisation used by classical geographers. For example, in Geography 2.1.18, ''                                                                                                     '' ("   the most southern of the Brettans are further north than this").Translation by Roseman, ''op.cit.'' He was writing around AD 10, although the earliest surviving copy of his work dates from the 6th century.
Pliny the Elder writing around AD 70 uses a Latin version of the same terminology in section 4.102 of his ''Naturalis Historia''. He writes of Great Britain: ''Albion ipsi nomen fuit, cum Britanniae vocarentur omnes de quibus mox paulo dicemus.'' ("Albion was its own name, when all  were called the Britannias; I will speak of them in a moment"). In the following section, 4.103, Pliny enumerates the islands he considers to make up the Britannias, listing Great Britain, Ireland, and many smaller islands.
In his ''Geography'' written in the mid 2nd century and probably describing the position around AD 100, Ptolemy includes both Great Britain (Albion) and Ireland (Hibernia) in the island group he calls ''Britannia''. He entitles Book II, Chapter 1 of as ''Hibernia, Island of Britannia'', and Chapter 2 as ''Albion, Island of Britannia''.
The name ''Albion'' for Great Britain fell from favour, and the island was described in Greek as                    or                   , in Latin ''Britannia'', an inhabitant as                   , ''Britannus'', with the adjective                       , ''Britannicus'', equating to "British". With the Roman conquest of Britain the name Britannia was used for the province of Roman Britain. The Emperor Claudius was honoured with the agnomen ''Britannicus'' as if he were the conqueror, and coins were struck from AD 46 inscribed DE BRITAN, DE BRITANN, DE BRITANNI, or DE BRITANNIS. With the visit of Hadrian in AD 121 coins introduced a female figure with the label BRITANNIA as a personification or goddess of the place. These and later Roman coins introduced the seated figure of Britannia which would be reintroduced in the 17th century.
In the later years of Roman rule Britons who left Latin inscriptions, both at home and elsewhere in the Empire, often described themselves as ''Brittanus'' or ''Britto'', and where describing their citizenship gave it as ''cives'' of a British tribe or of a ''patria'' (homeland) of ''Britannia'', not ''Roma''. From the 4th century, many Britons migrated from Roman Britain across the English Channel and founded Brittany.
While Latin remained the language of learning, from the early mediaeval period records begin to appear in native languages. The earliest indigenous source to use a collective term for the archipelago is the ''Life of Saint Columba'', a hagiography recording the missionary activities of the sixth century Irish monk Saint Columba among the peoples of what is now Scotland. It was written in the late seventh century by Adomnan of Iona, an Irish monk living on the Inner Hebridean island. The collective term for the archipelago used within this work is '''Oceani Insulae''' meaning ''"Islands of the Ocean"'' (Book 2, 46 in the Sharpe edition = Book 2, 47 in Reeves edition), it is used sparingly and no ''Priteni''-derived collective reference is made.
Another early native source to use a collective term is the ''Historia ecclesiastica gentis Anglorum'' of Bede written in the early eighth century. The collective term for the archipelago used within this work is ''insularum'' meaning "islands" (Book 1, 8) and it too is used sparingly. He stated that Britain "studies and confesses one and the same knowledge of the highest truth in the tongues of five nations, namely the Angles, the Britons, the Scots, the Picts, and the Latins", distinguishing between the Brythonic languages of the "ancient Britons" or Old Welsh speakers and other language groups.
Early Celtic, Saxon and Viking kingdoms such as Rheged, Strathclyde and Wessex amalgamated, leading to the formation of Scotland, England and Wales. In Norman Ireland, local lords gained considerable autonomy from the Lordship of Ireland until it became the Kingdom of Ireland under direct English rule.
Abraham Ortelius makes clear his understanding that England, Scotland and Ireland were politically separate in 1570  by the full title of his map: ''"Angliae, Scotiae et Hiberniae, sive Britannicar. insularum descriptio"'' which translates as ''"A representation of England, Scotland and Ireland, or Britannica's islands."'' Additionally many maps from this period show Wales and Cornwall as separate nations, most notably those of Mercator.
Maps of the Mediaeval, Renaissance and later periods often referred to ''Albion''. This archaic term was originally used by Ptolemy and Pliny to mean the island of Great Britain. In later centuries its meaning changed to refer only to the area we now call Scotland (''Albany'', or ''Alba'' in Gaelic). ''Albion'' has survived as a poetic name for Britain but it is not in everyday use.
Following the Acts of Union 1707, a fashion arose, particularly in Scotland, for referring to Scotland and England as ''North Britain'' and ''South Britain'' respectively. These terms gained in popularity during the nineteenth century.  The most lasting example of this usage was in the name of the North British Railway, which became part of the London and North Eastern Railway in 1923, and in the name of the North British Hotel, built by the railway in Edinburgh in 1902, which retained the name until it reopened in 1991 as the Balmoral Hotel.
The diagram on the right gives an indication of the further evolution of kingdoms and states. In 1603 the Scottish King James VI inherited the English throne as "James I of England". He styled himself as ''James I of Great Britain'', although both states retained their sovereignty and independent parliaments, the Parliament of Scotland and the Parliament of England. (The term "Great Britain" itself reportedly dates from as early as 1474, and was in common usage from the mid-16th century onwards.)
The 1707 Act of Union united England and Scotland in the Kingdom of Great Britain under the Parliament of Great Britain, then in 1800 Ireland was brought under British government control by the Act of Union creating the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland. Irish unrest culminated in the Irish War of Independence and the 1922 separation of the Irish Free State, which later became a republic with the name Ireland. The majority Protestant northeast continued to be part of what became the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
The adjectives used to describe the contents and attributes of the various constituent parts of the British Isles also cause confusion.
In the absence of a single adjective to refer to the United Kingdom, ''British'' is generally used to refer to the United Kingdom as a whole. However, in a specifically physical geographical sense, ''British'' is used to refer to the island of Great Britain. Members of the Unionist communities in Northern Ireland might describe themselves as ''British'' even though they are not on the island of Great Britain, as this reflects a political and cultural identity.
The cumbersome adjective ''Great British'' is very rarely used to refer to Great Britain, other than to contrive a pun on the word ''great'', as in "Great British Food".
The term ''Ulster'' can also be used as an adjective (e.g. "Royal Ulster Constabulary"), but this is more likely to be used by Unionists and has political connotations in the same fashion as its use as a proper noun (because only six of the traditional nine counties of Ulster, namely Antrim, Armagh, Down, Fermanagh, Londonderry and Tyrone, are included in Northern Ireland with the remaining three counties Cavan, Donegal and Monaghan forming part of the Republic).  The term ''Ulsterman'' (or ''Ulsterwoman'') is common and holds no such political connotation. Likewise, Nationalists might describe, say, a lake in Northern Ireland as ''Irish''.
Note that the geographical term Irish Sea thus far appears to have escaped political connotations, even though territorial control of the waters of the Irish Sea is divided between both the Republic of Ireland and the UK, and also includes a British Crown dependency, the Isle of Man   as yet there appears to be no controversy with the term   s usage to mirror that of "British Isles". The North Channel is found off the east coast of Northern Ireland and it stretches the length of roughly two-thirds of Northern Ireland's eastern coastline.
The "Northern" in "Northern Ireland" is not completely accurate.  The most northerly point on the island, Malin Head, is in the Republic of Ireland     in County Donegal's Inishowen Peninsula.
The dictionary definition of British Isles is that it is a geographical term that refers to the whole of Ireland and Great Britain as well as the surrounding islands. It is sometimes incorrectly used as if identical to the UK; or to refer to Great Britain and the surrounding islands, excluding the island of Ireland entirely. The BBC and ''The Times'' have style guides that mandate the dictionary definition but occasional misuse can be found on their web sites.
The term ''British Isles'' can also be considered irritating or offensive by some on the grounds that the modern association of the term ''British'' with the United Kingdom makes its application to Ireland inappropriate.
The term ''British Isles'' can also be considered to imply a proprietary title on the entire archipelago.
The policy of the government of the Republic of Ireland is that no branch of government should use the term, and although it is on occasion used in a geographical sense in Irish parliamentary debates, this is often done in a way that excludes the Republic of Ireland. In October 2006, ''The Times'' quoted a spokesman for the Irish Embassy in London as saying that they would discourage its use.
During a stop-over visit to the Republic of Ireland in 1989, the leader of the USSR, Mikhail Gorbachev, indicated that he assumed Ireland's head of state was Queen Elizabeth II, given that she was the British Queen and his officials said that Ireland was a part of the British Isles.
In Northern Ireland, some nationalists reject the term and instead use ''these islands'', ''these isles'' or "Britain and Ireland" as an alternative.
There have been several suggestions for replacements for the term ''British Isles''. Although there is no single accepted replacement, the terms ''Great Britain and Ireland'', ''The British Isles and Ireland'' and ''Britain and Ireland'' are all used.
The word ''Ireland'' has two meanings.
The word ''Ulster'' has two usages.
The word "England" is often used colloquially and incorrectly to refer to Great Britain     or the United Kingdom as a whole"When people say England, they sometimes mean Great Britain,  sometimes the United Kingdom, sometimes the British Isles     but never England."      ISBN 0-582-41686-8
There are historical instances of patriotic references to "England" which are actually intended to include Scotland and Wales as well.England expects that every man will do his duty     Horatio Nelson, message to the British Fleet 1805
The colloquial usage of "England" as a synonym for "Britain" is still widespread outside the UK. In Germany, the term "England" is often used to mean Great Britain or even the entire United Kingdom. In many other languages, such as Chinese, Japanese or Korean, the word for "English" is synonymous with "British"     see the article on Alternative words for British for more detail.
The Isle of Man and the two bailiwicks of the Channel Islands are Crown dependencies; that is, non-sovereign nations, self-governing but whose sovereignty is held by the British Crown. They control their own internal affairs, but not their defence or foreign relations. They are not part of the United Kingdom nor part of the European Union.
There are five living Celtic languages in the region. Each have names for the islands and countries of the British Isles. They are divided into two branches:
Some of the above are:
Note: In Irish there are actually several terms for Northern Ireland: ''An Tuaisceart'', meaning "the North", is usually used, but a more recent term for official use is ''Tuaisceart Eireann''.
The English word ''Welsh'' is from a common Germanic root meaning "Romanised foreigner" (cognate with Wallonia and Wallachia, and also cognate with the word used in Mediaeval German to refer to the French and Italians).
The English names ''Albion'' and ''Albany'' are related to ''Alba'' and used poetically for either England or Scotland, or the whole island of Great Britain.
English ''Erin'' is a poetic name for Ireland derived from ''Eire'' (or rather, from its dative form ''Eirinn'').
In Irish, the term ''Oileain Bhriotanacha'' is a translation of the English term ''British Isles''. Another translation is ''Oileain Bhreataineacha'', which was used in the 1937 translation from English to Irish of a 1931 geography book. 
Earlier dictionaries give ''Oileain Iarthair Eorpa'' as the translation, literally meaning ''West European Isles''. Today the most common term ''Eire agus an Bhreatain Mhor'' is used, meaning literally as ''Ireland and Great Britain'', as provided by terminological dictionaries.
Blighty is a slang word for Britain derived from the Hindustani word ''bilayati'' ("foreign"). Depending on the user, it is meant either affectionately or archly.  It was often used by British soldiers abroad in the First World War to refer to home.
The term "Europe" may be used in one of several different contexts by British and Irish people; either to refer to the whole of the European continent, to refer to only to Mainland Europe, sometimes called ''"continental Europe"'' or simply ''"the Continent"'' by some people in the archipelago   as in the apocryphal newspaper headline "Fog shrouds Channel, continent cut off."
Europe and the adjective European may also be used in reference to the European Union, particularly in a derogative context such as "The new regulations handed out by Europe".