Studies over the years have found that Scotch had more alumni mentioned in ''Who's Who in Australia'' (a listing of notable Australians) than any other school.Mark Peel and Janet McCalman, ''Who Went Where in Who's Who 1988: The Schooling of the Australian Elite'', Melbourne University History Research Series Number 1, 1992Ian Hansen, ''Nor Free Nor Secular: Six Independent Schools in Victoria, a First Sample'', Oxford University Press, 1971  
In 2010 ''The Age'' reported that Scotch College "''has educated more of Australia's most honoured and influential citizens than any other school in the nation''",  based on research that revealed its alumni had received more top Order of Australia honours than any other school. The hard copy article also published a table of the schools which were ranked in the top ten places, as follows: '''(1st with 19 awards)''' Scotch College, Melbourne,  '''(2nd with 17 awards)''' Geelong Grammar School,  '''(3rd with 13 awards)''' Sydney Boys High School, '''(equal 4th with 10 awards each)''' Fort Street High School, Perth Modern School and St Peter's College, Adelaide,  '''(equal 7th with 9 awards each)''' Melbourne Grammar School, North Sydney Boys High School and The King's School, Parramatta,  '''(equal 10th with 6 awards each)''' Launceston Grammar School, Melbourne High School, Wesley College, Melbourne and Xavier College.
The College was established in 1851 as ''"The Melbourne Academy"'', in a house in Spring Street, Melbourne, by Reverend James Forbes, of the Free Presbyterian Church of Victoria. It is the oldest extant secondary school in Victoria and celebrated its sesquicentenary in 2001.
Scotch is a founding member of the Associated Public Schools of Victoria (APS), and is affiliated with the International Coalition of Boys' Schools, the Junior School Heads Association of Australia (JSHAA), the Australian Boarding Schools' Association (ABSA), the Association of Independent Schools of Victoria (AISV), and the Headmasters' and Headmistresses' Conference. The School is also a member of the G20 Schools Group.
The college was founded 1851 by the Reverend James Forbes, the first settled minister of the Presbyterian Church in Victoria. It opened under the name of ''"The Melbourne Academy"'', in a small house in Spring Street, opposite the Royal Australasian College of Surgeons, with Robert Lawson, a Scot from Edinburgh University as the first Principal. In the year the School was founded, Forbes had contracted a chronic ailment to the trachea, and he subsequently died six weeks prior to the schools official opening on 6 October 1851. The Reverend William Miller who succeeded Reverend James Forbes at John Knox Church, became the founding chairman of the School Council.
On 19 January 1852, the school moved to a rented premises at 99 Spring Street, on the corner of Little Collins Street, before relocating to its own site at Lansdowne Street, East Melbourne on 10 January 1854. Scotch moved to the current site at Hawthorn in 1916. St Andrew's Presbyterian Hospital took over the Lansdowne Street site from 1934 until 1990.
The School was originally called "''The Melbourne Academy''", after its location, when it opened in 1851.  In its early years it was also known as
For a while all of these names were used concurrently until in the 1860s the usage settled on "''The Scotch College''", which was later shortened to be simply "''Scotch College''".
The School's coat-of-arms (shown above, right) features the following elements:James Mitchell, ''A Deepening Roar - Scotch College, Melbourne, 1851-2001'', Allen & Unwin, 2001, pages 135-137
The motto of the School, shown in Scottish heraldic style in a scroll above the cost-of-arms, is Latin: ''"Deo Patriae Litteris"''.  It literally means ''"God, Country, Learning"'', or transliterated means ''"For God, for Country, and for Learning"''.
Dr. F. G. Donaldson AM retired as Principal at the conclusion of 2007, having completed 25 years as Principal and was succeeded by I. T. Batty who commenced his term in 2008. Mr Batty is only the ninth Principal in the school's 159 year history.
Scotch is an incorporated body governed by a Council made up of three groups; 1/3 Old Boys nominated by the Old Scotch Collegians' Association, 1/3 Presbyterian Church of Victoria nominees and 1/3 "members of the Scotch Family" nominated by Council from members of associations including the Scotch Parents' Association and Scotch Foundation.
Chairmen of the Council have included Sir Arthur Robinson, Sir Archibald Glenn, Sir James Balderstone and David Crawford.
At the formation of the Uniting Church in Australia in 1977, Scotch was allocated to the Presbyterian Church of Australia by the Property Commission of the Presbyterian Church, which included an even number of representatives from the Uniting Church and the continuing Presbyterian Church as well as independent commissioners. At the time the Scotch Council unsuccessfully appealed this decision.
Scotch has been a boarding school since its foundation.  Today the School caters for 160 boarders of whom around 70% are drawn from around Australia and 30% are from overseas. The boarding precinct is on "The Hill" which overlooks the Senior School at the main Hawthorn campus.  There are three boarding houses:  ''School House'', ''McMeckan House'' and ''Arthur Robinson House''.  Both ''School House'' and ''McMeckan House'' were built as the gift of Anthony Mackie, and his brother and sisters, in memory of their uncle Captain James McMeckan.  ''Arthur Robinson House'' is named after a Chairman of the School Council, Sir Arthur Robinson.
Scotch students study towards the Victorian Certificate of Education (VCE), which is the main secondary student assessment program in Victoria which ranks students with an Australian Tertiary Admission Rank (ATAR) for university entrance purposes.
Some extra-curricular groups and activities at Scotch are:
Scotch College competes in the Associated Public Schools of Victoria (APS) league in Athletics, Badminton, Basketball, Cricket, Cross Country, Australian Rules Football, Hockey, Rowing, Rugby, Soccer, Squash, Swimming and Diving, Table Tennis, Tennis, Volleyball and Water Polo. In 2006, the school jointly won the APS Australian Rules Premiership, the First VIII Rowing (Head of the River), and the VSRU Open Grade Rugby. It was the fifth time in six years that Scotch had won the Rugby first XV's. It won a fifth consecutive Head of the River in 2008. In 2010 it won the Head of the River, Victorian, NSW and Australian Championships laying claim to being the most successful Australian schoolboy crew in history. It has won the Head of the River event more than any other competing school.
In addition to the APS competition, Scotch competes in a number of competitions with specific schools, including:
Alumni of Scotch College are known as ''Old Boys'' or ''Old Collegians'', and automatically become members of the School's alumni association, the Old Scotch Collegians' Association (OSCA).
Studies over the years have found that Scotch College had more alumni mentioned in ''Who's Who in Australia'' (a listing of notable Australians) than any other school, and its alumni had received more top Order of Australia honours than any other school.
Alumni of Scotch College include