The Soyuz spacecraft is launched by the Soyuz rocket, the most frequently used and most reliable launch vehicle to date. The Soyuz rocket design is based on the Vostok launcher, which in turn was based on the 8K74 or R-7a intercontinental ballistic missile. The rockets are normally launched from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. Plans are underway to have the rockets launched from the European space port in French Guiana. A simulated test launch was performed on May 6, 2011, with the first actual launch taking place later in the year. Plans are to have up to four launches a year from South America.  
The first unmanned Soyuz mission was launched November 28, 1966; the first Soyuz mission with a crew (Soyuz 1) was launched April 23, 1967, but the cosmonaut on board, Vladimir Komarov, died during the flight's crash-landing. Soyuz 2 was an unmanned mission, and Soyuz 3, launched on October 26, 1968, was the first successful Soyuz manned mission. The only other fatal mission, Soyuz 11, killed the crew of three also during re-entry due to premature cabin depressurization. Despite these early fatalities, Soyuz is presently widely considered the world's safest, most cost-effective human spaceflight system due to its unparalleled length of operational history.
The Soyuz spacecraft family is still in service.  Soyuz spacecraft were used to carry personnel to and from Salyut and later Mir Soviet space stations, and are now used for transport to and from the International Space Station. The International Space Station maintains a docked Soyuz spacecraft at all times to be used as escape craft in the event of an emergency.
A Soyuz spacecraft consists of three parts (from front to back):
The orbital and service modules are single-use and are destroyed upon re-entry in the atmosphere. The orbital and reentry portions are habitable living space. By moving as much equipment as possible into the orbital module, which does not have to be shielded or decelerated during atmospheric re-entry, the Soyuz is both larger and lighter than the contemporary Apollo spacecraft's command module. The Apollo command module had six cubic meters of living space and a mass of 5000&nbsp;Kg; the three-part Soyuz (command, orbital and service modules) provides the same crew with nine cubic meters of living space, an airlock, and a service module for the mass of the Apollo capsule alone. On nine Apollo missions (9 through 17) the astronauts also had access to the Lunar Module, which added 6.7 cubic metres of volume but also another 4500&nbsp;Kg of mass (if counting just the ascent stage as being somewhat equivalent to the Soyuz orbital module; 14700&nbsp;Kg when including the descent stage).
Soyuz can carry up to three crew members and provide life support for about 30 person days.  The life support system provides a nitrogen/oxygen atmosphere at sea level partial pressures.  The atmosphere is regenerated through KO2 cylinders, which absorb most of the CO2 and water produced by the crew and regenerates the oxygen, and LiOH cylinders which absorb leftover CO2.
The vehicle is protected during launch by a nose fairing, which is jettisoned after passing through the atmosphere. It has an automatic docking system.  The ship can be operated automatically, or by a pilot independently of ground control.
The forepart of the spacecraft is the orbital module (Russian: ''                          (    )''; Bytovoi otsek (BO)) also known as Habitation section. It houses all the equipment that will not be needed for reentry, such as experiments, cameras or cargo. The module also contains a toilet, docking avionics and communications gear. On the latest Soyuz versions, a small window was introduced, providing the crew with a forward view.
A hatch between it and the descent module can be closed so as to isolate it to act as an airlock if needed, crew members exiting through its side port (near the descent module). On the launch pad, the crew enter the spacecraft through this port.
This separation also lets the orbital module be customized to the mission with less risk to the life-critical descent module. The convention of orientation in zero gravity differs from that of the descent module, as crew members stand or sit with their heads to the docking port.
The reentry module (Russian: ''                                    (    )''; Spuskaemyi apparat (SA)) is used for launch and the journey back to Earth. Half of the reentry module is covered by a heat-resistant covering to protect it during re-entry; this half faces the Earth during re-entry. It is slowed initially by the atmosphere, then by a braking parachute, followed by the main parachute which slows the craft for landing. At one meter above the ground, solid-fuel braking engines mounted behind the heat shield are fired to give a soft landing. One of the design requirements for the reentry module was for it to have the highest possible volumetric efficiency (internal volume divided by hull area). The best shape for this is a sphere, but such a shape can provide no lift, which results in a purely ballistic reentry. Ballistic reentries are hard on the occupants due to high deceleration and cannot be steered beyond their initial deorbit burn. That is why it was decided to go with the "headlight" shape that the Soyuz uses&mdash;a hemispherical forward area joined by a barely angled conical section (seven degrees) to a classic spherical section heat shield. This shape allows a small amount of lift to be generated due to the unequal weight distribution. The nickname was thought up at a time when nearly every headlight was circular.
At the back of the vehicle is the service module (Russian: ''                -                                (      )''; Priborno-Agregatnyi Otsek (PAO)). It has a pressurized container shaped like a bulging can (''Instrumentation compartment, PO (Priborniy Otsek'') that contains systems for temperature control, electric power supply, long-range radio communications, radio telemetry, and instruments for orientation and control.  A non-pressurized part of the service module (''Propulsion compartment, AO (Agregatniy Otsek)'') contains the main engine and a liquid-fuelled propulsion system for maneuvering in orbit and initiating the descent back to Earth. The ship also has a system of low-thrust engines for orientation, attached to the Intermediate compartment (''PkhO or Perekhodnoi Otsek''). Outside the service module are the sensors for the orientation system and the solar array, which is oriented towards the sun by rotating the ship.
Because its modular construction differs from that of previous designs, the Soyuz has an unusual sequence of events prior to re-entry. The spacecraft is turned engine-forward and the main engine is fired for de-orbiting fully 180   ahead of its planned landing site. This requires the least propellant for re-entry, the spacecraft traveling on an elliptical Hohmann orbit to a point where it will be low enough in the atmosphere to re-enter.
Early Soyuz spacecraft would then have the service and orbital modules detach simultaneously. As they are connected by tubing and electrical cables to the descent module, this would aid in their separation and avoid having the descent module alter its orientation. Later Soyuz spacecraft detach the orbital module before firing the main engine, which saves even more propellant, enabling the descent module to return more payload. The orbital module cannot remain in orbit as an addition to a space station, because the airlock hatch is part of the descent module.
Re-entry firing is done on the "dawn" side of the earth, so that the spacecraft can be seen by recovery helicopters as it descends in the evening twilight, illuminated by the sun when it is above the shadow of the Earth. The Soyuz craft is designed to come down on land, usually somewhere in the deserts of Kazakhstan in central Asia. This is in contrast to early US manned missions which "splashed down" in the ocean.
The Soyuz spacecraft has been the subject of continuous evolution since the early 1960s. Thus several different actual versions, proposals and projects exist.
Korolyov initially promoted the Soyuz A-B-V circumlunar complex (''7K-9K-11K'') concept (also known as L1) in which a two-man craft Soyuz 7K would rendezvous with other components (9K and 11K) in Earth orbit to assemble a lunar excursion vehicle, the components being delivered by the proven R-7 rocket.
The manned Soyuz spacecraft can be classified into design generations. Soyuz 1 through Soyuz 11 (1967&ndash;1971) were first-generation vehicles, carrying a crew of up to three without spacesuits and distinguished from those following by their bent solar panels and their use of the Igla automatic docking navigation system, which required special radar antennas. This first generation encompassed the original Soyuz 7K-OK and the Soyuz 7K-OKS for docking with the Salyut 1 space station. The probe and drogue docking system permitted internal transfer of cosmonauts from the Soyuz to the station.
The Soyuz 7K-L1 was designed to launch a crew from the Earth to circle the moon, and was the primary hope for a Soviet circumlunar flight. It had several test flights in the Zond program from 1967&ndash;1970 (Zond 4 to Zond 8), which produced multiple failures in the 7K-L1's re-entry systems. The remaining 7K-L1s were scrapped. The Soyuz 7K-L3 was designed and developed in parallel to the Soyuz 7K-L1, but was also scrapped.
The next manned version of the Soyuz was the Soyuz 7K-OKS. It was designed for space station flights and had a docking port that allowed internal transfer between spacecraft. The Soyuz 7K-OKS had two manned flights, both in 1971. Soyuz 11, the second flight, depressurized upon re-entry, killing its three-man crew.
It was developed out of the military Soyuz concepts studied in previous years and was capable of carrying 2 cosmonauts with Sokol space suits (after the Soyuz 11 accident). Several models were planned, but none actually flew in space. These versions were named ''Soyuz 7K-P'', ''Soyuz 7K-PPK'', ''Soyuz R'', ''Soyuz 7K-VI'', and ''Soyuz OIS (Orbital Research Station)''. 
The Soyuz 7K-T/A9 version was used for the flights to the military Almaz space station.
Soyuz 7K-TM was the spacecraft used in the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project in 1975, which saw the first and only docking of a Soyuz spacecraft with an Apollo spacecraft. 
It was also flown in 1976 for the earth-science mission, Soyuz 22. 
Soyuz 7K-TM served as a technological bridge to the third generation.
The third generation Soyuz-T  (T:                         , ''Transportnyi'' meaning transport) spacecraft (1976&ndash;1986) featured solar panels allowing longer missions, a revised Igla rendezvous system and new translation/attitude thruster system on the Service module. It could carry a crew of three, now wearing spacesuits.
The Soyuz-TM crew transports (M:                                 , ''Modifitsirovannyi'' meaning modified) were fourth generation Soyuz spacecraft, and were used from 1986 to 2003 for ferry flights to Mir and the International Space Station.
Soyuz TMA (A:                                     , ''Antropometricheskii'' meaning anthropometric) features several changes to accommodate requirements requested by NASA in order to service the  International Space Station, including more latitude in the height and weight of the crew and improved parachute systems. It is also the first expendable vehicle to feature "glass cockpit" technology. Soyuz-TMA looks identical to a Soyuz-TM spacecraft on the outside, but interior differences allow it to accommodate taller occupants with new adjustable crew couches.
In 2004, Russian space officials announced that they intended to replace Soyuz with the new Kliper and Parom spacecraft by early 2011.http://www.spacedaily.com/reports/Soyuz_100_Times_More_Reliable_Than_Shuttle_999.html Since then, Kliper appears to have been indefinitely postponed due to lack of government funding. It has since been announced that the Soyuz will receive an upgrade to make it suitable for up to one year in space, as well as new digital interior displays and updated docking equipment. This new version, known as Soyuz TMA-M, debuted on 7 October 2010 with the launch of TMA-01M, carrying the ISS Expedition 25 crew.
Soyuz ACTS (Advanced Crew Transportation System), also known as Soyuz-K, is a proposed version of the Soyuz design capable of achieving lunar orbit. The upgrades could include a new habitation module developed by the European Space Agency. A novel, rocket-based precision landing system may also be implemented.  Missions could be launched from Baikonur or Guiana Space Centre.
The unmanned Progress spacecraft were derived from Soyuz and are used for servicing space stations.
While not being direct derivatives of Soyuz, the Chinese Shenzhou spacecraft and the Indian Orbital Vehicle follow the same general layout as that pioneered by Soyuz.
See List of Soviet manned space missions and List of Russian manned space missions as well as the Zond program.
Image:Soyuz National Space Centre.jpg|Early 7K-OK Soyuz at National Space Centre in Leicester, England
Image:Soyuz 19 (Apollo Soyuz Test Project) spacecraft.jpg|Soyuz spacecraft of the Apollo Soyuz Test Project (ASTP)
Image:Soyuz acoplada MIR.jpg|Soyuz docked to Mir
Image:Iss024e007122.jpg|Soyuz docked to ISS
Image:Soyuz spacecraft.jpg|Soyuz spacecraft mock-up
Image:Soyuz rocket engines.jpg|Soyuz launch vehicles engines
Image:Soyuz tm-31 transported to launch pad.jpg|Soyuz TM-31 moves to Launch Pad on 29 October 2000
Image:Soyuz TMA-2 launch.jpg|Soyuz TMA-2 launch from Baikonur on April 26, 2003
Image:Soyuz TMA-16 Lands.jpg|Soyuz TMA-16 landing
Image:Space Shuttle vs Soyuz TM - to scale drawing.png | Space Shuttle Orbiter and Soyuz-TM (drawn to scale).
Image:Soyus craft on Display at the Kennedy Space Center.jpg | Soyuz spacecraft on display at the Kennedy Space Center.
Image:SoyuzSovietStamp.jpg | Soviet insignia on a Soyuz spacecraft.