In 2006 he won the WPT Bad Boys of Poker II event when his  outdrew Mike Matusow's  on a board of . He wore a kimono throughout the event to promote poker in Japan. Also in 2006 he finished second to Yosh Nakano while representing Australia in the inaugural Intercontinental Poker Championship, taking down $150,000. True to his reputation, Tony G launched many verbal assaults against his opponents, most notably when he eliminated Russian Ralph Perry in fourth place. Tony G started to provoke Perry when he was deciding how to play his hand before the flop. When Perry called Tony G's all-in  with a worse hand, Tony G proceeded to ridicule and lecture him, specifically stating, "This is not someone to learn from  And when he eliminated Ralph Perry from the tournament: YEAAAH! YEAAAH BABY!! C'MON RUSSIAN, GET OUT!! IT'S TIME TO GO!! Look at this, look how he's doing, look how he's playing, look how ugly this is. You're a professional player and I can do this to you. You're a terrible player. This is disgraceful  Bring more Russians on. I'm here to get them all. You played that as bad as you can, your career is finished. You are gooone, GOONE, GONE!!" Tony's comments were so scathing that it prompted commentator Gabe Kaplan to quip "I think Tony G is speaking more like a Lithuanian than an Australian" and "Tony G could singlehandedly reignite the Cold War". Guoga, however, was more respectful of some players, such as Doyle Brunson when he called Doyle his idol after eliminating him.
In November 2006, he won the Asian Poker Tour event held in Singapore, walking away with $451,700 half of which he indicated he will give to Asian and Australian charities to be nominated by Betfair. In February 2007, he appeared on the NBC television program ''Poker After Dark'', coming in third place behind winner Phil Ivey. In November of the same year, he won a tournament in Moscow, earning $205,000. In his blog, he says that he left all of his prize money with the officials to give to Russian orphanages, having been inspired to do so by Barry Greenstein's habit of donating all his poker tournament winnings to charity. In January 2008, Tony received the Shining World Leadership Award in Melbourne Australia. As of 2009, his total live tournament winnings exceed $3,000,000. His 14 cashes at the WSOP account for $429,897 of those winnings. Guoga is also the principal owner of a network of high traffic poker information sites, including '''Pokernews.com''', Pokeraffiliateworld.com and Pokerworks.com.
In 2009 he began selling shares in himself on ChipMeUp, a poker staking section of PokerNews.