The plot of the show addresses the problems of ageing and caring for somebody with Alzheimer's disease with an often sharp-edged humour which carried with it a tinge of sadness. Despite its unlikely subject-matter for a comedy, the show was a favourite with audiences. Maggie and Arthur's relationship was presented with a fascinating complexity - Maggie's cruel attacks on and emotional manipulation of Arthur disguised her deep dependence on and need of him, and Arthur's dutiful love of Maggie was constantly in conflict with his guilty frustration at the huge limitations for his own life which looking after his mother entailed. The performance of Cracknell, a famous stage actress, as Maggie was particularly lauded as one of the finest characterisations on Australian television.
Widow of World War II veteran Leo, mother of Robert and Arthur, sister to Lorna and grandmother to Damien and Teonie. Maggie (Cracknell) is in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease and her youngest son Arthur lives with and takes care of her. However, despite being increasingly forgetful, Maggie is lucid enough to manipulate Arthur when she wants to, usually for something devilish that will seriously inconvenience him. Maggie was a nurse and met Leo while treating him for war wounds.
Younger son of Maggie and Leo, brother of Robert, uncle to Damien and Teonie and recent ex-husband of Deidre. Arthur (McDonald) is an editor and journalist for a newspaper. When he is not working, he is usually at home attending to the demands of his impish and increasingly confused mother. He drives a 1955 Morris Minor Series II Tourer convertible that is constantly breaking down, has trouble bringing dates back to the house due to his mother's deliberate interference, and is almost always thwarted by Maggie whenever he attempts to socialize with his work-friends. Maggie frequently excoriates Arthur, labelling all his would-be girlfriends as "floozies".
Elder son of Maggie and Leo, brother of Arthur, husband to Liz and father of Damien and Teonie. Robert is a successful dentist who likes to take lots of holidays and have extramarital affairs. He does so by disguising his overseas holiday trysts as dental research conferences. His mother tells him off for his womanising and says that it is the reason he failed medical school, much to the disappointment of his late father. He is a 'man of leisure' who is adept at providing excuses as to why it is Arthur and not him that must take the primary care of their elderly mother. Robert loves to play tennis and golf and throughout the show, owns 3 cars; a Jaguar, Volvo and a BMW. When Arthur asked him for a loan to buy a new car, all Robert would offer him was a seriously impaired Volvo at a discount.
Wife of Robert, mother to Damien and Teonie. The long-suffering Liz (Morris) is well-aware of her husband's affairs but finds it difficult to prove any of them, due to Robert's well-honed skill at covering them up. So in the meantime, Liz compensates by spending Robert's money and socialising with her equally rich, bored and unhappy friends. She occasionally seeks consolation from Arthur, using behaviour that could suggest that she is attracted to him.  She is frequently, however, just as insensitive and selfish as Robert is and just as eager to put Maggie in a home.  Liz has a verbal drawl, and is frequently heard to say "Oh Gawd" or "You're weird Arthur".
All 6 series have been released in Australia.