Born in Cincinnati, Ohio, Umberg graduated with honors from the University of California, Los Angeles in 1977. He was commissioned Second Lieutenant in the U.S. Army, then promoted to Captain. Umberg served with the 2nd Infantry Division in South Korea and with NATO forces in Italy during his time in the army.  Umberg also served as a paratrooper with the US Army Special Operations Command, US Army Special Warfare Center and the XVIIIth Airborne Corp. Umberg completed the Harvard University, Kennedy School of Public Policy, Program for Senior Executives in National Security. He was also awarded a Masters Degree in Strategic Studies from the U.S. Army War College. Umberg remained in the U.S. Army Reserve, rising to the rank of Colonel. His last assignment in the Reserve was as a prosecutor of terrorist suspects, and he received a Joint Service Commendation medal for his contribution in Guantanamo. Umberg's other military decorations include: the Meritorious Service Medal (2d award), the US Coast Guard Distinguished Public Service Award, the Army Commendation Medal (2d award), the Army Achievement Medal. Umberg is married to Brigadier General (USA) Robin Umberg.
After receiving his Juris Doctor degree from Hastings College of the Law in 1980, he was appointed an Assistant U.S. Attorney in Orange County. He had a 100% conviction rate prosecuting drug dealers, gang members, white collar criminals, and civil rights cases. In addition, he also served as a military prosecutor during between 1980 and 1985.
Umberg was first elected to the California State Assembly in 1990, defeating incumbent Republican Curt Pringle.  Umberg was re-elected in 1992. While in the Assembly he served as Chairman of the Environmental Safety and Toxic Materials Committee.  Instead of seeking a third term in 1994, Umberg ran for Attorney General of California but lost to Republican Dan Lungren.
Umberg then joined the law firm of Morrison & Foerster LLP in 1995 as a partner. He was the Managing Partner of Morrison & Foerster's Orange County Office from 2003 until 2005. In addition, he also took a position as an adjunct professor of law at Southwestern University School of Law. During the 1996 presidential election, he served as the chairman of the Clinton re-election campaign in California. Clinton appointed Umberg as the Deputy Director of the Office of National Drug Control Policy in 1997.
In 2000, Umberg left the Clinton administration and returned to California. In 2002, he lost the Democratic Party nomination for State Insurance Commissioner to John Garamendi. In 2004, Umberg won election to the Assembly to represent the 69th District. During his third term, Umberg Chaired the Elections and Redistriciting Committee. While in the legislature, Umberg authored over 60 measures which became law. These laws include measures dealing with hate crimes, white collor crime, campaign finance reform, high-speed rail transport and school meal programs.
Umberg sought the seat of retiring State Senator Joe Dunn (D) in the 2006 elections. Orange County Supervisor and former Assemblyman Lou Correa jumped in the race in January 2006 despite pressure from the local Democratic party for him to stay out (although with pressure from the state Democratic party for him to jump in), stating that he was running in part because of the allegations about Umberg's residency. Aside from other negative articles, Umberg also received criticism that he voted to legalize gay marriage.  Umberg attempted to get Correa off the ballot because Correa submitted more than the number of signatures required to qualify for the ballot, but ultimately failed. Umberg also claimed that an alliance between Correa and State Senate President Pro Tem Don Perata to funnel funds to Correa's campaign was illegal. Umberg was defeated by Correa by a 60% to 40% margin, and Correa went on to narrowly win the general election.
After Correa won the general election for the Senate by a 10% margin, Umberg entered the race to replace Correa on the Orange County Board of Supervisors, representing the 1st Supervisorial District. 52% of 1st Supervisorial District voters are also voters in the 69th Assembly District, formerly represented by Umberg. 73% of 1st Supervisorial District voters are also 34th Senate District voters, so Umbert was believed to be the favorite. On 6 February 2007, Umberg received 21.4%, coming in third, less than he had been expected to poll.