Mitchell was born Elizabeth Joanna Robertson in Los Angeles, California. Her stepfather, Joseph Day Mitchell, and mother, Josephine Marian Mitchell (nee Jenkins), are lawyers based in Dallas. Mitchell and her mother moved to Dallas, Texas in 1970, where her mother married Joseph Mitchell in 1975. Mitchell graduated from Booker T. Washington High School for the Performing and Visual Arts, a public magnet school. She is the oldest of three sisters, the others being Kristina Helen "Kristie" Mitchell (b. 1977), and Katherine Day "Kate" Mitchell (b. 1981). In 1991, she graduated from Stephens College with a Bachelor of Fine Arts in acting, and also studying at the British American Drama Academy. Mitchell worked for six years in Dallas Theater Center and a year at Encore Theater.
Mitchell had a recurring role as psychiatrist Dr. Kim Legaspi, the first lesbian lover of Dr. Kerry Weaver (Laura Innes) during the 2000   01 season of TV series ''ER''. She also played Angelina Jolie's hairdresser/lover in the movie ''Gia''. 
In March 2009, ''Entertainment Weekly'' reported that Mitchell had been cast in new ABC pilot for ''V'', its remake of the classic science fiction television miniseries. Although ABC and Warner Bros officials told the magazine she was only cast as a guest star, the announcement led to speculation and concern that Mitchell's character would be killed off at the end of ''Lost'''s fifth season, which ended on a cliffhanger that left the fate of her character unknown. Mitchell was later named the lead actress on ''V'' in an ABC press release and various sources reported that she would guest-star in ''Lost'''s sixth, final season. Mitchell's character was killed off in the sixth season premiere, but returned for the two-part series finale for which she received a nomination for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Drama Series.
The show ''V'' was picked up for a second season, which premiered on January 4, 2011. Mitchell is starring in an upcoming film, ''Answers to Nothing'', where she will play Kate.
Mitchell married actor Chris Soldevilla in 2004 with whom she has a son named C.J., who was born in 2005.
In an interview with Aventura magazine, Mitchell claimed she was just    a dorky kid    when she left Los Angeles for Dallas.    I would finish school in Dallas where my mom was going to law school, and she would make sure I got right over to the Theater Center,    says Mitchell.    It was magic. I loved every second of being there and wanted to sleep on stage. I knew then I wanted to be an actress.    
Though various websites & Aventura magazine mention that prior to her marriage to Soldevilla she was "married" to actor Gary Bakewell, Mitchell herself told Southern Beauty magazine in their Holiday 2009 issue that such information is a rumour: ''"For the most part,  manages to stay below the industry's gossip radar. ' I'm pretty lucky', she says, 'There's not a lot that's written about me that is completely incorrect.' Then, however, she jokes about her supposed first husband and second child - both untruths - mentioned on various websites."''  Aventura magazine erroneously referenced such a website, as they did not conduct a direct interview.
Before the premier of V, Mitchell was asked "Are you working on anything else right now?", to which she replied, "I promised my five-year-old I would do a lot of nothing. We have light-sabers and we fight outside in the yard at night to make them glow. And we make noises. I do dress sometimes as a Jedi master. Because I   m a mom, and that   s what we do. I have a fair knowledge of swordplay, so now I just have to figure out my light-saber-play."