School is out and the teenagers head for the beach. All is well until millionaire Harvey Huntington Honeywagon III (Wynn) comes around, convinced that the beachgoers are so senselessly obsessed with sex that their mentality is below that of a primate     especially Honeywagon's wunderkind pet chimp Clyde, who can surf, drive, and watusi better than anyone on the beach. With the teenagers demoralized and discredited, Honeywagon plans to turn Bikini Beach into a senior citizens retirement home. 
Meanwhile,   British rocker and drag racer Peter Royce Bentley, better known as "The Potato Bug" (played by Frankie Avalon in a dual role), has taken up residence on Bikini Beach. Annoyed by Frankie's reluctance to start their relationship towards marriage, Dee Dee becomes receptive to Potato Bug's advances. In a jealous rage, Frankie challenges The Potato Bug to a drag race, in hopes of winning Dee Dee back.
The original score for this film, like ''Muscle Beach Party'' before it, was composed by Les Baxter.
Guy Hemric and Jerry Styner wrote several songs for the film: "Bikini Beach" performed by the cast; "Love's a Secret Weapon" sung by Donna Loren; "Gimmie Your Love" sung by Avalon; "This Time It's Love" sung by Funicello; "Because You're You" sung by Avalon and Funicello. 
Hemric and Styner also wrote two songs that featured The Pyramids doing back up: "How About That?," sung as a duet by Avalon; and "Happy Feelin    (Dance and Shout)" sung by Little Stevie Wonder.
The Pyramids performed two additional songs     both which were written by Gary Usher and Roger Christian for the film:    Record Run    and the instrumental "Bikini Drag."
Candy Johnson   s band, The Exciters, perform "Gotcha Where I Wantcha," written by Jack Merrill and Red Gilson.
In a ''FILMFAXplus'' (April/June 2004) interview, director William Asher revealed that the script was originally written for The Beatles. According to Asher's claim, the group had agreed to act in the film but later dropped out as their rapidly growing fame (especially after their 1964 appearance on ''The Ed Sullivan Show'') caused their fee to exceed the film's budget.  Asher was forced to rework the script. Frankie Avalon's dual role as an English singer named "The Potato Bug" was created to replace the four Beatles in the story.
Pop singer Donna Loren appears for the second time.  She was previously in ''Muscle Beach Party'', and also appeared in ''Pajama Party'' and ''Beach Blanket Bingo''. She sang at least one solo in each movie.  Little Stevie Wonder, also from ''Muscle Beach Party'' returned for a bit part as well.
Unusual character actor Timothy Carey appears briefly in this film as "South Dakota Slim," and has a larger part as the same character in ''Beach Blanket Bingo''. His character is replaced by "North Dakota Pete" (played by Len Lesser) in ''How to Stuff a Wild Bikini.''
Nineteen-year-old Val Warren, who is billed as Teenage Werewolf in the film   s closing credits, was the first prize winner in Forest Ackerman   s ''Famous Monsters of Filmland'' magazine's National Horror Makeup Contest (beating out Rick Baker, who would later go on to win three Oscars for makeup artistry).  Included in first prize was a trip to Hollywood and an appearance in ''Bikini Beach''.  Warren stated in a reply to the ''Los Angeles Times'' report of Ackerman   s death,    When director William Asher requested that I growl during my brief sequence, my ever-protective agent, 'Uncle' Forry quickly reminded him that said role had now become a 'speaking part' and, as such, I was entitled to a cast credit as well as the Screen Actors Guild pay standard of an additional 250 bucks. When Asher consented, Forry, like the big kid he was, expressed his delight by turning to face me with a beaming smile and an exaggerated wink.   
The dragsters used in the drag racing scenes (shot at Pomona Raceway) were very popular - and successful - at the time. They include: Dean Jeffries' "Manta Ray," Larry Stellings' "Britannica," the Greer, Black and Prudhomme fuel dragster "Freida" - driven by Don Prudhomme, 'TV' Tommy Ivo's fuel dragster and four-Buick-engined "Showboat" dragster - the one Clyde drives to a new speed record.  Ivo was also a technical advisor for the film, as well as go-kart champ Von Deming - billed in the credits with the title, "West Coast Go-Kart Champion."
The surfboards used in this film (as well as the earlier ''Muscle Beach Party'') were by Phil of Downey, California - aka Phil Sauer, the maker of "Surfboards of the Stars." Sauer was also the stunt coordinator for another beach party film that used his surfboards, Columbia Pictures' ''Ride the Wild Surf'', which was released the following month. Sauer was even portrayed in that film as a character by Mark LaBuse.