The player is free to roam the game world on foot or riding a horse, taking optional missions as one pleases as a typical sandbox game. As the player progresses through the game, they can opt to complete side-missions, including poker tournaments, cattle herding, law enforcement and bounty hunting. Using money obtained from these side-missions and finding gold veins, players can purchase upgrades to their items. ''Gun'' was marketed through the use of "Last Call Poker"     an alternate reality game from 42 Entertainment.
The game begins with a cutscene showing Coronado's Second expedition. The game then moves forward 300 years to Montana. Colton White and his father Ned are hunting for game along the Missouri river. After saving Ned from a giant grizzly bear, Colton and Ned board a steamer, the Morning Star, to sell their skins and meat although Ned seems to have a more mysterious reason for boarding. Suddenly, the steamer is attacked by a corrupt preacher named Reed and a band of renegade soldiers turned savages. After losing ground to the renegades, Colton and Ned are pushed to the back of the boat where Ned reveals he is not Colton's biological father and pushes him over the side to save him from the steamboat's boiler explosion.
A man attempts to rob an unconscious Colton, who awakes. The man, Honest Tom, tells Colton that the steamboat attack was three days ago and there were no survivors. After beating Tom in a race and winning his horse, Tom's posse appears and attacks Colton who kills them all. Colton travels to Dodge City to find Jenny, a whore who knows about Reed. After beating a bunch of cowboys who kidnapped Jenny, she tells him that if anyone knows where to find Reed it is Empire City's mayor: Hoodoo Brown. After assisting the sheriff in finishing the bridge to Empire City, Colton and Jenny travel through Apache land.
Upon arriving at Empire, Colton is made a deputy by Hoodoo and assists his other deputies in finding a leader of the rebellion. After capturing a rebel hideout, Colton is appalled by the other deputies killing of an unarmed couple, and kills them. When he returns to kill Hoodoo, Hoodoo tells him that Jenny is with the preacher and they hear Jenny scream. When Colton runs upstairs to find her, Reed slits her throat in front of him and Hoodoo knocks Colton unconscious. When he awakes, he learns that Reed and Hoodoo are both working for railroad tycoon Thomas Magruder and they throw Colton in jail with the intent to frame and execute him for Jenny's murder. With the help of a safecracker, Soapy, Colton escapes the jail and goes to the rebel's new hideout where he meets their leader, Clay Allison.
Clay takes him on a mission to destroy one of Magruder's trains. As they celebrate the train attack at the hideout, they are attacked by Magruder's men. They repel the attack but Clay gets kidnapped in the process. Colton convinces the rebels to assault Empire City to find Clay and kill Hoodoo. After rescuing Clay, Colton and Hoodoo engage in a final battle where Colton kills Hoodoo. Colton then travels back to Dodge to find Soapy so they can crack a safe that contains an item Ned hid from Magruder on the steamboat.
After saving Soapy from men he cheated in poker, the two travel to the renegades' fort to find a way to the steamboat. However, the two are captured by the leader of the renegades; Sergeant Hollister, who commanded the men who attacked the steamboat. After escaping the fort they assist the local Blackfoot tribe in attacking the fort. After defeating Hollister, Colton and Soapy find the steamboat where they are attacked by Magruder's cavalry and then Reed. Colton kills Reed and he and Soapy discover that the item is a part of a golden cross which can show the way to the famous lost city of gold, Quivira. Colton realizes that the other piece is with the leader of the Apaches, Many Wounds. Colton and Soapy travel across the Badlands with Many Wounds who reveals that Colton's father was a doctor and his mother an Apache. Both were murdered by Magruder and Ned took Colton to make up for showing Magruder where to find them. Many Wounds shows them where to use the cross as a map. Soapy and Colton are attacked by Magruder's men. Colton kills them and steals Magruder's train to assault the mine that Magruder used to look for Quivira. With the help of the Apaches and Clay's rebel forces, Colton fights his way through the mines where he meets Magruder in a final showdown at Quivira. Colton defeats Magruder and escapes the mines with the help of  Many Wounds.
The game sold 225,000 units across the four systems it was initially released for.  According to TRST sales data the game has sold over 1.4 million units in the US (as of October 2008).  It was well-received by professional game reviewers and Activision has noted that ''Gun'' sold the best among new video game properties.
Activision has responded to The Association for American Indian Development's petition, which demands a product recall of ''Gun'' on the grounds that the game inaccurately depicts the Apache people using degrading and harmful content. The publisher issued this brief statement:
In February 2006, publisher Activision hinted that a sequel may be on the way. More rumors began in September 2007 when a poster for "Gun: Magruder's Ghost" was spotted in a demo for ''Tony Hawk's Proving Ground'', also a Neversoft title. IGN has also added the game as "other game by Activision". According to Joystiq, publisher Activision has apparently hinted during a financial conference that a sequel may be in production.