The magazine uses an environmentally friendly processed paper, which is composed of consumer waste (about 30%) and is absent of chlorine.Quad,    Ranger Rick is printed.,    Ranger Rick 43, no. 5 (May 2009): 2.  Vegetable oils largely make up the magazine   s actual ink. Quad,    Ranger Rick is printed.,    Ranger Rick 43, no. 5 (May 2009): 2.  By using these environmentally friendly resources the following is saved on a monthly basis: Quad,    Ranger Rick is printed.,    Ranger Rick 43, no. 5 (May 2009): 2. 
Trees: 1,179
Total Energy: 3,300 million BTUs
Waste Water: 1,517,064 gallons
Solid Waste: 216,093 lbs.
Previous ''Ranger Rick'' magazines have featured these and other adventure stories:
Here are other awards the magazine has attained over the years:    Awards & Honors - National Wildlife Federation,    http://www.nwf.org/Kids/Ranger-Rick/Parents-and-Educators/Awards.aspx. 
Note: Before 2000 or so, the Association of Educational Publishers (AEP) was known as EdPress. 
Parents' Choice Foundation 
The Learning Magazine Teachers' Choice Awards  
Other Awards: 
Because technology has greatly influenced and impacted the lives of children today, ''Ranger Rick'' magazine has made modifications in order to appeal to the children that are becoming increasingly distant in engaging in outdoor exploration.  Kenneth B. Kidd, Wild things: children's culture and ecocriticism (Wayne State University Press, 2004).  In order to inspire a new generation of conservationists, attracting young readers is essential to magazine's which promote environmental awareness and preservation efforts.  Brian Nearing, Linking kids to great outdoors: Agency starts magazine that aims to instill love of nature in the young (Times Union (Albany, NY), December 19, 2007). , and ''Ranger Rick'' magazine has realized this importance of maintaing natural interest in young people. The magazine has since made changes within their content  Kenneth B. Kidd, Wild things: children's culture and ecocriticism (Wayne State University Press, 2004).  in order to appeal to a changed generation of children, not only for profit, but for the future of conservational efforts. The magazine has made such changes, for example, in the amount of narrative, by replacing the majority of narrative pieces with more visually engaging elements. Kenneth B. Kidd, Wild things: children's culture and ecocriticism (Wayne State University Press, 2004).  Also, the ''Ranger Rick'' character himself has had a transformation as he once appeared as an accurate representation of a real raccoon, to becoming a very unrealistic, cartoon-like figure. Kenneth B. Kidd, Wild things: children's culture and ecocriticism (Wayne State University Press, 2004).  Some sections of the magazine have been modified as well, such as placing the text and titles in more modern and ideal locations to visually draw in readers.  Kenneth B. Kidd, Wild things: children's culture and ecocriticism (Wayne State University Press, 2004). 