Beginning in the 1980s, scientists began seeking a dedicated mission to study a comet.  During the early 1990s, several  missions to study comet Halley became the first successful missions to return close-up data. However, the US cometary mission, Comet Rendezvous Asteroid Flyby, was canceled for budgetary reasons. In the mid-1990s, further support was given to a cheaper, Discovery-class mission that would study comet Wild 2 in 2004.
Comet Wild 2 was selected as the primary target of the mission for the rare chance to observe a long-period comet that has ventured close to the Sun. The comet has since become a short period comet after an event in 1974, where the orbit of Wild 2 was affected by the gravitational pull of Jupiter, moving the orbit inward, closer to the Sun. In planning the mission, it was expected that most of the original material from which the comet formed, would still be preserved.
The primary science objectives of the mission include:
The spacecraft was designed, built and is operated by Lockheed Martin Astronautics as a Discovery-class mission in Denver, Colorado. JPL provides mission management for the NASA division for mission operations. The principal investigator of the mission is Dr. Donald Brownlee from the University of Washington.
Voyager Golden Record, etc.)-->
Stardust was launched carrying two sets of identical pairs of square 10.16-centimeter silicon wafers.  Each pair features engravings of well over one-million names of people who participated in the public outreach program by filling out internet forms available in late 1997 and mid 1998. One pair of the microchips is positioned on the spacecraft and the other was attached to the sample return capsule.
The spacecraft bus measures 1.7-meters in length, and 0.66-meters in width, a design adapted from the SpaceProbe deep space bus developed by Lockheed Martin Astronautics. The bus is primarily constructed with graphite fiber panels with an aluminum honeycomb support structure underneath; the entire spacecraft is covered with polycyanate, Kapton sheeting for further protection. To maintain low costs, the spacecraft incorporates many designs and technologies used in past missions or previously developed for future missions by the Small Spacecraft Technologies Initiative (SSTI). The spacecraft features five scientific instruments to collect data, including the Stardust Sample Collection tray, which was brought back to Earth for analysis.
During the second encounter with Earth, Stardust was put into a "divert maneuver" immediately after the capsule was released. The maneuver corrected the spacecraft direction to avoid entering the atmosphere. Under twenty kilograms of propellant remained onboard after the maneuver.
On January 29, 2004, the spacecraft was put in hibernation mode with only the solar panels and receiver active, in a three-year heliocentric orbit that would return it to Earth vicinity on January 14, 2009.
A subsequent mission extension was approved on July 3, 2007, to bring the spacecraft back to full operation for a flyby of comet Tempel 1 in 2011. The mission extension will be the first to revisit a small solar system body and is expected to use the remaining propellant, signaling the end of the useful life for the spacecraft.
On November 2, 2002, at 04:50:20 UTC, Stardust encountered asteroid 5535 Annefrank from a distance of . The solar phase angle ranged from 130 deg to 47 degrees during the period of observations. This encounter was used primarily as an engineering test of the spacecraft and ground operations in preparation for the encounter with comet Wild 2 in 2003.
On January 2, 2004, at 19:21:28 UTC, Stardust encountered Comet Wild 2 on the sunward side with a relative velocity of 6.1&nbsp;km/sec at a distance of . The original encounter distance was planned to be , but this was changed after a safety review board increased the closest approach distance to minimize the potential for catastrophic dust collisions.
The relative velocity between the comet and the spacecraft was such that the comet actually overtook the spacecraft from behind as they traveled around the Sun.  During the encounter, the spacecraft was on the sun-lit side of the nucleus, approaching at a solar phase angle of 70 degrees, reaching a minimum angle of 3 degrees near closest approach and departing at a phase angle of 110 degrees.
During the flyby the spacecraft deployed the Sample Collection plate to collect dust grain samples from the coma, and took detailed pictures of the icy nucleus.
On January 16, 2006, at 05:57:00 UTC, the Sample Return Capsule successfully separated from Stardust and re-entered the Earth's atmosphere at 09:57:00 UTC, at a velocity of 12.9&nbsp;km/s, the fastest re-entry speed into Earth's atmosphere ever achieved by a man-made object. The capsule then parachuted to the ground, finally landing at 10:10:00 UTC at the Utah Test and Training Range (), near the U.S. Army Dugway Proving Ground.  The capsule was then transported by military aircraft from Utah to Ellington Air Force Base in Houston, Texas, then transferred by road to the Planetary Materials Curatorial facility at Johnson Space Center in Houston to begin analysis. NASA officials claimed "prudence" dictated that the materials be transferred in secrecy, though  no security threats were apparent.
The sample container was taken to a clean room with a cleanliness factor 100 times that of a hospital operating room to ensure the star and comet dust was not contaminated. Preliminary estimations suggested at least a million microscopic specks of dust were embedded in aerogel collector.  Ten particles were found to be at least 100 micrometers and the largest approximately 1000 micrometers. An estimated 45 interstellar dust impacts were also found on the sample collector, which reside on the back side of the cometary dust collector. Dust grains are being observed and analyzed by a volunteer team through the distributed computing project, Stardust@Home.
In December 2006, seven papers were published in the scientific journal, ''Science'', discussing initial details of the sample analysis. Among the findings are: a wide range of organic compounds, including two that contain biologically usable nitrogen; indigenous aliphatic hydrocarbons with longer chain lengths than those observed in the diffuse interstellar medium; abundant amorphous silicates in addition to crystalline silicates such as olivine and pyroxene, proving consistency with the mixing of solar system and interstellar matter, previously deduced spectroscopically from ground observations; hydrous silicates and carbonate minerals were found to be absent, suggesting a lack of aqueous processing of the cometary dust; limited pure carbon (CHON) was also found in the samples returned; methylamine and ethylamine was found in the aerogel but was not associated with specific particles.
In 2010 Dr Andrew Westphal announced that Stardust@home volunteer Bruce Hudson found a track (labeled "I1043,1,30") among the many images of the aerogel that may contain an interstellar dust grain.
In April 2011, scientists from the University of Arizona discovered evidence for the presence of liquid water in a Comet Wild 2. They have found iron and copper sulfide minerals that must have formed in the presence of water. The discovery shatters the existing paradigm that comets never get warm enough to melt their icy bulk.
On March 19, 2006, Stardust scientists announced that they were considering the possibility of redirecting the spacecraft on a secondary mission to image Tempel 1. The comet was previously the target of the Deep Impact mission in 2005, sending an impactor into the surface. The possibility of this extension could be vital for gathering images of the impact crater Deep Impact was unsuccessful in capturing due to dust from the impact, obscuring the surface.
On July 3, 2007 the mission extension was approved and renamed ''New Exploration of Tempel 1'' (NExT). This investigation will provide the first look at the changes to a comet nucleus produced after a close approach to the sun. NExT also will extend the mapping of Tempel 1, making it the most mapped comet nucleus to date. This mapping will help address the major questions of comet nucleus geology. The flyby mission was expected to consume the remaining fuel, signaling the end of the operability for the spacecraft.
The mission objectives included the following:
On February 15, 2011, at 04:42:00 UTC, Stardust-NExT encountered Tempel 1 from a distance of .  An estimated 72 images were acquired during the encounter. These showed changes in the terrain and revealed portions of the comet never seen by Deep Impact. The impact site from Deep Impact was also observed though it was barely visible due to material settling back into the crater.
On March 24, 2011, Stardust conducted a burn to consume its remaining fuel. The reason for the burn was that the spacecraft was literally running on fumes. Scientists hope that the data collected will help in the development of a more accurate system for estimating fuel levels on spacecraft. After the data had been collected, no further antenna aiming was possible and the transmitter was switched off. The spacecraft sent an acknowledgement from approximately  away in space.