The '''Intellisync Corporation''' is a provider of Data and PIM Synchronization software for mobile devices, such as Cell Phones and PDAs. The company is currently a part of Nokia, after it was acquired in 2006. 
The company was formed after the San Jose, California, based Pumatech acquired the Alpharetta, Georgia based Synchrologic in late 2003 and renamed itself in 2004. The company has won several awards for its mobile software and data synchronization software.  On January 31, 2006, stockholder approval was secured for Intellisync to be acquired by Nokia. On February 10, 2006, Nokia formally completed its acquisition of Intellisync.  Nokia has announced that the IntelliSync Desktop product has been discontinued and the last date available to order the product is July 19, 2008.  Product support will be provided thru July 19, 2010 if eligible for support. . Nokia Intellisync Mobile Suite remains a key product of Nokia Email strategy.
On September 29, 2008 Nokia announced that it plans to cease developing or marketing its own behind-the-firewall business mobility solutions (Intellisync Mobility Product Suite). The appropriate technologies and expertise will be reallocated to Nokia   s new consumer push e-mail service. Going forward, Nokia plans to form its enterprise solutions offering by combining Nokia devices and applications with software solutions from industry leading enterprise vendors such as Microsoft, IBM, Cisco and others.
After the Nokia acquisition, the company headquarters in San Jose was closed and all employees moved to the Nokia office in Mountain View.  The company maintains development offices in Alpharetta, Georgia, Bulgaria, New Delhi, Tokyo and Cluj-Napoca.
Intellisync's flagship product, the Intellisync Mobile Suite, is a suite of software designed for corporations and wireless carriers. The Suite includes four modules, that can be installed independently or in any combination: Wireless Email, Systems/Device Management, File Sync and Application Sync. There is also a specific application reverse proxy sold as Intellisync Secure Gateway. This allows a more secure firewall configuration. 
The intent is to provide database synchronization with the company's Application Sync product; Email and PIM synchronization with Wireless Email, and mobile device management and static file distribution with Device Management/File Sync. These products support synchronization with a corporation's Microsoft Exchange Server, Domino mail servers or Novell GroupWise, as well as POP and IMAP mail support.
The company originally only provided software for Windows-based computers, Palm Devices, Handheld PCs, and Pocket PCs, but has recently expanded into supporting Symbian, BREW, and other mobile devices. While the company originally marketed its product to large businesses (such as Boeing, Nintendo and the United States Military), it recently began rebranding its product to be distributed by wireless carriers as a revenue enhancing  service to individual consumers. Wireless providers that have partnered with Intellisync include Verizon and Eurotel.
Yahoo is one of the internet providers that uses Intellisync products. AutoSync Yahoo is a product written by Intellisync to sync Yahoo contacts, notes, calendars and tasks with Outlook Express and MS Outlook.
Its primary competitor is Research in Motion (RIM).