The headquarters of the''' United Nations''' is a distinctive complex in New York City, United States. The complex has served as the official headquarters of the United Nations since its completion in 1952. It is located in the Turtle Bay neighborhood of Manhattan, on spacious grounds overlooking the East River. Its borders are First Avenue on the west, East 42nd Street to the south, East 48th Street on the north and the East River to the east. Turtle Bay is used as a synonym for the U.N. headquarters or for the U.N. as a whole.
The United Nations has three additional, subsidiary, regional headquarters or headquarter districts. These are located in Geneva (Switzerland), Vienna (Austria), and Nairobi (Kenya). These adjunct offices help represent UN interests, facilitate diplomatic activities, and enjoy certain extraterritorial privileges, but only the main headquarters in New York contains the seats of the principal organs of the UN, including the General Assembly and Security Council. All 15 of the United Nation's specialized agencies are located outside New York at these other headquarters or in other cities.
Though it is in New York City, and part of the United States, the land used by the United Nations Headquarters is considered international territory, while also being subject to most local, state, and federal laws.  For award purposes Amateur radio operators consider it a separate "entity", and for communications the UN has its own internationally recognized ITU prefix, 4U.
The FDR Drive passes underneath the Conference Building of the complex.
The United Nations Headquarters complex was constructed in New York City in 1949 and 1950 beside the East River, on  of land purchased from the foremost New York real estate developer of the time, William Zeckendorf. Nelson Rockefeller arranged this purchase, after an initial offer to locate it on the Rockefeller family estate of Kykuit was rejected as being too isolated from Manhattan. The $8.5 million purchase was then funded by his father, John D. Rockefeller, Jr., who donated it to the City. The lead architect for the building was the real estate firm of Wallace Harrison, the personal architectural adviser for the family.
Rather than announce a competition for the design of the facilities for the headquarters, the UN decided to commission a collaborative effort among a multinational team of leading architects. The American architect Wallace K. Harrison was named as chief architect and director of planning, and a board of design consultants was nominated by member governments. The board consisted of N. D. Bassov of the Soviet Union, Gaston Brunfaut (Belgium), Ernest Cormier (Canada), Charles E. Le Corbusier (France), Liang Seu-cheng (China), Sven Markelius (Sweden), Oscar Niemeyer (Brazil), Howard Robertson (United Kingdom), G. A. Soilleux (Australia), and Julio Villamajo (Uruguay).
Bound by such constraints as the East River Drive (later the Franklin D. Roosevelt East River Drive) and the East River, it became necessary to build a high-rise office building for the secretariat. The 39-story Secretariat Building was controversial in its time but became a modernist landmark.
Per an agreement with the New York City government, the buildings met some but not all local fire safety and building codes. The Secretary-General's office is on the 38th floor.
Construction on the initial buildings was begun in 1947, with the cornerstone laid on October 24, 1949, and was completed in 1952, although the Dag Hammarskjold Building was added in 1961. The construction of the headquarters was financed by an interest-free loan of $65 million made by the United States government, and the cost of construction was also reported as $65 million.
San Francisco, Chicago, Philadelphia, Boston, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park in Queens, Chopmist Hill Area of Scituate, Rhode Island and even the Black Hills of South Dakota and Bald Head Island in North Carolina were all proposed as sites for the United Nations Headquarters before Manhattan was finally decided upon. It was later revealed that France, the United Kingdom, and the Netherlands voted against situating the headquarters in the United States. The Manhattan site was selected after John D. Rockefeller, Jr. offered to donate $8.5 million to purchase the land.
Prior to the choice of the site in New York City, Navy Island near Niagara Falls in Ontario, Canada was proposed as an alternative headquarters for the United Nations. An international committee pitched the site as the "World Peace Capital" over 1945 and 1946. The island was considered to be an ideal location as it lay on the boundary of two bordering countries of a peaceful status. It was proposed that Navy Island would be ceded to the United Nations as long as the headquarters remained, and to revert to the Canadian government should the UN move. The proposal was ultimately turned down in favor of the current site in New York City.
In 1945-6, London hosted the first meeting of the General Assembly in Methodist Central Hall, and the Security Council in Church House. The third and sixth General Assembly sessions, in 1948 and 1951, met in the Trocadero in Paris. Prior to the construction of the current complex, the UN was headquartered at a temporary location at the Sperry Gyroscope Corporation's offices in Lake Success, New York, an eastern suburb of the city in Nassau County on Long Island, from 1946-1952. The Security Council has also held sessions on what was then the Bronx campus of Hunter College (now the site of Lehman College) from March to August 1946.  The UN also met at what is now the New York City Pavilion at the 1964 New York World's Fair site (and in fact was used for the 1939 Fair).  The General Assembly met at what is now the ice skating rink, and the Long Island Rail Road reopened the former World's Fair station as United Nations station
Right after his arrival in New York, Niemeyer met Corbusier on his demands. He requested Niemeyer not to submit a scheme, but rather to collaborate with him on a project, on the basis that he could    create a commotion   .  It was Wallace Harrison who tried to convince Niemeyer to move on his own.
50 designs were evaluated by the team, and Niemeyer's project 32 was finally chosen. As opposed to Corbusier   s project 23, which consisted of one building containing both the Assembly Hall and the councils in the centre of the site (as it was hierarchically the most important building), Niemeyer's plan split the councils from the Assembly Hall, locating the first alongside the river, and the second on the right side of the secretariat. This would not split the site, but on the contrary, would create a large civic square.
George Dudley later stated:
Later that day, Corbusier came once again to Niemeyer, and asked him to reposition the Assembly Hall back to the centre of the site. Such modification would destroy Niemeyer   s plans for the square. However, he finally decided to accept the modification:
Together, they submitted the scheme 23-32, which was built and is what can be seen today.
 This affects some law enforcement where UN rules override the laws of New York City, but it does not give immunity to those who commit crimes there. In addition, the United Nations Headquarters remains under the jurisdiction and laws of the United States, although a few members of the UN staff have diplomatic immunity and so cannot be prosecuted by local courts unless the diplomatic immunity is waived by the Secretary-General. In 2005, Secretary-General Kofi Annan waived the immunity of Benon Sevan, Aleksandr Yakovlev, and Vladimir Kuznetsov in relation to the Oil-for-Food Programme. All have been charged in the U.S. Federal Court of New York, except for Kofi Annan's own son, also implicated in the scandal. Benon Sevan later fled the U.S. to Cyprus, while Aleksandr Yakovlev and Vladimir Kuznetsov decided to stand trial.
The currency in use at the United Nations headquarters' businesses is the U.S. dollar. English and French are the working languages of the United Nations Secretariat; most of the daily communication within secretariat and most of the signs in the UN headquarters building are in French and English. English, French and Spanish are the working languages of the Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC); and Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish are working and official languages of the General Assembly.
The complex has a street address of United Nations Headquarters, New York, NY 10017, USA. For security reasons, all mail sent to this address is sterilized, so items that may be degraded should be sent by courier. The United Nations Postal Administration issues stamps, which must be used on stamped mail sent from the building. Journalists, when reporting from the complex, often use "United Nations" rather than "New York" as the identification of their location in recognition of the extraterritoriality status.
The complex includes a number of major buildings.  While the Secretariat building is most predominantly featured in depictions of the headquarters, it also includes the domed General Assembly building, the Dag Hammarskjold Library, as well as the Conference and Visitors Center, which is situated between the General Assembly and Secretariat buildings, and can be seen only from FDR Drive or the East River. Just inside the perimeter fence of the complex stands a line of flagpoles where the flags of all 192 UN member states, plus the U.N. flag, are flown in English alphabetical order.
The General Assembly building holds the General Assembly Hall, with a seating capacity of 1,800, is the largest room in the complex. The Hall has two murals  by the French artist Fernand Leger. Above the podium is the UN emblem. Wooden protrusions form an ornamental ring that covers most of the interior of the circular hall. At the top of the hall is a large dome surrounded by powerful light fixtures.
The Conference Building is located along the East River between the General Assembly Building and the Secretariat.  The Conference Building holds the Security Council Chamber, which was a gift from Norway and was designed by the Norwegian architect Arnstein Arneberg. The oil canvas mural depicting a phoenix rising from its ashes by Norwegian artist Per Krogh hangs at the front of the room.
The 39-story Secretariat tower provides offices for the Secretary General, the Under-Secretary-General for Legal Affairs and United Nations Legal Counsel, the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs and Office of Disarmament Affairs, and the Department for General Assembly and Conference Management (DGACM).
The Dag Hammarskjold Library was dedicated on November 16, 1961. The building was a gift from the Ford Foundation and is located next to the Secretariat at the south-west corner of the headquarters campus. The library holds 400,000 books, 9,800 newspapers and periodical titles, and 80,000 maps. The library also holds the Woodrow Wilson Collection of 8,600 volumes of League documents and 6,500 related books and pamphlets. The library also has an Economic and Social Affairs Collection in the DC-2 building.
The complex is also notable for its gardens and outdoor sculptures. Iconic sculptures include the "Knotted Gun," a gift from the Luxembourg government and "Let Us Beat Swords Into Plowshares", a gift from the Soviet Union, Russia. The latter sculpture is the only appearance of the "swords into plowshares" quotation, from Isaiah 2:4, within the complex. Contrary to popular belief, the quotation is not carved on any UN building. Rather, it is carved on the "Isaiah Wall" of Ralph Bunche Park across the street. A piece of the Berlin Wall also stands in the U.N. garden.
Other prominent artworks on the grounds include a Marc Chagall stained glass window memorializing the death of Dag Hammarskjold, the Japanese Peace Bell which is rung on the vernal equinox and the opening of each General Assembly session, a Chinese ivory carving made in 1974 (before the ivory trade was largely banned in 1989), and a Venetian mosaic depicting Norman Rockwell's painting ''The Golden Rule''. A tapestry copy of Pablo Picasso's ''Guernica'' on the wall of the United Nations building at the entrance to the Security Council room. In 1952, a pair of Leger murals was installed in the General Assembly Hall of the United Nations headquarters in New York, New York.
Two huge murals by Brazilian artist Candido Portinari, entitled Guerra e Paz (War and Peace) can be found at the delegates hall. Portinari intended to execute the work in the United States. However, his visa was denied due to his communist convictions. He decided to paint them in Rio de Janeiro, and they were later assembled in the headquarters. After their completion in 1957, Portinari, who was already ill when he started the masterpiece, succumbed to lead poisoning from the pigments his doctors advised him to abandon.
While outside of the complex, the headquarters also includes two large office buildings that serve as offices for the agencies and programmes of the organization.  These buildings, known as DC-1 and DC-2 are located at 1 and 2 UN Plaza respectively. DC1 was built in 1976. There is also an identification office at the corner of 46th Street, inside a former bank branch, where pre-accredited diplomats, reporters, and others receive their grounds pass. UNICEF House (3 UN Plaza) and the UNITAR Building (807 UN Plaza) are also part of headquarters. In addition, the Church Center for the United Nations (777 UN Plaza) is a private building owned by the United Methodist Church as an interfaith space housing the offices of several non-governmental organizations. The Office of Internal Oversight Services (OIOS) is located at 380 Madison Avenue.
In recent years, however, the headquarters buildings have come to need extensive renovation, including the need to install sprinklers, fix leaks, and remove asbestos. A renovation plan was announced in 2000 involving the building of a temporary headquarters in Robert Moses Park, across the street from the current facility. Once renovations were finished, the temporary building would be used to ease overcrowding at the DC-1 and DC-2 However, due to the refusal of the federal and New York state governments to fund the project, little has been accomplished.
Alternative sites were considered as temporary holding locations. In 2005, it was suggested that a new temporary site be created at the old Lake Success location. Brooklyn was also suggested as a temporary site.  Another alternative for a temporary headquarters or a new permanent facility was the World Trade Center site.
On July 28, 2007, it was announced the complex will undergo a $1 billion renovation starting in the fall. Swedish firm Skanska AB won a bid to overhaul the buildings which will include the Conference, General Assembly and Secretariat buildings. The renovations, which will be the first since the complex opened in 1950, are expected to take about 7 years to complete. When completed the complex is also expected to be more energy efficient. Officials hope the renovated buildings will achieve a LEED Silver rating, although they concede that the delay in construction will result in a projected 7.5% inflation rate in the cost of materials and labor over the course of the project.
Due to its role in international politics, the United Nations Headquarters is often featured in movies and other pop culture.  Movies in which the headquarters buildings are major settings include ''North by Northwest'', ''The Interpreter'', ''Live and Let Die'', ''The Art of War'', ''U.S. Marshals'', '' '', ''The Glass Wall'', ''The Second Renaissance'', ''The Peacemaker'', ''Thirteen Days'', ''In the Loop'' and Disney's 1977 animated film ''The Rescuers''. The eighth (final) season of ''24'' takes place partly in the building, where major peace talks are interrupted by an assassination attempt.  The only film actually shot on location in the UN headquarters is ''The Interpreter'' (2005), filmed with the consent of the Secretary-General, although some scenes in the political documentary film ''U. N. Me'' were surreptitiously filmed inside the building without permission.
The headquarters served for the external shots of the fictional Darling family office in the series Dirty Sexy Money.
The headquarters is also a location in a number of video games, including: '' '', ''Sim City 3000'', '' '', ''Operation Body Count'', ''Spider-Man 2'', ''Civilization'', '' '' and ''Grand Theft Auto IV''.
The cover of the Megadeth album "Peace Sells... But Who's Buying?" depicts the U.N. headquarters lying in ruins with the sign "for sale", while "United Abominations" features it in flames and being destroyed by meteors.  In the book ''World War Z'', the United Nations Headquarters is moved to the USS ''Saratoga''.  The Marc Chagall stained glass wall was the subject of a souvenir sheet of U.N. postage stamps in 1967.
Protests, demonstrations, and other gatherings directly on First Avenue are rare. Some gatherings have taken place in Ralph Bunche Park, but it is too small to accommodate large demonstrations. The closest location where the New York City Police Department usually allows demonstrators is Dag Hammarskjold Plaza at 47th Street and First Avenue, one block away from the visitors' entrance, four blocks away from the entrance used by top-level diplomats, and five blocks away from the general staff entrance.
Excluding gatherings solely for diplomats and academics, there are a few organizations which regularly hold events at the UN. The United Nations Association of the United States of America (UNA-USA), a non-governmental organization, holds an annual "member's day" event in one of the conference rooms. Model United Nations conferences sponsored by UNA-USA, the National Collegiate Conference Association (NCCA/NMUN), and the International Model UN Association (IMUNA/NHSMUN) hold part of their sessions in the General Assembly chamber.  Seton Hall University's Whitehead School of Diplomacy hosts its UN summer study program at the headquarters as well.
Due to the significance of the organisation, proposals and offers to relocate the Headquarters buildings would surface now and then. Common complaints about its current location include diplomats who struggle to obtain U.S. visas and local residents complaining about inconveniences each time the roads are sealed due to visiting dignitaries. A telephone poll in 2001 found that 67% of callers were in favour of the UN moving out of the country. Countries critical of the United States, such as Iran, are especially vocal in questioning the current location of the buildings in U.S. territory.
In 2001, Dmitriy Rogozin proposed moving the HQ to St. Petersburg due to America's failure to pay its dues to the UN, saying "If the position of the Americans does not change and if as a result the international civil servants working in New York feel ever more uncomfortable, I think we will raise the question of moving the central UN headquarters to the 'Venice of the North,' St. Petersburg," During the period where the UN was facing delays in its efforts to refurbish its existing buildings, alternative sites considered as temporary sites also included the World Trade Center site being proposed as a new permanent facility.
Some governments have offered potential sites for the UN should it decide to move. In 2007, ''La Presse'' reported that the Canadian government, along with provincial and municipal authorities, proposed Montreal as a site to move the headquarters; a former docklands site has been earmarked and preliminary drawings made, but the UN turned down the request in 2007 and opted to renovate its existing facilities instead. News that the UN will move to Singapore appeared in 2008, suggesting the UN   s relocation committees have recommended the city-state as a new site to be completed by August 2015. In 2010, The Dubai government offered Dubai as an ideal venue due to its proximity to international "trouble spots".
There has also been various proposals by other groups to relocate to places such as Haiti and Iraq for various causes.