Mike Malinin was born October 10, 1967 in Washington, D.C., the youngest of four children.  His family soon relocated to Miami, Florida where Malinin went to high school at Ransom Everglades in Coconut Grove. He began studying drums in the summer of 1979. His first instructor was Mike Cottom, and he then studied with Harry Hawthorne at the University of Miami until 1985, when he graduated from high school and headed to Denton, Texas, to attend the University of North Texas. While in Denton, Malinin played in many bands, including Angry Jasmine, Last Rites, and Caulk. He played on Caulk's first release, entitled ''Learn to Take''.
Malinin eventually dropped out of college and moved to Los Angeles in July 1992 with his friend and fellow musician Robert Cooper. After playing in various short-lived bands, he joined Careless (featuring Brian Baker) around 1994. Baker eventually left the band and began playing with Bad Religion, and Malinin landed a gig with the Goo Goo Dolls in January 1995.
Malinin has a side project called FORTY MARSHAS.  FORTY MARSHAS's debut, self-titled album (recorded at LA's Swing House Studio) was released in June 2007 on Beatville Records. Other members of the band include Robert Cooper (Pete Droge), Korel Tunador (Katy Perry), Jason Freese (Green Day), Brad Fernquist (New Radicals, Michelle Branch, Fastball), Sarah Meech (Continue the Lie), Krista Galante, Efrem Schulz (Death by Stereo), Jason Sikora, Brian Schulmeister (Amungus), Mitch Marine (Smashmouth, Dwight Yoakam), John Avila (Oingo Boingo), and Rick Garcia (Green Car Motel, Act of Faith). Guest appearances on the record by Phil Jaurigui, Warren Huart, Marlon Luna, Paul Denman (Sade), and Lauren Barrett.
In mid-2009, Malinin and company began writing and recording new material for a sophomore FORTY MARSHAS album. Returning members Jason Sikora, Brad Fernquist, Krista Galante Malinin, Robert Cooper, Sarah Meech, Brian Schulmeister, and Rick Garcia collaborated with Malinin to continue the band's exploration of alternative indie rock. The FORTY MARSHAS album "in other words..." was released independently in April 2010.
Malinin is also an avid ultra-marathon runner, having completed several 100-mile races, 50-milers, 50K runs, and marathons.  He currently resides in Los Angeles with his wife.