The four identical Cluster satellites study the impact of the Sun's activity on the Earth's space environment by flying in formation around Earth. For the first time in space history, this mission is able to collect three-dimensional information on how the solar wind interacts with the magnetosphere and affects near-Earth space and its atmosphere, including aurorae. The satellites are named Rumba Salsa, Samba and Tango but are more commonly called Cluster 1, Cluster 2, Cluster 3 and Cluster 4 or even C1, C2, C3 and C4. 
The spacecraft are cylindrical (290 x 130&nbsp;cm, see ) and are spin-stabilized at 15 rotations per minute. After launch, their solar cells provided 224 watts power for instruments and communications.  The four spacecraft maneuver into various tetrahedral formations to study the magnetospheric structure and boundaries. The inter-spacecraft distances can be varied from around 17 to 10,000 kilometers (km).  The propellant for the maneuvers makes up approximately half of the spacecraft's launch weight.
The highly elliptical orbits of the spacecraft reach a perigee of around 4 RE (Earth radii, where 1 RE = 6371&nbsp;km) and an apogee of 19.6 RE.  Each orbit takes approximately 57 hours to complete.  The European Space Operations Centre (ESOC) acquires telemetry and distributes to the online data centers the science data from the spacecraft.
The Cluster mission was proposed to ESA in 1982 and approved in 1986, along with the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO).  Though the original Cluster spacecraft were completed in 1995, the explosion of the rocket carrying the satellites in 1996 delayed the mission by four years while the instruments were rebuilt.
On July 16, 2000, a Soyuz-Fregat rocket from the Baikonur Cosmodrome launched two of the Clusters (Salsa and Samba) into a parking orbit from where they maneuvered under their own power into a 19,000 by 119,000 kilometer orbit with a period of 57 hours. Three weeks later on August 9, 2000 another Soyuz-Fregat rocket lifted the remaining two Cluster spacecraft (Rumba and Tango) into similar orbits.  Spacecraft 1, Rumba, is also known as the Phoenix spacecraft, since it is largely built from spare parts left over after the failure of the original mission.  After commissioning of the payload, the first scientific measurements were made on February 1, 2001.
The ESA ran a competition to name the Cluster satellites, which attracted participants from many countries.  Ray Cotton from the United Kingdom won with the names Rumba, Tango, Salsa and Samba. Ray's town of residence, Bristol, was awarded with scale models of the satellites in recognition of the naming and connection with the satellites.
Originally planned to last until the end of 2003, the mission has been extended several times. The first extension took the mission from 2004 until 2005, and the second from 2005 to June 2009. The mission has now been extended until end 2012.
Previous single and two-spacecraft missions were not capable of providing the data required to accurately study the boundaries of the magnetosphere.  Because the plasma comprising the magnetosphere cannot presently be accessed using remote sensing techniques, satellites must be used to measure it in-situ.  Four spacecraft allow scientists make the 3D, time-resolved measurements needed to create a realistic picture of the complex plasma interactions occurring between regions of the magnetosphere and between the magnetosphere and the solar wind.  
Each satellite carries a scientific payload of 11 instruments designed to study the small-scale plasma structures in space and time in the key plasma regions: solar wind, bow shock, magnetopause, polar cusps, magnetotail, plasmapause boundary layer and over the polar caps and the auroral zones.
In 2003 and 2004, the China National Space Administration launched the Double Star satellites, TC-1 and TC-2, that worked together  with Cluster to make coordinated measurements mostly within the magnetosphere. TC-1 stopped operating on 14 October 2007. Here are three scientific highlights where TC-1 played a crucial role
1. ''Space is Fizzy''
Ion density holes were discovered near the Earth's bow shock that can play a role in bow shock formation. The bow shock is a critical region of space where the constant stream of solar material, the solar wind, is decelerated from supersonic speed to subsonic speed due to the internal magnetic field of the Earth.
Full story: http://sci.esa.int/jump.cfm?oid=39559
Echo of this story on CNN: 
2. ''Inner magnetosphere and energetic particles''
Chorus Emissions Found Further Away From Earth During High Geomagnetic Activity.
Chorus are waves naturally generated in space close to the magnetic equator, within the Earth's magnetic bubble called magnetosphere. These waves play an important role in the creation of relativistic electrons and their precipitation from the Earth's radiation belts. These so called killer electrons can damage solar panels and electronic equipments of satellites and represent a hazard to astronauts. Therefore, information on their location with respect to the geomagnetic activity is of crucial importance to be able to forecast their impact.
Chorus sound file: http://sci.esa.int/science-e/www/object/doc.cfm?fobjectid=38339
3. ''Magnetotail dynamics''
Cluster and Double Star Reveal the Extent of Neutral Sheet Oscillations.
For the first time, neutral sheet oscillations observed simultaneously at a distance of tens of thousands of kilometres are reported, thanks to observations by 5 satellites of the Cluster and the Double Star Program missions. This observational first provides further constraint to model this large-scale phenomenon in the magnetotail.
Full story: http://sci.esa.int/jump.cfm?oid=38999