Mitchell began his political involvement when he supported Sean MacBride, leader of the radical republican Clann na Poblachta at the 1957 general election. He joined Fine Gael in 1967, becoming that party's unsuccessful candidate in a by-election in 1970. He sought a party nomination to run at the 1973 general election. However he agreed not to contest the seat to allow Declan Costello, a senior figure in his party and son of former Taoiseach John A. Costello, to be elected. Costello went on to serve as Attorney General of Ireland in the 1973   1977 National Coalition of Fine Gael and the Labour Party. 
Mitchell was elected to Dublin Corporation in 1974. In 1976, aged 29, he became the youngest ever Lord Mayor of Dublin. He was an unsuccessful candidate for Dail Eireann at the 1973 general election in Dublin South West and lost again in the 1976 by-election in the same constituency, to Labour Party's Brendan Halligan. 
At the 1977 general election he was elected to the 21st Dail for the new constituency of Dublin Ballyfermot.
Mitchell, who was seen as to the left of Fine Gael was however out of favour with John Bruton when he became Fine Gael leader in 1990. When Bruton formed the Rainbow Coalition in December 1994, Mitchell was not appointed to any cabinet post. 
Mitchell contested and won Dail elections in 1977, 1981, (February and November) 1982, 1987, 1989, 1992, 1997. He also ran unsuccessfully for the European Parliament in the 1994 and 1999 elections. He also was director of elections for Austin Currie, the Fine Gael candidate, in the 1990 presidential election. In 2001, Bruton was deposed as Fine Gael leader, and replaced by Michael Noonan. Mitchell served as his deputy from 2001 to 2002.
Mitchell also chaired the key Oireachtas ''Public Accounts Committee''. Under Mitchell's chairmanship the committee began to look at allegations of corruption and widescale tax evasion in the banking sector, particularly regarding Deposit Interest Retention Tax. It was established that there was a culture of encouraging tax evasion within Irish banks, which had allowed wealthy customers to set up non-resident (off-shore, international) bank accounts into which money was transferred, enabling the account holder to avoid paying DIRT. The scandal resulted Allied Irish Banks being forced to reach a settlement of    90 million with the Revenue Commissioners in respect of Deposit Interest Retention Tax evasion in 2000 in addition to thousands of tax-evaders being prosecuted including the former Minister for Justice Padraig Flynn. Mitchell received much praise for his role in exposing the scandal.
Mitchell   s election agent was Tommy Morris. Who led and organised his many political success. FG Dunlin West successfully won three seats out of five with Burke Fleming and Mitchell securing over 56% of the popular vote. Tommy Morris was director of elections.  It was he who introduced for the first time in Irish politics many new forms of candidate advertising such as Bus advertising traffic canvassing and When Charles J. Haughey invited Dick Burke to take the European commission post thereby causing a by-election, Mitchell secured Liam Skelly   s election with Morris   s expertise.
Though regarded in politics as one of Fine Gael's "survivors", who held onto his seat amid major boundary changes, constituency changes and by attracting working class votes in a party whose appeal was primarily middle class, Mitchell lost his Dublin Central seat at the 2002 general election. That election witnessed a large scale collapse in the Fine Gael vote, with the party dropping from 54 to 31 seats in Dail Eireann. Although Mitchell suffered from the swing against Fine Gael in Dublin, he was not aided by the fact that Inchicore, which was considered his base in the constituency had been moved to Dublin South Central. Jim had chosen not to run in that constituency as his brother Gay was a sitting TD running for re-election for that constituency.
Mitchell had earlier had a liver transplant in an attempt to beat a rare form of cancer which had cost the lives of a number of his siblings. Though the operation was successful, the cancer returned. Though he appeared to be making a recovery, Mitchell ultimately died of the disease in December 2002.
His former constituency colleague and rival, former Taoiseach Bertie Ahern, described Jim Mitchell as having made an "outstanding contribution to Irish politics." His brother Gay Mitchell remains a Fine Gael MEP.
As Minister for Transport, Mitchell granted the aviation license to a fledgling airline called Ryanair on 29 November 1985. This was granted despite strong opposition by Ireland's national carrier Aer Lingus. The issue of the license broke Aer Lingus' stranglehold on flights to London from the Republic of Ireland.