Brunswick is located on the shores of Casco Bay and the Androscoggin River, 12 miles north of Freeport, Maine, and 28 miles north of Portland, Maine. In addition to its Brunswick campus, Bowdoin also owns a 118 acre (478,000 m  ) coastal studies center on Orrs Island and a 200 acre (809,000 m  ) scientific field station on Kent Island in the Bay of Fundy.
Bowdoin College was chartered in 1794 by Governor Samuel Adams of Massachusetts, of which Maine was then a district, and was named for former Massachusetts governor James Bowdoin, whose son James Bowdoin III was an early benefactor. At the time of its founding, it was the easternmost college in the United States. It is thought that the Bowdoin seal, created in 1798 by Joseph Callender, was a sun because it was the first college in the United States to see the sunrise.  In 1806, 13 Harvard graduates opted to accept a Bowdoin degree along with their diploma from Harvard.
Bowdoin came into its own in the 1820s, a decade in which Maine became an independent state as a result of the Missouri Compromise and the college graduated a number of its most famous alumni, including future United States President Franklin Pierce, class of 1824, and writers Nathaniel Hawthorne and Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, both of whom graduated Phi Beta Kappa in 1825.
Bowdoin's connections to the Civil War have prompted some to quip that the war "began and ended" in Brunswick. Harriet Beecher Stowe, "the little lady who started this big war," started writing her influential anti-slavery novel ''Uncle Tom's Cabin'' in Bowdoin's Appleton Hall while her husband was teaching at the College, and Brigadier General (and Brevet Major General) Joshua Chamberlain, a Bowdoin alumnus and professor, was responsible for receiving the surrender of the Army of Northern Virginia at Appomattox Court House in 1865. Chamberlain, a Medal of Honor recipient who later served as governor of Maine, adjutant-general of Maine, and president of Bowdoin, distinguished himself at Gettysburg, where he led the 20th Maine in its valiant defense of Little Round Top.
There are other Civil War connections as well: Major General Oliver Otis Howard, class of 1850, led the Freedmen's Bureau after the war and later founded Howard University; Massachusetts Governor John A. Andrew, class of 1837, was responsible for the formation of the famous 54th Massachusetts; and William P. Fessenden 1823 and Hugh McCulloch 1827 both served as Secretary of the Treasury during the Lincoln Administration. After the war, Bowdoin contended that a higher percentage of its alumni fought in the war than that of any other college in the North   and not only for the Union. In fact, Confederate President Jefferson Davis held an honorary degree from Bowdoin, which he received while United States Secretary of War in 1858.  President Ulysses S. Grant, too, was given an honorary degree from the college in 1865.
In addition to Howard and Chamberlain, William Fessenden's sons, James Deering Fessenden and Francis Fessenden, were both brigadier generals, and seventeen Bowdoin alumni would receive brevets as brigadier generals, including Ellis Spear (Class of 1858, who was Chamberlain's second-in-command at Gettysburg), Charles Hamlin (Class of 1857, son of Vice President Hannibal Hamlin), and General Howard's brother Charles (Class of 1859).
Although Bowdoin's Medical School of Maine closed its doors in 1921, the College is currently known for its particularly strong programs in the natural sciences. One illustrious alumnus was Dr. Augustus Stinchfield, who received his M.D. in 1868, who went on to become one of the co-founders of the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota.  He was asked to join the two Mayo brother's private medical practice in 1892.  In 1915, the remaining partners in the then private practice embraced the creation of the non-profit Mayo Clinic. While perhaps Bowdoin's better-known alumnus in the sciences is the controversial entomologist-turned-sexologist Alfred Kinsey, class of 1916, the College's reputation in this area was cemented in large part by the Arctic explorations of Admiral Robert E. Peary, class of 1877, and Donald B. MacMillan, class of 1898.  Peary led the first successful expedition to the North Pole in 1908, and MacMillan, a member of Peary's crew, became famous in his own right as he explored Greenland, Baffin Island and Labrador in the schooner ''Bowdoin'' between 1908 and 1954. Bowdoin's Peary-MacMillan Arctic Museum  honors the two explorers, and the College's mascot, the Polar Bear, was chosen in 1913 to honor MacMillan, who donated a particularly large specimen to his alma mater in 1917.
Following in the footsteps of President Pierce and House Speaker Thomas Brackett Reed, class of 1860, several 20th century Bowdoin graduates have assumed prominent positions in national government while representing the Pine Tree State. Wallace H. White, Jr., class of 1899, served as Senate Minority Leader from 1944-1947 and Senate Majority Leader from 1947   1949; George J. Mitchell, class of 1954, served as Senate Majority Leader from 1989-1995 before assuming a prominent role in the Northern Ireland peace process; and William Cohen, class of 1962, spent twenty-five years in the House and Senate before being appointed Secretary of Defense in the Clinton Administration. Maine's First Congressional District has been christened the "Bowdoin seat" because of its long occupation by graduates of the College. A total of eleven Bowdoin graduates have ascended to the Maine governorship, and three graduates of the College currently sit on the state's highest court.
Over the last several decades, Bowdoin College has modernized dramatically. In 1970, it became one of a very limited number of selective schools to make the SAT optional in the admissions process, and in 1971, after nearly 180 years as a small men's college, Bowdoin admitted its first class of women. Bowdoin also phased out fraternities in the late 1990s, replacing them with a system of college-owned social houses.
In 2001, Barry Mills, class of 1972, was appointed as the fifth alumnus president of the College.
On January 18, 2008, Bowdoin announced that it would be eliminating loans for all new and current students receiving financial aid, replacing those loans with grants beginning with the 2008-2009 academic year. President Mills stated, "Some see a calling in such vital but often low paying fields such as teaching or social work. With significant debt at graduation, some students will undoubtedly be forced to make career or education choices not on the basis of their talents, interests, and promise in a particular field, but rather on their capacity to repay student loans. As an institution devoted to the common good, Bowdoin must consider the fairness of such a result."  
In February 2009, following a $10 million donation by Subway Sandwiches co-founder and alumnus Peter Buck the college completed a $250 million capital campaign.  Additionally, the college has also recently completed major construction projects on the campus including a significant renovation of the college's art museum and a new fitness center named after Peter Buck.
Bowdoin is consistently ranked among the top ten liberal arts colleges in the United States by ''U.S. News and World Report''. In the 2010 edition of the rankings, Bowdoin ranks sixth. In the late 1990's it was ranked as high as fourth. In 2006, ''Newsweek'' described Bowdoin as a "New Ivy", one of a number of elite colleges and universities outside of the Ivy League.
The Government & Legal Studies Department, whose prominent professors include Michael Franz, Allen Springer, Paul Franco, Richard E. Morgan, Chris Potholm and Jean M. Yarbrough, was ranked the top small college political science program in the world by researchers at the London School of Economics in 2003. Government & Legal Studies was the most popular major for every graduating class between 2000 and 2009. Other departments are also strong, including economics, the natural sciences, and English. 
In 2010, Bowdoin's art history program was ranked as the top program in the nation by ''U.S. News and World Report''.
Course distribution requirements were abolished in the 1970s but were reinstated by a faculty majority vote in 1981, as a result of an initiative by oral communication and film professor Barbara Kaster. She insisted that distribution requirements would ensure students a more well-rounded education in a diversity of fields and therefore present them with more career possibilities. The requirements of at least two courses in each of the categories of Natural Sciences/Mathematics, Social and Behavioral Sciences, Humanities/Fine Arts, and Foreign Studies (including languages) took effect for the Class of 1987 and have been gradually amended since then. Current requirements require one course each in: Natural Sciences, Quantitive Reasoning, Visual and Performing Arts, International Perspectives and Exploring Social Differences. A small, writing intensive course, called a First Year Seminar, is also required.
In 2002, the faculty decided to change the grading system so that it incorporated plus and minus grades. Previously, only grades of A, B, C, D, and F, were given, without the "+" or "-" modifications.
Other prominent Bowdoin faculty include (or have included): Edville Gerhardt Abbott, Charles Beitz, John Bisbee, Paul Chadbourne, Thomas Cornell, Kristen R. Ghodsee, Eddie Glaude, Joseph E. Johnson, Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, Elliott Schwartz, and Scott Sehon.
Bowdoin is one of the most selective liberal arts colleges in the country,  with an acceptance rate of 15% for the class of 2015. Bowdoin is classified by ''U.S. News and World Report'' as "most selective". Of enrolling students, 89% are in the top 10% of their high school graduating class. According to the Princeton Review, the average GPA of enrolling high school students is 3.8.
In Fall 2010, Bowdoin's acceptance rate was the fifth lowest among liberal arts colleges ranked by ''U.S. News and World Report''.
Although Bowdoin does not require the SAT in admissions, all students must submit a score upon matriculation. The middle 50% SAT range for the verbal and math sections of the SAT is 660-750 and 660-750, respectively     numbers only of those submitting scores during the admissions process. The middle 50% ACT range is 30   33.
The April 17, 2008, edition of ''The Economist'' noted Bowdoin in an article on university admissions: "So-called 'almost-Ivies' such as Bowdoin and Middlebury also saw record low admission rates this year (18% each). It is now as hard to get into Bowdoin, says the college's admissions director, as it was to get into Princeton in the 1970s." 
Many students apply for financial aid, and around 85% of those who apply receive aid. Bowdoin is a need-blind and a no-loans institution. Students applying to the school are evaluated independently of their financial situations, the college meets 100% of demonstrated financial need, and the college replaces loans with grants for all students on financial aid to lift the burden of significant student debt upon graduation.  
While a significant portion of the student body hails from New England     including nearly 25% from Massachusetts and 10% from Maine     recent classes have drawn from an increasingly national and international pool. Although Bowdoin once had a reputation for homogeneity (both ethnically and socioeconomically), a diversity campaign has increased the percentage of students of color in recent classes to more than 31%. In fact, admission of minorities goes back at least as far as John Brown Russwurm 1826, Bowdoin's first African-American college graduate, and the third African-American graduate of any American college.
Bowdoin's dining services has been ranked #1 among all universities and colleges nationally by ''Princeton Review'' in 2004, 2006, 2007, and 2011. The college's dining services have been featured on numerous national news organizations including the ''The New York Times''. Bowdoin has two major dining halls, one of which was renovated in the late 1990s, and every academic year begins with a lobster bake outside Farley Fieldhouse. The college was ranked #6 nationally for the "Dorms like Palaces" category by ''Princeton Review'' in 2011. 
In 2010, Newsweek ranked Bowdoin the #6 "Most desirable small school in America". In April 2008, College Prowler, a publishing company for guidebooks on top colleges and universities in the United States and written by students, named Bowdoin College its "School of the Year" citing excellence in academics, safety and security, housing and dining.
Recalling his days at Bowdoin in a recent interview, Professor Richard E. Morgan '59 described student life at the then-all-male school as "monastic," and noted that "the only things to do were either work or drink." (This is corroborated by the ''Official Preppy Handbook,'' which in 1980 ranked Bowdoin the number two drinking school in the country, behind Dartmouth.) These days, Morgan observed, the College offers a far broader array of recreational opportunities: "If we could have looked forward in time to Bowdoin's standard of living today, we would have been astounded."   
Since abolishing Greek fraternities in the late 1990s, Bowdoin has switched to a system in which entering students are assigned a "college house" affiliation correlating with their first-year dormitory. While six houses were originally established, following the construction of two new dorms, two were added effective in the fall of 2007, bringing the total to eight: Ladd (affiliated with Osher Hall), Baxter (West), Quinby (Appleton), MacMillan (Coleman), Howell (Hyde), Helmreich (Maine), Reed (Moore), and Burnett (Winthrop). The college houses are physical buildings around campus which host parties and other events throughout the year. Those students who choose not to live in their affiliated house retain their affiliation and are considered members throughout their Bowdoin career. Before the fraternity system was abolished in the 1990s, all the Bowdoin fraternities were co-educational (except for one unrecognized sorority and two unrecognized all-male fraternities).
Bowdoin's chapter of Phi Beta Kappa, which was founded in 1825, is the nation's sixth oldest. Among those who have been inducted to the Maine Alpha chapter as undergraduates include Nathaniel Hawthorne (1825), Henry Wadsworth Longfellow (1825), Robert E. Peary (1877), Owen Brewster (1909), Harold Hitz Burton (1909), Paul Douglas (1913), Alfred Kinsey (1916), Thomas R. Pickering (1953), and Lawrence B. Lindsey (1976).
In 2006, Bowdoin was named a "Top Producer of Fulbright Awards for American Students" by the Institute of International Education.
In 2003, the ''Wall Street Journal'' ranked Bowdoin among the top twenty colleges and universities in the United States based on the percentage of the school's alumni who attend a "top-five" graduate program in business, law, or medicine.
According to payscale.com, alumni of Bowdoin College have a mid-career median salary of $106,000, making it the 29th highest among colleges and universities in the United States. 
Historically, Bowdoin is known for the strength of its alumni in many different fields and professions. In Maine, the First Congressional District has been christened the "Bowdoin seat" because of its long occupation by graduates of the College. A total of eleven Bowdoin graduates have ascended to the Maine governorship, and three graduates of the College currently sit on the state's highest court.
Bowdoin's student newspaper, ''The Bowdoin Orient'', is the oldest continuously published college weekly in the United States. The Orient was named the second best tabloid-sized college weekly at a Collegiate Associated Press conference in March 2007.  Additionally, the school's literary magazine, ''The Quill'', has been published since 1897.  The College's radio station, WBOR, has been in operation since 1951. In 1999, ''The Bowdoin Cable Network'' was formed, producing a weekly newscast and several student created shows per semester.
There are six a capella groups on campus. The Meddiebempters and the Longfellows are all-male, Miscellania and Bella Mafia are all-female, and BOKA and Ursus Verses are co-ed. 
The largest student group on campus is the Outing Club, which leads canoeing, kayaking, rafting, camping and backpacking trips throughout Maine.  One of the school's two historic rival literary societies, the Peucinian Society, has recently been revitalized from its previous form. The Peucinian Society was founded in 1805, making it one of the oldest literary and intellectual societies in the country. This organization counts such people as Henry Wadsworth Longfellow and Joshua Chamberlain amongst its former members, though these individuals originally belonged to the Athenian Society (the second society of the two historic groups). These literary and intellectual societies were the dominant groups on campus before they declined in popularity after the rise of Greek fraternities.
Museums on Bowdoin's campus include the Bowdoin College Museum of Art, the Joshua L. Chamberlain Museum, and the Peary-MacMillan Arctic Museum. Notable Buildings include Massachusetts Hall, Hubbard Hall, the Parker Cleaveland House and the Harriet Beecher Stowe House.
The Bowdoin College Polar Bears (the college mascot) competes in the NCAA Division III New England Small College Athletic Conference (NESCAC), which also includes Amherst, Conn College, Hamilton, Middlebury, Trinity, Tufts, Wesleyan, Williams, and Maine rivals Bates and Colby in the Colby-Bates-Bowdoin Consortium (CBB). The College's official colors are white and black.
Bowdoin offers thirty varsity teams, including men's teams in baseball, basketball, cross country, football, ice hockey, lacrosse, Nordic skiing, sailing, soccer, squash, swimming and diving, tennis, and track and field, and women's teams in field hockey, golf, ice hockey, lacrosse, Nordic skiing, sailing, soccer, softball, squash, swimming and diving, tennis, track and field, volleyball, and rugby. 
Men's ice hockey is the most popular spectator sport, with hundreds of students turning out for games against arch-rival Colby.  In 2004, Bowdoin became the second college in the United States to elevate the women's rugby team to varsity status. While technically still varsity, the women's rugby team competes in New England Rugby Football Union, rather than NESCAC. The sailing team, which competes in the New England Intercollegiate Sailing Association (NEISA) is co-ed and was considered in 2006 to be one of the top 20 sailing teams in the nation by Sailing World magazine. There are also intercollegiate and club teams in men's and women's fencing, men's and women's rowing, men's rugby, water polo, men's volleyball and men's and women's Ultimate. 
Women's basketball and field hockey have been Bowdoin's most successful teams. The women's basketball team are 8-time NESCAC champions, holding an astonishing 7-year streak. The field hockey team are three-time NCAA National Champions; winning the title in 2007 (defeating Middlebury College), 2008 (defeating Tufts University) and 2010 (defeating Messiah College). Head coach Nicky Pearson has been NESCAC coach of the year a record 7 times; no other coach in any NESCAC sport has won the award more than twice. In 2007, 2008 and 2010, Pearson was also honored as the NCAA's Division III coach of the year.
2011 also saw Bowdoin's 4th NCAA National Championship, with a win in the Men's Tennis doubles. Field Hockey hold the other 3 NCAA titles.
Bowdoin's athletic facilities combine modern buildings with old traditions, and have been historically used as training grounds for Olympic athletes. 
In addition to several outdoor athletic fields (Pickard fields & Whittier field), the College's athletic facilities include:
According to its Environmental Mission Statement, Bowdoin College "shall seek to encourage conservation, recycling, and other sustainable practices in its daily decision making processes, and shall take into account, in the operations of the College, all appropriate economic, environmental, and social concerns." 
Between 2002 and 2008, Bowdoin College decreased its CO2 emissions by 40%.  It achieved that reduction by switching from #6 to #2 oil in its heating plant, reducing the campus set heating point from 72 to 68 degrees, and by adhering to its own Green Design Standards in renovations.
In 2003, Bowdoin made a commitment to achieve LEED-certification for all new campus buildings. The college has since completed construction on Osher and West residency halls, the Peter Buck Center for Health & Fitness, and the Sidney J. Watson Arena, all of which have attained LEED or Silver LEED certification. The new dorms partially use collected rain water as part of an advanced flushing system, while the new ice arena uses the one of the most efficient dehumidification and refrigeration systems out of any Division III collegiate arena.
In 2009, the college announced a detailed plan to achieve carbon neutrality by 2020 as a result of campus wide conservation efforts and specific initiatives in its implementation plan. The plan includes the construction of a solar thermal system, part of the "Thorne Solar Hot Water Project", cogeneration in the central heating plant (for which Bowdoin received $400,000 in federal grants), lighting upgrades to all campus buildings, and modern monitoring systems of energy usage on campus.
Selected notable Bowdoin graduates include:
Bowdoin graduates have led all three branches of the federal government, including both houses of Congress. Franklin Pierce (1826) was America's fourteenth President; Melville Weston Fuller (1853) served as Chief Justice of the United States; Thomas Brackett Reed (1860) was twice elected Speaker of the House of Representatives; and Wallace H. White, Jr. (1899) and George J. Mitchell (1954) both served as Majority Leader of the United States Senate.
Bowdoin's Alma Mater is "Raise Songs to Bowdoin."  Originally penned by Kenneth C.M. Sills, class of 1901, new lyrics have since been added by Anthony Antolini '63, who serves on the faculty of the College's Department of Music.  Singers punch the air on the word 'friend' in both verses.
The original lyrics for the first verse were as follows. The changed phrases have been highlighted.