Manatt was chairman of the Democratic National Committee from 1981 to 1985. In those years, he supervised and directed the 1984 democratic national convention. He is now a delegate, sometimes categorized as a super delegate. He also served as Ambassador to the Dominican Republic from 1999 to 2001.  He is the founder of the law firm Manatt, Phelps, and Phillips LLP, where his practice focuses on international, administrative, and corporate law. Manatt served until June 2008 as chairman of the Board of Trustees at the George Washington University. His wife is Kathleen K. Manatt.
Mr. Manatt is the former Chair of the International Foundation of Election Systems Board of Director.   He and his wife Kathleen established the Manatt Democracy Studies Fellowship Program in 1998.
Manatt was born on June 9. 1936 in Chicago, Illinois. Son of William Price Manatt, and Lucille Taylor Manatt, the youngest of two boys alongside Richard P. Manatt. Although born in Chicago, he grew up in Audubon, Iowa, helping his father, a farmer, care for the family farm. His mother was a school teacher and later a stay-at-home mom.  He attended primary, middle and high school in Audubon. In his sophomore year, he began dating  Kathy Klinkefus, who later became his wife.
In 1954, Manatt began studying at Iowa State College (later University). He and Kathy Klinkefus, who also attended Iowa State, graduated in early 1958.  Shortly thereafter, they moved to Washington D.C., he began studying at the George Washington University School of Law.  From xxx until June 2008, Manatt served as chairman of the Board of Trustees at George Washington University. Manatt sits on the Council on American Politics, bringing together leaders from across the nation to address issues facing the growth and enrichment of the Graduate School of Political Management at The George Washington University.
Manatt married Kathleen (Kathy) Klinkefus on December 29, 1957 in Audubon, Iowa. They then moved to Washington, D.C. where they had their first child, Michele. Then, the family moved to Los Angeles, where they had two boys, Timothy and Daniel. The boys went to public school, while their daughter studied at a combination of public and private schools.  She is a graduate of the prestigious Westlake School for Girls in West Los Angeles, now known as Harvard-Westlake. 
While Michele was attending the University of California at Berkeley, the family moved back to Washington D.C, where the two boys attended and graduated from  Sidwell Friends School. Manatt continued expanding the Law Firm, where it grew to have offices in Los Angeles, San Francisco, New York City, Washington, D.C, Orange County, CA, Palo Alto, CA, Sacramento, CA, and Albany.
In 1965, while living in Los Angeles he founded the Manatt law firm with his long-time friend and colleague Thomas Phelps, a banking and finance attorney. He began his legal career focusing on banking and financial services. In 1976, Mickey Kantor joined the firm and his name was added to the letterhead, until his departure in 1993. L. Lee Phillips, an entertainment lawyer, joined the firm in 1977, and became a named partner soon after. For its founding location, the firm  headquarters are in Los Angeles. Over time, offices were opened in 8 different cities, primarily in California, but also in New York and Washington D.C.. In 2007, the law firm was employing 380 attorneys. It was founded as a general practice, now incorporating  litigation, Corporate Finance, Entertainment, Health Care, Real Estate, Advertising, and lobbying. Some of their notable clients are: In advertising, Coca Cola Company, and Yahoo!; In entertainment, Sony Pictures Entertainment, and The Eagles, and in consumer services, AT&T, Hilton Hotels Corporation, and Time Warner. Their internal revenue in 2007 was  $242 million
In 1981, he became the national chairman of the Democratic National Committee (DNC), and oversaw and executed the 1984 party convention, nominating former Vice President Walter Mondale of Minnesota for President, and New York congresswoman Geraldine A. Ferraro, making history as that marked the first time a woman  was a major party nominee. The convention took place from July 16   19, 1984 in Moscone Center, San Francisco. The permanent chairman that year was Martha Layne Collins of Kentucky. Mondale was chosen on the first ballot. That year, the keynote speaker on the first evening of the convention was Governor Mario Cuomo of New York. Although the convention was considered a great success, the Mondale-Ferraro ticket could not get traction against the popularity of then-president and Republican Ronald Reagan and Vice President George H. W. Bush.
He now resides in Washington, D.C. where he continues to help run and work at the law firm, and is engaged in numerous civic activities.  He and Mrs. Manatt have a granddaugther and  grandson, Victoria and Patrick, the children of Michele Manatt, a former U.S. State Department and White House Drug Policy Office official,  and her husband Wolfram Anders, an investment professional with the International Finance Corporation, part of the World Bank Group. In 2010, their second granddaughter was born to Daniel and his wife Nikole Manatt.