A '''lithium-ion battery''' (sometimes '''Li-ion battery''' or '''LIB''') is a family of rechargeable battery types in which lithium ions move from the negative electrode to the positive electrode during discharge, and back when charging. Chemistry, performance, cost, and safety characteristics vary across LIB types. Unlike lithium primary batteries (which are disposable), lithium-ion electrochemical cells use an intercalated lithium compound as the electrode material instead of metallic lithium.
Lithium-ion batteries are common in consumer electronics. They are one of the most popular types of rechargeable battery for portable electronics, with one of the best energy densities, no memory effect, and a slow loss of charge when not in use. Beyond consumer electronics, LIBs are also growing in popularity for military, electric vehicle, and aerospace applications. Research is yielding a stream of improvements to traditional LIB technology, focusing on energy density, durability, cost, and intrinsic safety.
Lithium-ion batteries account for 67% of all portable secondary battery sales in Japan. In the UK lithium-ion batteries account for 4.3% of all portable battery sales and in the EU 1%.
During discharge, lithium ions  carry the current from the negative to the positive electrode, through the non-aqueous electrolyte and separator diaphragm.
David Linden, Thomas B. Reddy (ed). ''Handbook Of Batteries 3rd Edition''. McGraw-Hill, New York, 2002 ISBN 0-07-135978-8 chapter 35
During charging, an external electrical power source (the charging circuit) applies a higher voltage (but of the same polarity) than that produced by the battery, forcing the current to pass in the reverse direction. The lithium ions then migrate from the positive to the negative electrode, where they become embedded in the porous electrode material in a process known as intercalation.
The three primary functional components of a lithium-ion battery are the anode, cathode, and electrolyte. The anode of a conventional lithium-ion cell is made from carbon, the cathode is a metal oxide, and the electrolyte is a lithium salt in an organic solvent.
Silberberg, M. 2006. ''Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change'', 4th Ed. New York (NY): McGraw-Hill Education. p 935.
The most commercially popular anode material is graphite. The cathode is generally one of three materials: a layered oxide (such as lithium cobalt oxide), a polyanion (such as lithium iron phosphate), or a spinel (such as lithium manganese oxide).
The electrolyte is typically a mixture of organic carbonates such as ethylene carbonate or diethyl carbonate containing complexes of lithium ions. These non-aqueous electrolytes generally use non-coordinating anion salts such as lithium hexafluorophosphate (), lithium hexafluoroarsenate monohydrate (), lithium perchlorate (), lithium tetrafluoroborate (), and lithium triflate ().
Depending on materials choices, the voltage, capacity, life, and safety of a lithium-ion battery can change dramatically. Recently, novel architectures using nanotechnology have been employed to improve performance.
Pure lithium is very reactive. It reacts vigorously with water to form lithium hydroxide and hydrogen gas. Thus, a non-aqueous electrolyte is typically used, and a sealed container rigidly excludes water from the battery pack.
Lithium ion batteries are more expensive than NiCd batteries but operate over a wider temperature range with higher energy densities, while being smaller and lighter.  They are fragile and so need a protective circuit to limit peak voltages.
Li-ion cells are available in various formats, which can generally be divided into four groups:
The lack of case gives pouch cells the highest energy density; however, pouch cells (and prismatic cells) require an external means of containment to prevent expansion when their SOC level is high.
Lithium-ion batteries were first proposed by M.S. Whittingham  at Binghamton University, at Exxon, in the 1970s. Whittingham used titanium(II) sulfide as the cathode and lithium metal as the anode.
Primary lithium batteries in which the anode is made from metallic lithium pose safety issues. As a result, lithium-ion batteries were developed in which both anode and cathode are made of a material containing lithium ions. In 1981, Bell Labs developed a workable graphite anode to provide an alternative to the lithium metal battery. Following cathode research performed by a team led by John Goodenough, in 1991 Sony released the first commercial lithium-ion battery. Their cells used layered oxide chemistry, specifically lithium cobalt oxide.
In 1983, Dr. Michael Thackeray, Goodenough, and coworkers identified manganese spinel as a cathode material. Spinel showed great promise, given low-cost, good electronic and lithium ion conductivity, and three-dimensional structure which gives it good structural stability. Although pure manganese spinel fades with cycling, this can be overcome with chemical modification of the material. Manganese spinel is currently used in commercial cells.
In 1989, Goodenough and Arumugam Manthiram of the University of Texas at Austin showed that cathodes containing polyanions, e.g. sulfates, produce higher voltages than oxides due to the inductive effect of the polyanion.
In 1996, Goodenough, Akshaya Padhi and coworkers identified lithium iron phosphate () and other phospho-olivines (lithium metal phosphates with olivine structure) as cathode materials.
In 2002, Yet-Ming Chiang and his group at MIT showed a substantial improvement in the performance of lithium batteries by boosting the material's conductivity by doping it with aluminum, niobium and zirconium. The exact mechanism causing the increase became the subject of a debate.
In 2004, Chiang again increased performance by utilizing iron-phosphate particles of less than 100 nanometers in diameter. This decreased particle density by almost one hundredfold, increased the cathode's surface area and improved capacity and performance. Commercialization led to a competitive market and a patent infringement battle between Chiang and Goodenough.
The three participants in the electrochemical reactions in a lithium-ion battery are the anode, cathode, and electrolyte.
Both the anode and cathode are materials into which, and from which, lithium can migrate. During ''insertion'' (or ''intercalation'') lithium moves into the electrode. During the reverse process, ''extraction'' (or ''deintercalation''), lithium moves back out. When a lithium-based cell is discharging, the lithium is extracted from the anode and inserted into the cathode. When the cell is charging, the reverse occurs.
Useful work can only be extracted if electrons flow through a closed external circuit. The following equations are in units of moles, making it possible to use the coefficient x.
The positive electrode half-reaction (with charging being forwards) is:
The negative electrode half-reaction is:
The overall reaction has its limits. Overdischarge supersaturates lithium cobalt oxide, leading to the production of lithium oxide,
Overcharge up to 5.2 Volts leads to the synthesis of cobalt(IV) oxide, as evidenced by x-ray diffraction
G.G. Amatucci, J.M. Tarascon, L.C. Kein J. Electrochemical Society '''143''' p1114 1996  
In a lithium-ion battery the lithium ions are transported to and from the cathode or anode, with the transition metal, cobalt (Co), in \mathrm{Li}_x \mathrm{Co} \mathrm{O}_2 being oxidized from  to  during charging, and reduced from  to  during discharge.
The cell voltages given in the Electrochemistry section are larger than the potential at which aqueous solutions can electrolyze, in addition lithium is highly reactive to water, therefore, nonaqueous or aprotic solutions are used.
Unfortunately, organic solvents easily decompose on anodes during charging. However, when appropriate organic solvents are used as the electrolyte, the solvent decomposes on initial charging and forms a solid layer called the solid electrolyte interphase (SEI), which is electrically insulating yet provides sufficient ionic conductivity. The interphase prevents decomposition of the electrolyte after the second charge. For example, ethylene carbonate is decomposed at a relatively high voltage, 0.7 V vs. lithium, and forms a dense and stable interface. 
A good solution for the interface instability is the application of a new class of composite electrolytes based on POE (poly(oxyethylene)) developed by Syzdek et al. It can be either solid (high molecular weight) and be applied in dry Li-polymer cells, or liquid (low molecular weight) and be applied in regular Li-ion cells.
Another issue that Li-ion technology is facing is safety. Large scale application of Li cells in Electric Vehicles needs a dramatic decrease in the failure rate. One of the solutions is the novel technology based on reversed-phase composite electrolytes, employing porous ceramic material filled with electrolyte.
Note that both advantages and disadvantages depend on the materials and design that make up the battery. This summary reflects older designs that use carbon anode, metal oxide cathodes, and lithium salt in an organic solvent for the electrolyte.
If overheated or overcharged, Li-ion batteries may suffer thermal runaway and cell rupture.
Other safety features are required in each cell:
These devices occupy useful space inside the cells, add additional points of failure and irreversibly disable the cell when activated. They are required because the anode produces heat during use, while the cathode may produce oxygen. These devices and improved electrode designs reduce/eliminate the risk of fire or explosion.
These safety features increase costs compared to nickel metal hydride batteries, which require only a hydrogen/oxygen recombination device (preventing damage due to mild overcharging) and a back-up pressure valve.
Because lithium-ion batteries can have a variety of cathode and anode materials, the energy density and voltage vary accordingly.
Lithium-ion batteries with a lithium iron phosphate cathode and graphite anode have a nominal open-circuit voltage of 3.2 V and a typical charging voltage of 3.6 V. Lithium nickel manganese cobalt (NMC) oxide cathode with graphite anodes have a 3.7 V nominal voltage with a 4.2 V max charge. The charging procedure is performed at constant voltage with current-limiting circuitry (i.e., charging with constant current until a voltage of 4.2 V is reached in the cell and continuing with a constant voltage applied until the current drops close to zero). Typically, the charge is terminated at 3% of the initial charge current. In the past, lithium-ion batteries could not be fast-charged and needed at least two hours to fully charge. Current-generation cells can be fully charged in 45 minutes or less. Some lithium-ion varieties can reach 90% in as little as 10 minutes. ''avinc.com; ''AeroVironment, 30 May 2007. (Press release).  "Test rapidly recharges a battery pack designed for use in passenger vehicles. 10-minute recharge restores enough energy to run electric vehicle for two hours at 60 miles per hour."
The charge time is about three to five hours, depending on the charger used. Generally, cell phone batteries can be charged at 1''C'' and laptop-types at 0.8''C'', where ''C'' is the current that would discharge the battery in one hour. Charging is usually stopped when the current goes below 0.03''C'' but it can be left indefinitely depending on desired charging time. Some fast chargers skip stage 2 and claim the battery is ready at 70% charge.
Top-off charging is recommended when voltage goes below 4.05 V/cell.
Typically, lithium-ion cells are charged with 4.2&nbsp;  &nbsp;0.05&nbsp;V/cell, except for military long-life cells where 3.92&nbsp;V is used for extending battery life. Most protection circuits cut off if either 4.3&nbsp;V or 90&nbsp;  C is reached. If the voltage drops below 2.50&nbsp;V per cell, the battery protection circuit may also render it unchargeable with regular charging equipment. Most battery protection circuits stop at  per cell.
For safety reasons it is recommended the battery be kept at the manufacturer's stated voltage and current ratings during both charge and discharge cycles.
The increasing demand for batteries has led vendors and academics to focus on improving the power density, operating temperature, safety, durability, charging time, output power, and cost of LIB solutions.
Science Express (preprint).  Retrieved 2010-06-11.
Li-ion batteries require a Battery Management System to prevent operation outside each cell's Safe Operating Area (over-charge, under-charge, safe temperature range) and to balance cells to eliminate SOC mismatches, significantly improving battery efficiency and increasing overall capacity. As the number of cells and load currents increase, the potential for mismatch also increases.
Andrea, Davide (19 September 2008). . ELithion LLC. Retrieved 2010-06-15. There are two kinds of mismatch in the pack: state-of-charge (SOC) and capacity/energy ("C/E") mismatch. Though SOC is more common, each problem limits pack capacity (mA  h) to the capacity of the weakest cell.
Lithium-ion batteries can rupture, ignite, or explode when exposed to high temperature. Short-circuiting a battery will cause the cell to overheat and possibly to catch fire. Adjacent cells may also then heat up and fail, in some cases, causing the entire battery to ignite or rupture. In the event of a fire, the device may emit dense irritating smoke.
Replacing the lithium cobalt oxide cathode material in lithium-ion batteries with a lithium metal phosphate such as lithium iron phosphate, improves cycle counts, shelf life and safety, but lowers capacity. Currently, these 'safer' lithium-ion batteries are mainly used in electric cars and other large-capacity battery applications, where safety issues are critical.
Lithium-ion batteries normally contain safety devices to protect the cells from disturbance. However, contaminants inside the cells can defeat these safety devices.
In March 2007, Lenovo recalled approximately 205,000 batteries at risk of explosion. In August 2007, Nokia recalled over 46 million batteries at risk of overheating and exploding. One such incident occurred in the Philippines involving a Nokia N91, which uses the BL-5C battery.
In December 2006, Dell recalled approximately 22,000 laptop batteries from the U.S. market. Approximately 10 million Sony batteries used in Dell, Sony, Apple, Lenovo/IBM, Panasonic, Toshiba, Hitachi, Fujitsu and Sharp laptops were recalled in 2006. The batteries were found to be susceptible to internal contamination by metal particles. Under some circumstances, these particles could pierce the separator, causing a short-circuit.
In October 2004, Kyocera Wireless recalled approximately 1 million mobile phone batteries to identify counterfeits.
In January 2008, the United States Department of Transportation ruled that passengers on board commercial aircraft could carry lithium batteries in their checked baggage if the batteries are installed in a device. Types of batteries affected by this rule are those containing lithium, including Li-ion, lithium polymer, and lithium cobalt oxide chemistries. Lithium-ion batteries containing more than  equivalent lithium content (ELC) are exempt from the rule and are forbidden in air travel. This restriction greatly reduces the chances of the batteries short-circuiting and causing a fire. 
Additionally, a limited number of replacement batteries may be transported in carry-on luggage. Such batteries must be sealed in their original protective packaging or in individual containers or plastic bags.
Some postal administrations restrict air shipping (including EMS) of lithium and lithium-ion batteries, and products containing these (e.g. laptops, cell phones etc.). Among these countries and regions are Hong Kong,
Researchers are working to improve the power density, safety, recharge cycle, cost and other characteristics of these batteries.
Solid-state designs have the potential to deliver three times the energy density of typical 2011 lithium-ion batteries at less than half the cost per kilowatt-hour. This approach eliminates binders, separators, and liquid electrolytes. By eliminating these,
Earlier trials of this technology ran into cost barriers, because the semiconductor industry's vacuum deposition technology cost 20   30 times too much. The new process deposits semiconductor-quality films from a solution. The nanostructured films grow directly on a substrate and then sequentially on top of each other. The process allows the firm to "spray-paint a cathode, then a separator/electrolyte, then the anode. It can be cut and stacked in various form factors."