Mizota, a Japanese American, was born in Los Angeles, California and raised in Danville, California. Mizota studied dance in high school and in UCLA and graduated summa cum laude with a degree in Communication Studies. Mizota played Katy in the MTV comedy/drama ''Undressed'', guest starred on the soap opera ''Passions'', and danced in ''Boys and Girls'', ''Beautiful'', and the ill-fated ''Monkeybone'' in 2001.
Mizota appeared in the film ''Austin Powers in Goldmember'' (2002) as Fook Mi, alongside Carrie Ann Inaba who played her twin sister Fook Yu. The two women are not related, but when Mizota had been cast for her role, she was asked if she knew any actresses who resembled her and suggested Inaba. Inaba, who had appeared briefly in '' '', was given the role and the two women were made up to appear as identical twins. Mizota and Inaba would later reprise their roles with Mike Myers in a commercial for Motorola.
In 2003, Mizota co-hosted the annual video game awards ''G-Phoria'' along with comedian Jamie Kennedy and Victor Lucas, host of the video game show, ''The Electric Playground''. Mizota was a host for Discovery Kids' '' '' on NBC and a video game countdown show, ''Filter'' on G4.  Mizota's time on the G4 Network has given her a wide fanbase. However, on December 9, 2005, Mizota announced that G4 had canceled the series, and the last episode of Filter with Mizota as host aired on December 19, 2005. G4 brought back Filter in June 2006 with new host Beth Ostrosky, but the show has since been canceled again. 
Also in 2005, Mizota took part in the reality show, ''Three Wishes'' starring Amy Grant and had a role in Rob Marshall's feature film, ''Memoirs of a Geisha''.
Mizota hosted an online technology show for Revision3 called ''InDigital'', but has since moved on. Mizota is the current spokeswoman for Time Warner Cable, under the name "Karen". In 2006, Mizota appeared in a Best Buy holidays commercial as a Best Buy employee, and in Toyota commercials as a customer looking at cars. In 2007, Mizota appeared in another Best Buy holiday commercial as a woman with a voyeuristic partner, and in a State Farm commercial, as a baseball game attendant. In 2009, Mizota appeared in a Volkswagen commercial as a dealership employee.
Diane recently hosted a ''Dancing With the Stars'' recap with Joey Lawrence on Yahoo.com, as part of Yahoo! Buzz Session. She co-hosts the second season of the GSN series ''Bingo America'' with Richard Karn.  She also hosts the celebrity fitness show, "Inside and Out" on Yahoo's OMG page and has recently been tapped to host "This Week in Mom" on Yahoo's Shine page.  
In April 2011, Diane won the social media contest to become Ashton Kutcher's Vice President of Pop Culture for Popchips, by writing, producing and editing her own submission video, and will cover pop culture events for the next year.  One of her first assignments is an exclusive interview with Bruno Mars as he prepares his new tour.