Nationally, Bath is most well known for being the runner up in Series 3 of ''Dancing with the Stars'' in 2005, and for presenting ''Seven Morning News'', weekdays at 10:30am from 2004 to 2006. Bath has been with Seven since 1996 when she joined the Sydney newsroom. Bath was also one of Australia's youngest television presenters.
Bath was born and raised in Sydney's working-class western suburbs Born in Auburn and raised in South Wentworthville, she attended Holroyd High School. Later, she enrolled at Sydney University where, in 1985, she studied English, psychology, German and legal institutions for two months before deciding it was not for her. Harbouring no ambitions to be a journalist, she started working at a restaurant in Surry Hills and became a trainee manager at Kmart Merrylands - a position which she reportedly left because they would not let her make jokes while announcing red light specials.
On the advice of The Sydney Morning Herald columnist Peter Bowers, Bath applied to study communications at Mitchell College (now Charles Sturt University) in Bathurst. Not only was she accepted into the course, she also won a scholarship, and majored in politics. During her studies she was a broadcaster with the on-campus community radio station 2MCE-FM.  In 1988, half-way through the last year of her three-year course, she was offered a job at Sydney AM radio station 2UE as a cadet reporter and newsreader. 
Her second job came a year later, after a friend encouraged her to apply for a job with a regional television station in Albury. She moved to Albury-Wodonga, where she spent the next 20 months working at Prime Television station AMV-4 and spending her weekends in Melbourne. At AMV-4, she started reporting, was the weather presenter for a while, then finished off as the full-time newsreader.
In 1991, at 23, she joined Newcastle's NBN Television, where she stayed for the next five years as a reporter and host to the evening local news broadcast. Originally she thought she was going there as just a reporter, but the newsreader resigned and they offered the vacant position to her. She resigned from NBN Newcastle in late 1995 after being offered a job by Seven in Sydney. NBN took Bath to the Supreme Court to delay her appearance on Seven. The court granted an injunction against her appearing on Seven before 1 February 1996.
Before becoming presenter for ''Seven's Morning News'', Bath has previously had numerous presenting roles with the network over the years. 
For three weeks in mid 1997, Bath was working 18 hour days, filling in as host of ''11AM'', presenting the afternoon news updates, recording the news bulletin shown on Ansett flights and presenting the 11pm Late News bulletin.
In 1998, Bath was a reporter for ''Witness'', the network's flagship current affairs program, until it was axed later that year. Seven then asked Bath to co-host its new current affairs show, ''Dateline'', with Stan Grant. She declined and was given the role of presenting the Sydney 6pm news over summer.
In 1999, she returned to the Late News, as well as reading afternoon news bulletins on Sydney radio station 2WS from May.
In 2000, Bath was part of Seven's host team for the Sydney 2000 Olympic Games, including a spot on ''Olympic Sunrise''. In August, she carried the Olympic Torch in Newcastle. Bath was then given the honour of co-hosting the prelude to the Opening Ceremony live on stage at the Olympic Stadium, while seven months pregnant with her first child.
After having son Darcy in late 2000, she returned to political interviewing in 2001 as presenter of Sunday Sunrise and stayed for three years, as well as presenting Sydney's weekend 6pm news bulletin until 2004 (including an extended bulletin live from Bali on 12 October 2003). In 2001 she also co-hosted part of the networks Federal Election coverage on 10 November.
In 2004, she began presenting ''Seven Morning News'' where she replaced Chris Reason. 
In 2005, Chris Bath was a contestant in the third Australian series of ''Dancing with the Stars''. In seven out of the ten weeks of the series she obtained the highest score from the judges, including the semi final and grand final. However when the votes were combined with those of the viewers, Chris Bath finished second to ''Home and Away'' actor Ada Nicodemou for the title of ''Dancing with the Stars'' Champion.
From 12 December 2005, Bath presented Seven's Sydney 6pm weeknight news bulletin until the end of 2005. She then returned to the morning news on Wednesday to Friday and did the Sydney weekend news until mid January 2006. She also presented the summer breakfast show on Sydney radio station WSFM 101.7 from 12 December until 13 January.
On 7 December 2005, Sydney newspaper ''The Daily Telegraph'' printed that Bath had been in talks with the Nine Network to become the host of the ''Today'' breakfast show in 2006. However, Seven insiders say Bath was contracted to Seven until 1 December 2006 at the time and the Nine Network denied approaching her. The Herald Sun reported Bath turned down the position because she could not cope with the early starts and she wanted to honour her contract with Seven. The role eventually went to now former ''Ten News'' Sydney presenter, Jessica Rowe (who was also eventually replaced by Lisa Wilkinson less than 18 months later).
In 2006, Bath began presenting ''Seven Morning News'' on Monday to Thursday and the Sydney evening news on Fridays. From May, Bath swapped roles with Ann Sanders to present the weekend evening news in Sydney as well as Fridays. Ann took over the ''Morning News''. Later that year, Bath also presented a new employment based reality series for the Seven Network titled ''You've Got The Job''.
During 2007 and 2008, Bath often presented the ''Seven Late News'' updates and ''Seven's 4.30 News'' on Fridays. This continued into 2009, with Bath replacing Monique Wright as the Friday presenter of ''Seven's 4.30 News''.
In January 2009, Bath was appointed presenter of Seven's new current affairs program, ''Sunday Night''.
Later in the year, the network confirmed that Bath would become the weeknight presenter of ''Seven News Sydney'' when Ian Ross retires. Bath took over the role on Monday 30 November 2009.
Outside the Seven Network, Bath's standing in the industry was acknowledged in 2004 when she was asked to judge entries for the TV current affairs reporting and camera category of the prestigious Walkley Awards for journalism.
Bath is also a master of ceremonies, having MC'ed a number of events including the Jeans for Genes Day Art Auction in Sydney on 12 July 2007 and 20 July 2006.
Bath also enjoys motivational speaking, and in 2003 she took a large role in the "Step to the future" youth leadership forum for school students in Sydney.
Bath is also a Celebrity Ambassador for the Petrea King Quest for Life Foundation.
Other than Seven News, Chris Bath has appeared on a number of television programs and a film including: