 "Fame" here means "renown" (rather than today's more common meaning of "celebrity"). Its originator, Chancellor Henry Mitchell MacCracken, acknowledged inspiration from the Ruhmeshalle (Hall of Fame) in Munich, Germany.MacCracken, Henry Mitchell (1900), "The Hall of Fame," ''The American Monthly Review of Reviews,'' vol XXII (July   December 1900), 
It is a secular national shrine on the grounds of the Bronx Community College of the City University of New York located in The Bronx, New York, New York. Though the Hall's renown has itself faded, its glorious architecture remains, and the hall stands as a shrine not just to great men, but to Roman ideals of fame favored at the beginning of the 20th century.
Completed in 1900, as part of the original New York University campus at the site, the building was donated by Helen Gould and was formally dedicated on May 30, 1901.
The Hall of Fame stands on the heights occupied by the British army in its successful attack upon Fort Washington in the autumn of 1776. Dr. Henry Mitchell MacCracken, originator of The Hall of Fame and Chancellor of New York University once said:
Other monuments of a similar nature had been built earlier. King Ludwig I of Bavaria actually built two: a Walhalla Ruhmes- und Ehrenhalle near Regensburg, Germany, completed in 1842, and a ''Ruhmeshalle auf der Anhohe'' (Bavarian Hall of Fame), in Munich, completed in 1853.
Chancellor Henry Mitchell McCracken described the evolution of the idea for the Hall of Fame:
The memorial structure is an open-air colonnade, 630 feet in length with space for 102 bronze sculptures, designed in the neoclassical style by architect Stanford White. The library is comparable to Low Library at Columbia, designed by White's partner Charles McKim. The colonnade also runs behind (west of) the Hall of Languages to the south, and the Hall of Philosophy to the north. ''See also:''   
Carved in stone on pediments of The Hall of Fame are the words "By wealth of thought, or else by mighty deed, They served mankind in noble character. In worldwide good they live forever more."
The base to each sculpture holds a bronze tablet bearing the name of the person commemorated, significant dates, achievements and quotations. Each bronze bust must have been made specifically for The Hall of Fame and must not be duplicated within 50 years of its execution.
To be eligible for nomination, a person must have been a native born or naturalized (since 1914) citizen of the United States, must have been dead for 25 years (since 1922; from 1900 through 1920, a nominee had to be dead only 10 years) and must have made a major contribution to the economic, political, or cultural life of the nation. Nominees were elected by a simple majority vote, except from 1925 through 1940, when a 3/5 majority was required, and in 1976 when a point system replaced the majority vote. Two nominees, Constance Woolson (nominated in 1900) and Orville Wright (elected in 1965), were considered, being dead only 6 and 17 years respectively.
The Hall of Fame soon became a focal point for US national pride:
The first 50 names were required to include representatives of a majority of 15 classes:
The first 29 people to be elected in the year 1900 were:
Added in 1905:
Added in 1910:
Added in 1915:
Added in 1920:
Added in 1925:
Added in 1930:
Added in 1935:
Added in 1940:
Added in 1945:
Added in 1950:
Added in 1955:
Added in 1960:
Added in 1965:
Added in 1970:
Added in 1973:
Added in 1976:
The inductees voted on in 1976 (and Brandeis) do not have busts at the Hall.
In addition to Constance Woolson and Jefferson Davis, the following people were nominated at least once but not elected:
John C. Calhoun,http://www.trivia-library.com/b/hall-of-fame-for-great-americans-1900.htm
Horace Greeley,
Ephraim McDowell,
Richard M. Hoe,
Adoniram Judson,
Henry Wheaton,
Hiram Powers,
Louisa May Alcott,
Dorothea Dix,
Alice Cary,
Lydia Huntley Sigourney,
Theodore Dwight Woolsey,
Martha Washington,
Francis Wayland,
Frederick Edwin Church,
Sarah Franklin Bache,
Horace Bushnell,
Mary Washington,
Matthew Simpson,
William Austin Burt,
Ottmar Mergenthaler,
John Eliot (missionary),
Helen Hunt Jackson,
Robert L. Stevens,
John Jay,
Samuel Adams,
Sacagawea,
Benjamin Thompson,
James A. Garfield,
William McKinley,
Cyrus McCormick,
Henry George,
George Rogers Clark,
Charles Follen McKim,
Henry Barnard,
Borden Parker Bowne,
Lucretia Mott,
Elena Petrovna Blavatsky,
Sarah Josepha Buell Hale,
William Lloyd Garrison,
Wendell Phillips,
John Singleton Copley,
Andrew Johnson,
William Henry Harrison,
Chester A. Arthur,
Benjamin Harrison,
S. Weir Mitchell,
William Brewster (Pilgrim),
William James,
Warren G. Harding,
William Beaumont,
Elizabeth Blackwell,
Benjamin Peirce,
Robert McCormick,
Elizabeth Seton,
Calvin Coolidge,
Paul Dunbar,
John Ireland (archbishop),
Judah Touro,
William Henry Welch,
Joyce Kilmer,
George Caleb Bingham,
Paul M. Warburg,
John Stevens (inventor),
Karl Landsteiner,
Jacob Schiff,
Nikola Tesla,
Noah Webster,
Henry Ford,
Charles Evans Hughes,
Fiorello La Guardia,
Babe Ruth,
John Shaw Billings,
Gilbert N. Lewis,
Crawford Long,
George M. Cohan,
Al Jolson,
Lou Gehrig,
Johnny Appleseed,
Amelia Earhart,
Chief Joseph,
Wyatt Earp,
Huey Long,
Will Rogers.
In 2001, Bronx Community College organized a US$ 1 Million fund-raising effort to re-build and expand the Hall of Fame.
Along with the library dome at the Bronx Community College, the Hall of Fame was featured in the 2006 film ''The Good Shepherd'' as a backdrop for scenes taking place at Yale University. The dome of the Gould Memorial Library at the Hall of Fame served as a stand-in for MIT's Great Dome in the movie A Beautiful Mind.