Mitchell was born in Highland Park, Michigan. He graduated in 1980 from Wayne State University, where he majored in English. He was a film critic for the ''Fort Worth Star-Telegram'', the ''LA Weekly'', ''The Detroit Free Press'', and ''The New York Times''.
In the late 1980s, Mitchell was part of a short-lived PBS show  called ''The Edge''. On the series, he provided film commentary and general criticism. In one segment, Mitchell offered a quick run-down of all of director Oliver Stone's tropes, including "always keep that camera moving," which he said while moving a camcorder over a small model of a Vietnamese jungle and prison camp set up on a table. 
Mitchell produced ''The Black List'' in 2008, with director Timothy Greenfield-Sanders, a documentary film about race, culture and the seeds of success. The film includes Toni Morrison, Chris Rock and Kareem Abdul-Jabbar among others. A follow-up film, ''The Black List Part 2'', was filmed in the same style with director Timothy Greenfield-Sanders.  The second film features Angela Davis, Tyler Perry and RZA.
Since 1996, Mitchell has been the host of Santa Monica, California, public radio station KCRW's pop culture and film interview program , which is nationally distributed and podcast. He served for a number of years as a pop culture commentator for ''Weekend Edition'' on NPR.  In 2008, ''Elvis Mitchell: Under the Influence'' began airing on Turner Classic Movies. On the program Mitchell interviews actors and directors about their favorite classic films.
Elvis Mitchell is featured in the 2009 documentary film '' '' discussing how he was championed as a young writer by Pauline Kael, and the impact on him as an adolescent of the Herschell Gordon Lewis film, ''Two Thousand Maniacs!''.
On September 10, 2010, famed film critic Roger Ebert announced that he is returning to television on a movie review show that he is producing for public television. He also announced that Mitchell along with film critic Christy Lemire of ''The Associated Press'' will be featured on the new program reviewing the new films released.  On December 14, 2010, the ''Chicago Sun-Times'' reported that Mitchell would not be appearing on the new show. In January 2011 it was announced that Mitchell had joined the Movieline as chief film critic, along with Stephanie Zacharek.
Penske Media Corp has terminated Elvis Mitchell after more than 3 months as Movieline.com's chief film critic. 
Mitchell has been  as curator of a new film series. It was announced on June 16, 2011 that Mitchell will start at his new job on the weekly film series this July.
In his reviews, Mitchell takes on a freewheeling, somewhat stream of consciousness approach, and threads a good deal of intertextuality into his work by referencing other films.
In 2007, Mitchell appeared in an episode of the HBO series ''Entourage'', playing himself.  
On April 27, 2008, Mitchell was returning from Toronto to Detroit when border guards found Cuban cigars and $12,000 in cash on him.
Elvis grew up in Highland Park and he and twin sister 
Lisa were graduated from Highland Park High School.