In Germany, Vattenfall is the electric utility for the states of Hamburg, Mecklenburg-Vorpommern, Brandenburg, Berlin, Saxony-Anhalt, Thuringia, and Saxony. Vattenfall partly owns three and operates two nuclear power plants in the country: Brunsbuttel Nuclear Power Plant (Vattenfall owns 67 % and E.ON 33 %) and Krummel Nuclear Power Plant (E.ON owns 50 % and Vattenfall owns 50 %) - both located near Hamburg - are operated by Vattenfall, and Brokdorf Nuclear Power Plant in Schleswig-Holstein (E.ON owns 80 % and Vattenfall 20 %) is operated by E.ON. Vattenfall also owns a number of coal-fired power stations, including Janschwalde Power Station, Boxberg Power Station, Lippendorf Power Station (owned in part), Schwarze Pumpe Power Station, and Rostock Power Station (in part).
Vattenfall owns four of the dirty thirty most polluting power stations in Europe.
Vattenfall was operated by Ake Rusck between 1948 and 1957. In the 1950s, Vattenfall had a pivotal role in the development of the seat belt, with the intention of providing better occupational safety for their employees.
Since the late 1990s, Vattenfall has used its operating profit, stemming primarily from its Swedish hydropower facilities, to expand in especially Germany and Poland. The strategy has involved the acquisition of multiple brown coal fired power plants. This has been highly controversial in Sweden due to the status of brown coal as one of the least environmentally friendly alternatives for generating electricity. In addition, brown coal is strip mined in a process that sometimes forces communities to relocate as mining fields expand.
Vattenfall however promotes itself as being on the cutting edge of global energy preservation, which they lay out in an initiative to lower global carbon dioxide emissions. During the year 2007, President and CEO of Vattenfall, Lars G Josefsson, introduced "global burden-sharing" during a presentation at the United Nations. This initiative is intended to provide flexibility between developing and developed nations (report available from Vattenfall: ).
On February 23, 2009, Vattenfall announced that they were buying Nuon creating one of the largest power companies in Europe.
Vattenfall has power generation in Germany, Poland, Netherlands, United Kingdom, Denmark, Finland, and Sweden. However Vattenfall has business globally in 90 different countries around the world with its consultancy company in the energy and power sector, Vattenfall Power Consultant.
Vattenfall generates Electricity by hydropower (24%), nuclear power (28%), fossil fuel (47%) and smaller proportions of wind power (1%), biofuel and waste.
Main areas of operations are electricity, heat and transmission. Vattenfall supplies energy to 4.8 million customers in the Nordic countries and northern Europe. How the power and heat is generated is based on the particular conditions in each country. Conditions vary due to differences in natural resources and history. In Sweden and Finland, conditions allow Vattenfall to rely mainly on hydro and nuclear power. The available sources in Germany and Poland are mainly based on fossil fuels.
The story behind the safety belt is contrary to common beliefs not credited to Saab or Volvo. Fatal car accidents was rapidly increasing in Sweden during the 1950s. As a study at Vattenfall for accidents among the employees revealed that the majority of casualties came from car accidents two of the Vattenfall engineers Bengt Odelgard and Per-Olof Weman started to develop the safety belt. Their work set the standard for safety belt in Swedish cars as it was presented to Volvo in the late 50s.
Vattenfall is part of a Swedish industrial initiative to speed up the development of next generation's hybrid vehicles, which may be charged with electricity directly from the socket and driven longer distances on electricity, plug-in hybrid. For Vattenfall, this project entails the development and testing of electricity infrastructure and various charging alternatives. Solutions should be user friendly and flexible enough to ensure charging a plug-in hybrid is easier than filling your car at a petrol station today.
Electric vehicles will not require any extensive infrastructure development, as Sweden's power grid has sufficient capacity and an ordinary power point can be used to charge a plug-in hybrid. Sweden also has enough production capacity to meet the increased demand for electricity that would arise, in both the short and the long-term. For instance, Vattenfall's Lillgrund wind farm with 48 wind turbines could supply enough electricity to power 147,000 vehicles that drive 15,000 kilometers a year using electricity 75 percent of the time. The project partners are Vattenfall, Volvo Cars and ETC AB. Funding is also being provided by the Swedish Energy Agency.
Carbon capture and storage (CCS) is the method of capturing carbon dioxide from flue gas, compressing it into liquid form and storing it deep underground in suitable geological formations. Since 2001, Vattenfall has been working on developing methods for capturing CO2 from large coal-fired power plants and storing it underground. Development of safe, cost-efficient and viable technologies can contribute to drastic reductions of CO2-emissions. This work includes all parts of the chain - capture, transport and storage. Another important part of the project is to identify and assess the environmental impact that capture, transport and storage of CO2 entails.
Vattenfall is evaluating several ocean energy technologies, such as wave- and salinity power as well as tidal and marine current technologies. Substantial research is in progress and considerable demonstration activities are initiated around the world. Most of the attention is focused on wave energy, which is estimated to be the next renewable technology to be commercialized (after wind power). Globally, the potential for wave energy is enormous and ranges from 6 000 to 15 000 TWh per year. In the EU countries alone, the annual potential along the European west coast is estimated to 2000 TWh.
Vattenfall is investing strongly in efforts to reduce carbon dioxide emissions and to limit the environmental effects resulting from the use of different energy sources. Renewable energy, new technology, energy efficiency, pre-drying of lignite and restoration of landscape are some of the projects.
Vattenfall strive to increase the use of biomass fuels as principal fuel and as part of the fuel mix. At the Midtfyn plant in Danish Odense, construction is in progress for a new straw-fueled co-generation boiler with a capacity of 35 MW of electricity and 84 MW of heat. At the Amager plant in Copenhagen an existing coal-fueled co-generation plant is being converted to a straw-fuelled plant. In Sweden and Finland, plants are being upgraded to increase the proportions of biomass fuels and to reduce the use of fossil fuels. Vattenfall's biggest investment is in wind power plants, where the aim is a production of 8 TWh until 2016.
Vattenfall have managed to get EKOenergy label in Finland and Bra Miljoval label in Sweden for few of their electricity products. Ecolabeled electricity is produced in different Swedish and Danish wind parks and hydropower plants in Vargon, Trollhattan and Lilla Edet certified by the Swedish Society for Nature Conservation.
Vattenfall is taking part in international studies and tests to stay at the front edge of the ocean energy technology development. Interesting technologies are being tested outside the coasts of Sweden, Denmark, Norway and Ireland. These wave based energy sources are estimated to be commercial profitable around the year 2020, at the earliest. Apart from wave power Vattenfall is also assessing several other ocean energy technologies, such as salinity power, tidal power and marine current technologies.
In September 2008, Vattenfall commissioned the world's first Oxyfuel pilot plant for CCS     Carbon capture and storage. The pilot plant is located in Schwarze Pumpe, Germany and uses oxyfuel technology to capture carbon dioxide from coal combustion. Vattenfall have also started investigations for converting one existing CHP plant block at Nordjyllandsvaerket  to a CCS demonstration plant. The aim is to take the demonstration plant into operation 2013.
In December 2009 Vattenfall announced a joint-venture with Scottish company Pelamis Wave Power to develop a 20MW wave power project off the coast of Shetland, Scotland.  The project will potentially use 26 Pelamis P2 machines.
 These new power plants will have significantly better operating efficiency and environmental performance compared to older plants. The older plants    electricity production will thus become redundant.
In the Swedish nuclear power plants Ringhals and Forsmark, reinvestments are being made to modernise and adapt operations to new safety and environmental requirements. This will contribute to an increase in production capacity by a total effect of about 1000 MW.
In southern Germany, Vattenfall has a project in progress aimed at developing technology for drying lignite prior to combustion. By burning pre-dried lignite instead of natural lignite, with approximately 50 per cent moisture content, as is done today, the operating efficiency can be increased significantly and therefore save energy and reduce carbon dioxide emissions. Estimations are that the technology will be ready for full-scale demonstrations within 10 years.
Vattenfall sees mining and recultivation as two phases of the same operation. The ongoing recultivation programmes in Lausitz, Poland and Brandenburg, Germany are based on well-established models that ensure ecological stability and multifunctional use.
To provide a fact base for discussions about reducing emissions of GHG, Vattenfall and McKinsey & Company conducted studies and created a global GHG abatement database that was published in 2007. In January 2009 McKinsey launched a second and updated edition of this study, Pathways to a low-carbon economy.
Vattenfall has proposed a framework leading to a low carbon emitting society. The most pressing need is to create a credible, stable and predictable long-term global framework defining how reductions will be achieved. To address this challenge, Vattenfall has outlined a global adaptive burden-sharing model for a low carbon emitting society.
The model is built on the following principles:
Vattenfall   s climate vision is to be a climate-neutral company by 2050. Achieving this climate vision requires that Vattenfall can reduce its CO2 emissions from existing operations while at the same time dramatically increasing its generation of electricity with very low CO2 emissions. The new electricity generation capacity needed to realise the company   s climate vision will be derived from renewable energy sources, such as wind power, bioenergy, ocean energy and non-renewable energy sources, such as coal power using the new CCS technology, and nuclear power.
At present, renewable sources of energy account for a small part of the world   s electricity generation, but they are growing increasingly important against the backdrop of the major climate challenge the world is facing. According to the International Energy Agency (IEA), approximately 18% of the world   s total energy generation is based on renewable sources (2006 figures), of which hydro power accounts for nearly 90%. Most of the world   s total electricity generation is based on fossil fuels which accounted for nearly two-thirds of generation in 2006, while nuclear power accounted for approximately 15%. The EU   s target is that 20% of total energy supply will be derived from renewable sources by 2020, compared with today   s level of slightly more than 8%. In the Nordic countries Vattenfall has a comparatively high percentage of renewable energy in its electricity generation mix due to an abundance of hydro power.
The 3C initiative    Combat Climate Change    stems from Vattenfall's proposal for a low carbon emitting society. Vattenfall is responsible for coordinating the 3C initiative that aims at forming a global opinion group consisting of companies showing leadership by demanding an integration of climate issues into the world of market and trade. More than 50 international companies have already signed up.
Vattenfall's initiative the climate manifesto aims to empower the general public. By signing the climate manifesto the public can support the decision makers to take the decisions that needs to be taken in order to combat climate change. Vattenfall believes that the world needs structural changes of the system we all are a part of as individuals, consumers and voters. The primary structural changes are compressed into three vital policy points that together form the    climate manifesto    for combating climate change.
Vattenfall made each signature turn into a figure that went on a tour of Europe starting in Brussels and ending at the United Nations Climate Change Conference in Poznan 2008. The figures formed an immense visual impact showing the decision makers peoples support. Over 230.000 individuals signed the manifesto (April 2009). The new climate agreement between the UN-members is to be set in December 2009 at COP 15 held in Copenhagen.
Vattenfall sponsorship ambitions cover the areas sport, cultural, humanitarian and environmental concerns. Vattenfalls programmes aim to support initiatives in communities where it operates and promotes the importance of accountability in Vattenfalls working culture. In 2008, Vattenfall spent SEK 195 million on voluntary contributions, including donations.
Vattenfall   s partnership with the National Geographic Society have two main elements     a pan-European school competition and a multi-media partnership.
Vattenfall is a Major Partner to the World Childhood Foundation, the humanitarian organisation working to defend the rights of the child and to promote better living conditions for vulnerable and exploited children at risk across the world. The World Childhood Foundation was founded in 1999 by H. M. Queen Silvia of Sweden.
Vattenfall is a sponsor of Clean Up the World in Poland, a community-based environmental campaign that inspires and empowers communities from every corner of the globe to clean up, fix up and preserve the local environment. In collaboration with the primary partner     the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP)     Clean Up the World brings together businesses, community groups, schools and governments in a range of activities and programmes that are making improvements to local environments.
Vattenfall will be a national partner for the 12th IAAF World Championships in Athletics berlin 2009. Klaus Wowereit, the mayor of Berlin, presented Vattenfall as strong partner for the World Championships in Athletics and the state of Berlin.
Vattenfall is a main sponsor for a number of local projects in Sweden. Vattenfall is the official sponsor of the Ski Team Sweden supporting the various national teams as well as local enterprises. In Germany, Vattenfall sponsors the Vattenfall Cyclassics an annual one-day pro and amateur cycling race in and around Hamburg as well as the Vattenfall Reading Days (Vattenfall Lesetage) where several famous authors hold public readings at different places within the city of Hamburg.
According to Greenpeace, Vattenfall   s coal-fired power plants account for more than twice as much CO   -emissions as the rest of Sweden combined, and, if counting their Swedish-owned but foreign-located plants as Swedish, would bring Sweden up to fourth most CO   -emitting country, counting per capita. 
In May 2009, Vattenfall was voted the winner of the 2009 Climate Greenwash Awards for "its mastery of spin on climate change, portraying itself as a climate champion while lobbying to continue business as usual, using coal, nuclear power, and pseudo-solutions such as agrofuels and carbon capture and storage (CCS)."   Vattenfall owns four of the dirty thirty most polluting power stations in Europe.
The first fire in the transformer of the nuclear power plant Krummel (part owned with E.ON) in 2007 forced a closure of the power plant for over two years, while a short circuit in July 2009 in another transformer led to another closure. Due to these incidents the Prime Minister of Schleswig-Holstein, Peter Harry Carstensen announced that this will be "letzter Versuch" (their last try) before complete closure of the facility.