His parents were Herby and Joan Beggs, and he has a younger sister, Jacqueline.  In November 1979, Beggs' mother died, leaving him to care for his sister, who was then 15.  He took a job as a dustman upon leaving school.
Nick's daughter Lula was born in 1991, and his first marriage ended in 1994. He had another daughter, Willow, in 2002 by his girlfriend Ann, whom he married in 2003.  He is now also stepfather to Ann's children Olivia, Jake and Callum Keenan. Nick currently lives in Leighton Buzzard, Bedfordshire.
After attending art school, in 1979 Beggs formed the band Art Nouveau, with Steve Askew, Stuart Croxford Neale and Jez Strode.  Later, Chris Hamill (Limahl) joined the band and at Beggs' suggestion it was renamed Kajagoogoo.  The release of the first single, "Too Shy", in January 1983 saw the band on a promotional tour as the record reached number 1 in the UK Singles Chart.
Limahl was subsequently dismissed from Kajagoogoo and, following a split with Strode, the three remaining band members reformed as 'Kaja'.
Between 1985 and 1987, Beggs concentrated on writing with various other songwriters and finally formed Ellis, Beggs, & Howard in March 1987. Ellis, Beggs and Howard split in 1989, and in 1990 Beggs joined the progressive folk band, Iona. He recorded two albums with them, ''The Book of Kells'' and ''Beyond These Shores''.
He continued working with various artists and bands including Alphaville, Belinda Carlisle, Emma Bunton (on her album Life In Mono) and Led Zeppelin   s former bass player, John Paul Jones. In 1996, Beggs met Howard Jones on a flight from the United States and a friendship was established. Jones invited Beggs to tour as part of his band.  Beggs has also worked with bands and artists such as ABC, Alphaville, Belinda Carlisle, Celtus, China Crisis, Cliff Richard, Cozi, Curiosity Killed The Cat,  , Engelbert Humperdinck, Gary Numan, Go West, Howard Jones, Iona, Keke, Kim Wilde, Maddy Prior, Mark Shaw, Michael Bolton, Midge Ure, Nena, Nick Heyward, Polysics, Rick Waller, Right Said Fred, Seal, Stefano Ianne, Steve Hackett, Steve Howe, T'Pau, Terl Bryant, Then Jerico, There She Was, Tina Turner, Tom McRae, Tony Hadley, Toyah Willcox, Troy Donockley and Warren Cuccurullo.
Beggs became a contributor to various guitar publications and is now a staff writer for Bass Guitar Magazine. He is also a Patron of London based guitar and bass school, Guitar-X.
He has recorded and released two solo albums: ''Stick Insect'' (2002) and ''The Maverick Helmsman'' (2004).
Beggs and Askew have been heavily involved with a new duo called Industrial Salt, who have been successful in Japan. They have also written material for Claudia Mills, a finalist on the BBC TV talent show, ''Let Me Entertain You''.
A reformed Kajagoogoo with Beggs, Askew and Croxford Neale toured in 2004.  Since then Limahl and Strode have both rejoined and the band has toured extensively over Europe in 2008 and 2009.
Beggs' primary instruments are Chapman Stick and bass guitar.  His bass guitars include a Tanglewood acoustic bass and a Fender jazz fretless, a prototype Ashbory bass, a 5 string Wal bass (modified by Beggs to include a midi pickup enabling him to trigger synths), an Aria SB, a Kramer, a Musicman Stingray and a Rickenbacker 4003 FG. He has also significantly modified a Chapman Stick to a fully midi able instrument triggering midi from both bass and melody strings. He has named this the "Virtual Stick". He uses a TC Electronic RH450 bass amp with RS210 and RS212 cabinets.