Nitrogen trifluoride is used in the plasma etching of silicon wafers. Today nitrogen trifluoride is predominantly employed in the cleaning of the PECVD chambers in the high volume production of liquid crystal displays and silicon-based thin film solar cells. In these applications NF3 is initially broken down ''in situ,'' by a plasma. The resulting fluorine atoms are the active cleaning agents that attack the polysilicon, silicon nitride and silicon oxide. Nitrogen trifluoride can be used as well with tungsten silicide, and tungsten produced by CVD.  NF3 has been considered as an environmentally preferable substitute for sulfur hexafluoride or perfluorocarbons such as hexafluoroethane.
The process utilization of the chemicals applied in plasma processes is typically below 20 %. 
Therefore some of the PFCs and also of the NF3 always escape into the atmosphere. Modern gas abatement systems can decrease such emissions. 
Elemental fluorine has been introduced as an environmentally friendly replacement for nitrogen trifluoride in the manufacture of flat panel displays and solar cells.
Nitrogen trifluoride is also used in hydrogen fluoride and deuterium fluoride lasers, which are types of chemical lasers. It is preferred to fluorine gas due to its convenient handling properties, reflecting its considerable stability.
It is compatible with steel and Monel, as well as several plastics.
 After first attempting the synthesis in 1903, Otto Ruff prepared nitrogen trifluoride by the electrolysis of a molten mixture of ammonium fluoride and hydrogen fluoride.
NF3 is slightly soluble in water without undergoing chemical reaction. It is nonbasic with a low dipole moment of 0.2340 D.  By contrast, ammonia is basic and highly polar (1.47 D).  This difference arises from the fluorine atoms acting as electron withdrawing groups, attracting essentially all of the lone pair electrons on the nitrogen atom.  NF3 is a potent yet sluggish oxidizer.
It oxidizes hydrogen chloride to chlorine:
It converts to tetrafluorohydrazine upon contact with metals, but only at high temperatures:
NF3 reacts with fluorine and antimony pentafluoride to give the tetrafluoroammonium salt:
Although  has a high GWP, for a long time its radiative forcing in the Earth's atmosphere has been assumed to be small, spuriously presuming that only small quantities are released into the atmosphere.  Industrial applications of  routinely break it down, while in the past previously used regulated compounds such as  and PFCs were often released. Research has questioned the previous assumptions. High-volume applications such as DRAM computer memory production, the manufacturing of flat panel displays and the large-scale production of thin-film solar cells in regions with insufficient ecological awareness continues to increase the emissions of .), a toxic and potent greenhouse gas | journal=J. Hazard. Mat. | volume= 159| doi=10.1016/j.jhazmat.2008.02.023 | pages=257 | pmid=18378075 | issue=2   3}}
 World production of NF3 is expected to reach 8000 tons a year by 2010. By far the world's largest producer of  is the US chemical company Air Products & Chemicals. An estimated 2% of produced  is released into the atmosphere. Robson projected that the maximum atmospheric concentration is less than 0.16 parts per trillion (ppt) by volume, which will provide less than 0.001 Wm   2 of IR forcing.
One study suggests that the contribution of the NF3-Emissions to the overall greenhouse gas budget of thin-film Si-solar cell manufacturing is overestimated. Instead, the contribution of the nitrogen trifluoride to the CO2-budget of thin film solar cell production is compensated already within a few months by the CO2 saving potential of the PV technology.
Skin contact with  is not hazardous, and it is a relatively minor irritant to mucous membranes and eyes.  It is a pulmonary irritant with a toxicity comparable with nitrogen oxides, and overexposure via inhalation causes the conversion of hemoglobin in blood to methemoglobin, which can lead to the condition methemoglobinemia.