The game is largely based on the Indiana Jones movie ''Raiders of the Lost Ark''. Set in 1945, British agent Rick Dangerous travels to the Amazon jungle to search for the lost Goolu tribe. His plane crashes in the jungle, and Rick must escape from the enraged Goolu. When the game starts Rick finds himself in a cave running from a rolling boulder, a famous scene from the Indiana Jones movie.
Armed with a pistol and dynamite, Rick must fight hostiles and evade countless traps in three more levels. The second level is set inside a pyramid in Egypt. In level three, Rick must venture to the Nazi stronghold of Schwarzendumpf castle to rescue captured Allied soldiers. The rescued soldiers tell him that the Nazis are planning a missile attack on London. Therefore, in the last level Rick must infiltrate their secret missile base.
Rick can jump and climb, and carry a limited amount of dynamite and ammunition for his gun. The gun is Rick's main means of disposing of enemies, although most traps that can kill Rick can also kill his enemies if used correctly.  The dynamite sticks are generally used for puzzle solving, such as by blowing up certain blocks. (Of course, some of them fly ''towards'' the explosion, potentially killing Rick in the backfire). Rick is also armed with a pogo stick that allows him to paralyze enemies with split-second timing.
Unusually, many of the traps in ''Rick Dangerous'' have no visible warning, which means that a player's initial progress through the game can be a nail-biting ordeal of trial and error. This was criticized by some reviewers.
Rick returns to London after completing the last mission, and we learn that the city is under attack by aliens.
At the end of ''Rick Dangerous 1'', we learn that an alien invasion is imminent. As ''Rick Dangerous 2'' starts, UFOs land in London. The image shift in the character of Rick Dangerous is evident from the start: The coat is nowhere to be found and the Indiana Jones-style hat from the previous episode is almost symbolically blown off by a laser beam coming from one of the spaceships in the introduction sequence. One UFO lands in Hyde Park, and Rick goes there to settle the score.
There are a number of changes to the game play that make the ''Rick Dangerous 2'' more complex and more challenging than its predecessor. For a start, Rick is now armed with a laser gun and bombs that can not only be placed but slid, making way for strategic bomb-placement. The pogo stick is replaced by a punch attack. Rick can also employ a special flying vehicle in a few parts of the game, which allows for fast movement but this may also become a danger factor.
Also, while there is a linear story to the game, the first four levels may be played in any order. Completing these four levels (Hyde Park, ice caverns on the planet Freezia, the deep forest of Vegetablia and the "atomic mud mines") unlocks the fifth and final level, the Fat Guy's Headquarters, which ends in a boss fight. This level can then be played as often as desired, until the player quits the game, but the endgame movie only plays if the player completes all ''five'' levels in order.
The end of ''Rick Dangerous 2'' does not complete the story. The game finishes with a sort of a cliffhanger, with the Fat Guy escaping at the final moment through a teleporter device, and Rick following him with the familiar captions "What will Rick do next?". Though this may have hinted another sequel to the story, ''Rick Dangerous 3'' was never made. Many of the ideas were to be re-used in a Super Nintendo Entertainment System game called ''Danger Dan'', which was also unfinished. Both games were re-released on the budget label Kixx.
Both games were highly received in most magazines; for example, ''Amstrad Action'' gave ''Rick Dangerous 2'' a 97% rating. However, ''Zzap!64'' only gave ''Rick Dangerous 1 & 2'' a 73% and 75% overall rating respectively, pointing out that the first game was "A playable and fun platform-style game but not much more than that." Amiga Power were highly critical of both games and the reliance on pattern learning.
The C64 version met with lukewarm reviews; an 84% from ''CU Amiga-64''  and a 73% from ''Zzap!64''.  ''Zzap!64'' pointing out that the game was "A playable and fun platform-style game but not much more than that."
The Amstrad version also received the same response getting a 76% from ''The Games Machine'', although the game fared slightly better with ''Amstrad Action'' who rated it 83% and awarded it with an "AA Rave" accolade.
Amiga reviews were generally positive, ''ACE'' giving a 890 rating and ''Amiga Format'' giving an 89%.
As with the Amiga, the Atari ST version received positive reviews; 88% and 87% from ''The One for 16-bit Games'' and ''Computer and Video Games'' respectively.  ''The One'' magazine explaining that "Rick Dangerous rates as one of the most enjoyable 16-bit arcade games in a long time."
The ZX Spectrum version fared well amongst its respective magazines. ''CRASH'' awarded the sequel game a "CRASH Smash" accolade with 90% in their issue 82. "A number one platform game returns with smashingly equal results." While ''Your Sinclair'' also gave the game a 90 rating, stating "More explore-and-collect frolics, but a whole lot better than the original. "  90 rating. 
The Amiga game scored highly as well.  ''CU Amiga'' gave an 89% rating and a "CU Screen Star" award in their November 1990 issue. ''Amiga Format'' awarded the Amiga game their 'Gold' award with a 92% rating.
Atari ST reviews were also positive; ''The One'' gave the game an overall rating 90%. while ''Zero'' magazine gave an overall 84% rating in their October 1990 review.