On May 26, 54 teenage schoolgirls gather at Shinjuku Station in Tokyo to commit mass suicide. As the train approaches the station, they line up on the edge of the platform, join hands, and throw themselves in front of the train as it is arriving. In the midst of the subsequent chaos, someone leaves a small white bag on the platform. Meanwhile, in a Tokyo hospital during a night shift, the security guard is left astonished as one nurse disappears without a trace and another jumps out of a window. Another white bag is found in the hospital. Three detectives - Kuroda (Ryo Ishibashi), Shibusawa (Masatoshi Nagase), and Murata (Akaji Maro) - take the case. They then seek a connection linking the schoolgirls. Soon, a hacker named Kiyoko (Yoko Kamon) - who uses the alias "The Bat" - calls the police and informs them of a link between the suicides and a website she found, which shows nothing but red and white dots. She agrees to help the police solve the crime. Meanwhile, the white bags are opened, each revealing two rolls of human skin stitched together. The detectives theorize that the skin was removed from the victims before their deaths.
On May 28, at a high school in Tokyo, a group of students who are on the school roof during break laugh about the mass suicide. As a joke to imitate the 54 schoolgirls, they end up standing on the edge of the roof, jokingly pretending to get ready to jump off. They pretend to jump off the roof, but their joking gets serious as some actually jump. The ones that didn't jump look down in shock and surprise. Moments later, they also end up committing suicide. On May 29, the suicide boom has spread all over Japan. Mitsuko (Saya Hagiwara) is on her way home, when she gets hit by her boyfriend Masa who has thrown himself off a roof. Mitsuko is taken to the police station for questioning. In the autopsy room, Kuroda discovers Masa had an open wound on his back which went right through a butterfly tattoo, and that one of the pieces of skin on the roll fits perfectly on the wound. Mitsuko acknowledges knowing about the wound, but denies ever hearing about a suicide club. The police strip search Mitsuko to see if she is missing any skin and discover that while she has no skin missing, she does have an identical butterfly tattoo. Before Mitsuko leaves the police station, she attracts Shibu's attention, and Shibu gives her his business card so that she can contact him if need be. Later, Kuroda's son, Toru, shows Kuroda a weird website his friend showed him, with nothing but a white flashing circle and a short message regarding the suicides.
On May 30, the police receive a call from a boy who clears his throat after each sentence. He warns that on that evening at 7:30 another mass suicide will take place at the same platform. That evening the detectives organize a stake-out in order to prevent another mass suicide from happening but nothing happens at the station. Meanwhile, the individual and smaller-scale group suicides continue all over Japan, claiming many lives, including Kuroda's entire family. This section of the film includes a gory scene in which a mother is chopping vegetables in front of her daughter and proceeds to chop off her fingers, and the camera sees the mutilated hand and splattered blood all over her face. The Bat gets caught by the henchmen of a mysterious psychopath who calls himself "Genesis". She and her sister are taken to his underground lair, where a girl in a white sack is brutally raped and killed by one of the henchmen right in front of them while Genesis sings a song. A group of detectives has just gathered at Kuroda's home when they get a call from the same child who warned them about the second suicide wave. The boy asks Kuroda if he is "connected with himself" and whether or not one can be in connected with oneself after death. After he hangs up the phone, Kuroda snatches a gun from one of the detectives and shoots himself. At Genesis' lair, The Bat, after she notices that her sister has already been killed too, manages to obtain access to a computer and tries to e-mail the authorities information about her whereabouts, but is caught in the act by Genesis. He is eager to get his name into the history books, however, and allows her to send the message. The police arrive soon afterward and arrest Genesis and his henchmen, and the bust immediately becomes national news.
On June 1, Mitsuko goes to her boyfriend's home to return his helmet. She goes to his old room. Soon she realizes something is not right. First she notices the Dessert posters on the wall. Then she takes a look at the photo album where she sees pictures of Masa and the members of the band together. Then the phone rings. She notices that the ringtone is one of Dessert's songs. One poster gets her attention. She grabs the cell phone and notices that the girls' fingers and the numbers on their shirts have a connection: with the help of the cell phone she unravels the poster's secret message by hitting each number on the girls shirt one time for each finger they held out     for the girls with double-digit numbers on their shirts, their right hand corresponded with the first digit and their left with the second. The message revealed was the word S-U-I-C-I-D-E. Not long after she has cracked the code behind the poster, the other phone starts ringing. She answers it and is asked to give a PIN. Mitsuko dials 7842433, the same code she used for the decoding of the secret "suicide" message. After typing the number she talks to a boy, who tells her there is no Suicide Club, and invites Mitsuko to "come over". Mitsuko begins to decode Dessert-related material, though what exactly she found is left unspecified, and in the middle of this finds out Dessert has a concert at an arena the next day and goes there.
On June 2, with the code she just got, she is able to unlock a door and get to the backstage area, where she goes to a stage. The stage curtains are opened and she sees a group of children in the audience. One of the children asks her if she came to repair her connection with herself. She shouts she is connected to herself and the children applaud. She then goes with them to a place where her tattoo is removed by a woodworking plane. A new roll of skin is made which ends up with the police. The detective Shibusawa notices that one of the pieces of the skin belongs to Mitsuko. That evening he goes to the station where he sees Mitsuko and thinks she is going to commit suicide. He grabs her arm but she pulls away. The train arrives but she does not kill herself. Instead, she quietly gets on it, the door closes and the train leaves. As it does, Dessert announces it is their last presentation, performing their last concert as the movie ends.
Two different R1 versions of the film exist, an R-rated version and an unrated version. Not only can they be differentiated by the unrated version having a red stripe on the cover, but they have different pictures on the sides of the DVD cover (the unrated having a picture of Mitsuko). There are six additions to this version of the film.
As of early 2006, the film has one sequel and a proposed follow-up. ''Noriko's Dinner Table'' (''Noriko no Shokutaku'') depicts events from before and after the happenings of ''Suicide Circle'', and gives more insight on several plotholes of its predecessor. In 2006, Sono said "I always wanted to make a trilogy but in reality it is very difficult."
A manga of the same title and written by Usamaru Furuya appeared at the same time of the movie's Japanese DVD release. Although Furuya's intention was to faithfully reproduce the film's plot, Sion Sono asked him to write his own story. As a result, the ''Suicide Club'' manga is much more straightforward and easy to understand than the film, and features much more solid character development. It deals with the same opening scene, but there is a twist: out of the 54 suicidal girls, a survivor is reported: Saya Kota. Her best friend, Kyoko, must now unveil the secret of the Suicide Club and save Saya from falling deeper into it.