Nuclear weaponry was used periodically throughout the UC era, notably during the One Year War. Subsequent use of nuclear weaponry, although banned by the Antarctic Treaty, appears throughout the Universal Century.
Bioweaponry was used by the Principality of Zeon during the One Year War.
Chemical weaponry was used during three separate conflicts in the Universal Century. Since space colonies are completely enclosed, the results of chemical weaponry are often very disturbing.
Although the Antarctic Treaty prohibited the use of nuclear, biological or chemical weaponry, this did not stop the Principality or the Federation trying to develop new superweapons for use against one another.
One of the most devastating tactics used against the Earth Federation was the colony drop. Universal Century colonies are roughly  long and  wide, making them the largest ballistic weapons ever built. Colony drops result in massive climate changes, land loss, and heavy casualties among those living in harm's way.
Colony(or similar items with large size) dropping tactics were widely used in other Gundam Series, such tactics appeared in Gundam W, Gundam X, and also in SEED Destiny. In Gundam X, over 90% of the earth's population was wiped out after a successful massive colony drop operation.
Based on the weapon devised by ancient inventor Archimedes, the Solar System, also called Solar Flare System, is a superweapon developed by the Earth Federation which uses a system of mirrors to focus sunlight onto an object in order to heat it to the point of fracture. The Federation used this weapon twice, once during the One Year War and again during the Delaz Fleet crisis.
Following the loss of Odessa and Solomon, the Zeon military was on the defensive. After witnessing the effectiveness of the Earth Federation's Solar System during the Battle of Solomon and fearing the Federation's next move would be a full-scale assault on the home colonies, Zeon's Supreme Commander Gihren Zabi ordered the construction of a massive solar powered beam projector known as the Solar Ray System. The project originally started in the Mahal colony in September 0079, exploiting the same loophole in the Antarctic Treaty as the Federation's Solar System. Supervised by Colonel Asakura, who also developed Zeon's lethal G3 nerve gas, solar batteries from other colonies were collected and a projection array was built within the colony walls. Although intended for use against the Federation this weapon was only used once against Degwin Sodo Zabi while his fleet and General Revil's fleet were meeting to negotiate a peace. The premature firing of the Solar Ray Cannon by Gihren Zabi caused the Colony Laser to burn out, which contributed to the Principality of Zeon's loss during the Battle of A Baoa Qu by depriving Gihren and Kycilla Zabi of the ability to strike at the Federation from a distance.
Essentially a superior improvement of the Solar Ray Cannon. To punish rebellious colonies without resorting to conventional invasion or the use of chemical weapons, Section 2 of the Gryps Colony was converted into a massive laser cannon. Unlike the Solar Ray Cannon, which burned out after firing, the Gryps Colony Laser can fire indefinitely, although its primary flaws were the time-consuming process of recharging between shots and the fact that it was ponderously slow and huge (but resilient) target. Power is supplied by an array of solar panels, whilst a thermonuclear pulse thruster provides a limited degree of mobility. It was first used by the Titans to destroy Colony 18 of Side 2, and later captured by the AEUG and used to eradicate the remnants of the Titans. The Colony Laser was destroyed following the conclusion of "Operation Maelstrom" and the end of the Gryps Conflict.