In 1887 Congress passed the Hatch Act, which provided for the establishment of the Agricultural Experiment Station in 1888. The Cooperative Extension Service was established in 1914 by the Smith-Lever Act. The university has since had its mission expanded and redefined by the Legislature. In 1932, the Legislature renamed the university as '''Mississippi State College'''.
By 1958, when the Legislature again renamed the university as Mississippi State University, the Graduate School had been organized (1936), doctoral degree programs had begun (1951), the School of Forest Resources had been established (1954), and the College of Arts and Sciences had replaced the General Science School (1956).
In July 1965, Richard E. Holmes became the first African-American student to enroll at Mississippi State University.
The School of Architecture admitted its first students in 1973, the College of Veterinary Medicine admitted its first class in 1977. The MSU Vet school (commonly referred to as the CVM) is the largest veterinary school in the nation under one roof.
The School of Accountancy was established in 1979.
The University Honors Program was founded in 1968 in order to provide more rigorous course curricula for academically talented students, as well as to facilitate guest lecture series, forums, and distinguished external scholarships. The program has been vastly expanded to form its own college after Bobby Shackouls, an MSU alumnus and retired CEO, donated US$10 million to found the Judy and Bobby Shackouls Honors College in April 2006. 
The school recently also started a joint Ph.D program with San Jose State University allowing an increase in research for both universities, as well as enhancing the stature of both engineering colleges.
In March 2009, Mississippi State announced the conclusion of the university's seven-year capital campaign, with more than $462 million received in private gifts and pledges. 
Mississippi State University is accredited by the Commission on Colleges of the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools to award baccalaureate, master's, specialist, and doctoral degrees.
Today, the university has the following colleges and schools:
As of Fall 2010, the current total enrollment of Mississippi State is 19,644.  The university contains 160 buildings, and the grounds of the university comprise about 4,200 acres (17&nbsp;km  ), including farms, pastures, and woodlands of the Experiment Station. The university also owns an additional 80,000 acres (320&nbsp;km  ) across the state.
Mississippi State University also operates an off-campus, degree-granting center in Meridian where both undergraduate and graduate programs are offered. In cooperation with the U.S. Army Engineer Waterways Experiment Station, the College of Engineering offers the Master of Science degree to students in Vicksburg.
Mississippi State's campus is centered on the main quadrangle, called the ''Drill Field'' (pictured) due to its heavy use by the Corps of Cadets prior to the end of World War II. The Drill Field is defined at its north and south ends by the mirror-image buildings, ''Lee Hall'' (the original University building, now the division of languages building, far left in picture below) and ''Swalm Hall'' (home to the Dave C. Swalm School of Chemical Engineering, far right in picture below). Old Main was the original dormitory, west of Lee Hall; it burned in a tragic fire, and was replaced by the Colvard Student Union. The largest building fronting the Drill Field is Mitchell Memorial Library (immediately to right of flagpole in picture below).
From the Drill Field, the campus radiates in all directions. The College of Engineering can be found mostly to the east side of the Drill Field; to the north are the Arts and Sciences, including Computer Science, and the College of Architecture, Art, and Design (CAAD). Humanities are found to the south, while Agriculture dominates the west section. To the west and northwest are also found the athletic facilities, including Scott Field and the Humphrey Coliseum, or ''The Hump''.
Beyond the main campus (and the series of commuter parking lots ringing the main campus) are the North and South Farms. While still used for their original purpose of agricultural research, the Farms are also host to newer facilities, such as the astronomical observatory and Veterinary College (South Farm) and the High Performance Computing Collaboratory (North Farm). At the far west of campus, one finds first the fraternity and sorority houses, and beyond them the Cotton District and downtown Starkville, Mississippi. The University is also home to the Thad Cochran Research, Technology and Economic Development Park, which host many of the university's research centers, such as the Center for Advanced Vehicular Systems (CAVS) and the nationally-recognized Social Science Research Center.
Residence halls at Mississippi State University:
Bricks salvaged from the fire were used to build the . Bricks from Old Main were also dumped in the area that became the band practice field and can be seen on slope of the north side.
Roy Vernon Scott, professor emeritus of history at MSU is the author of ''Old Main: Memories of a Legend''.
MSU has over 300 student organizations.  Prominent organizations include the MSU Road Runners, Student Association, Alumni Delegates, Orientation Leaders, 18 fraternities and 11 sororities, the Residence Hall Association, the Black Student Alliance, the Mississippi State University College Democrats and Republicans, the Campus Activities Board, Music Maker Productions, the Baptist Student Union, the Engineering Student Council, Arnold Air Society, the Stennis-Montgomery Association and ChallengeX.  The national literary magazine ''Jabberwock Review'' is also based at MSU.
Mississippi State's local radio station is WMSV. 
Prior to WMSV, Mississippi State had a student-run radio station, WMSB which went off the air
The student newspaper is the ''Reflector'', published twice per week on Tuesday and Friday. The publication was named the #1 college newspaper in the South in 2007 by the Southeast Journalism Conference. In previous years, The ''Reflector'' has consistently ranked in the top 10 among college newspapers in the southern United States.
Mississippi State's Greek system comprises 20 fraternities and 9 sororities. Fraternities and sororities take part in a number of philanthropic programs and provide social opportunities for students. Formal rush takes place at the start of every fall semester.
The Bulldogs participate in NCAA Division I in the competitive 12-member
Southeastern Conference (West Division) under the mascot the ''Bulldog'' and colors maroon and white.
The university made history on December 1, 2003 when it hired Sylvester Croom as its head football coach. Croom was the first African-American named to such a position in the history of the SEC. Croom resigned in November 2008.