In most modern poker games, the first round of betting begins with some form of forced bet by one of the players. In standard poker, each player is betting that the hand he has will be the highest ranked. The action then proceeds clockwise around the table and each player in turn must either match the maximum previous bet or fold, losing the amount bet so far and all further interest in the hand. A player who matches a bet may also "raise", or increase the bet. The betting round ends when all players have either matched the last bet or have folded. If all but one player fold on any round, then the remaining player collects the pot and may choose to show or conceal their hand. If more than one player remains in contention after the final betting round, the hands are revealed and the player with the winning hand takes the pot. With the exception of initial forced bets, money is only placed into the pot voluntarily by a player who, at least in theory, rationally believes the bet has positive expected value. Thus, while the outcome of any particular hand significantly involves chance, the long-run expectations of the players are determined by their actions chosen based on probability, psychology and game theory.
Poker has gained in popularity since the beginning of the 20th Century, and has gone from being primarily a recreational activity confined to small groups of mostly male enthusiasts, to a widely popular spectator activity with international audiences and multi-million dollar tournament prizes, with women being a constantly growing part of that audience.
  By the 1990s some gaming historians including David Parlett started to challenge the notion that poker is a direct derivative of As Nas.  There is evidence that a game called poque, a French game similar to poker, was played around the region where poker is said to have originated.  The name of the game likely descended from the Irish ''Poca'' (Pron. Pokah) ('Pocket') or even the French ''poque'', which descended from the German ''pochen'' ('to brag as a bluff' lit. 'to knock').
A modern school of thought rejects these ancestries,Reuven and Gabrielle Brenner, and Aaron Brown, ''A World of Chance: Betting on Religion, Games, Wall Street'', Cambridge University Press (2008), ISBN 978-04701273152 as they focus on the card play in poker, which is trivial and could have been derived from any number of games or made up on general cardplay principles.Stephen Longstreet, ''Win or Lose: A Social History of Gambling in America'' , Bobbs-Merrill (1977), ISBN 978-0-672-52253-6 The unique features of poker have to do with the betting, and do not appear in any known older game. In this view poker originated much later, in the early or mid-18th century, and spread throughout the Mississippi River region by 1800. It was played in a variety of forms, with 52 cards, and included both straight poker and stud. 20 card poker was a variant for two players (it is a common English practice to reduce the deck in card games when there are fewer players).Aaron Brown, ''The Poker Face of Wall Street'', John Wiley & Sons (2006), ISBN 978-0-470-12731-5 The development of poker is linked to the historical movement that also saw the invention of commercial gambling.David G. Schwartz, ''Roll the Bones: The History of Gambling'', Gotham (2007), ISBN 978-1-59240-316-5Timothy O'Brien, ''Bad Bet : The Inside Story of the Glamour, Glitz, and Danger of America's Gambling Industry'', Crown Business (1998), ISBN 978-0-8129-2807-5
English actor Joseph Crowell reported that the game was played in New Orleans in 1829, with a deck of 20 cards, and four players betting on which player's hand was the most valuable. Jonathan H. Green's book, ''An Exposure of the Arts and Miseries of Gambling'' (G. B. Zieber, Philadelphia, 1843), described the spread of the game from there to the rest of the country by Mississippi riverboats, on which gambling was a common pastime. As it spread north along the Mississippi River and to the West during the gold rush, it is thought to have become a part of the frontier pioneer ethos.
Soon after this spread, the full 52-card English deck was used and the flush was introduced. The draw was added prior to 1850 (when it was first mentioned in print in a handbook of games).Henry G. Bond (ed.), Bohn's New Handbook of Games,  Henry F. Anners (1850) During the American Civil War, many additions were made including stud poker (the five-card variant), and the straight. Further American developments followed, such as the wild card (around 1875), lowball and split-pot poker (around 1900), and community card poker games (around 1925).
The game and jargon of poker have become important parts of American culture and English culture. Such phrases and cliches as ''ace in the hole'', ''ace up one's sleeve'', ''beats me'', ''blue chip'', ''call one's bluff'', ''cash in'', ''high roller'', ''pass the buck'', ''poker face'', ''stack up'', ''up the ante'', ''when the chips are down'', ''wild card'', and others are used in everyday conversation, even by those unaware of their origins at the poker table.
Beginning in 1970 a series of developments led to poker becoming far more popular than it was previously:
Poker's popularity experienced an unprecedented spike at the beginning of the 21st century, largely because of the introduction of online poker and hole-card cameras, which turned the game into a spectator sport.  Not only could viewers now follow the action and drama of the game on television, they could also play the game in the comfort of their own home.  Broadcasts of poker tournaments such as the World Series of Poker and World Poker Tour brought in huge audiences for cable and satellite TV distributors.  Because of the increased coverage of poker events, poker pros became celebrities, with poker fans all over the world entering into tournaments for the chance to compete with them. Television coverage also added an important new dimension to the poker professional's game, as any given hand could now be aired later, revealing information not only to the other players at the table, but to anyone who cared to view the broadcast.
Beginning in 2003, major poker tournament fields grew dramatically, in part because of the growing popularity of online satellite-qualifier tournaments where the prize is an entry into a major tournament. The 2003 and 2004 World Series of Poker champions, Chris Moneymaker and Greg Raymer, respectively, won their seats to the main event by winning online satellites. After the passage of the UIGEA in October 2006, attendance at live tournaments as well as participation in live and online cash games initially slowed, however they are still growing and far more popular today than they were prior to 2003. The growth and popularity of poker can be seen in the WSOP which had a record 7,319 entrants to the 2010 main event.
In casual play, the right to deal a hand typically rotates among the players and is marked by a token called a ''dealer button'' (or ''buck''). In a casino, a house dealer handles the cards for each hand, but the button (typically a white plastic disk) is rotated clockwise among the players to indicate a nominal dealer to determine the order of betting. The cards are dealt clockwise around the table, one at a time.
One or more players are usually required to make forced bets, usually either an ''ante'' or a ''blind bet'' (sometimes both). The dealer shuffles the cards, the player on the chair to their right cuts, and the dealer deals the appropriate number of cards to the players one at a time, beginning with the player to their left. Cards may be dealt either face-up or face-down, depending on the variant of poker being played. After the initial deal, the first of what may be several betting rounds begins. Between rounds, the players' hands develop in some way, often by being dealt additional cards or replacing cards previously dealt. At the end of each round, all bets are gathered into the central pot.
At any time during a betting round, if one player bets and no opponents choose to ''call'' (match) the bet and all opponents instead ''fold'', the hand ends immediately, the bettor is awarded the pot, no cards are required to be shown, and the next hand begins.  This is what makes bluffing possible. Bluffing is a primary feature of poker, one that distinguishes it from other vying games and from other games that make use of poker hand rankings.
At the end of the last betting round, if more than one player remains, there is a showdown, in which the players reveal their previously hidden cards and evaluate their hands. The player with the best hand according to the poker variant being played wins the pot.  A poker hand comprises five cards; in variants where a player has more than five cards, the best five cards play.
Poker has many variations, all following a similar pattern of play and generally using the same hand ranking hierarchy. There are three main families of variants, largely grouped by the protocol of card-dealing and betting:
Other games that use poker hand rankings may likewise be referred to as ''poker''. Video poker is a single-player computer game that functions much like a slot machine; most video poker machines play draw poker, where the player bets, a hand is dealt, and the player can discard and replace cards. Payout is dependent on the hand resulting after the draw and the player's initial bet.
Strip poker is a traditional poker variation where players remove clothing when they lose bets. Since it depends only on the basic mechanic of betting in rounds, strip poker can be played with any form of poker; however, it is usually based on simple variants with few betting rounds, like five card draw.
Another game with the ''poker'' name, but with a vastly different mode of play, is called ''Acey-Deucey'' or ''Red Dog'' poker. This game is more similar to Blackjack in its layout and betting; each player bets against the house, and then is dealt two cards. For the player to win, the third card dealt (after an opportunity to raise the bet) must have a value in between the first two. Payout is based on the odds that this is possible, based on the difference in values of the first two cards.  Other poker-like games played at casinos against the house include three card poker and pai gow poker.