Matt Thiessen wrote the song in Australia in light of a feud with a friend. The lyrics reflect remorse for his behavior, as well as pleas for forgiveness.
The music video for the song shows a woman encountering various events being rewound and replayed, interposed with scenes of Relient K performing on an urban rooftop. The video starts off with a view of a room and a young woman. The camera then pans out to see her step outside. The first series of event that happens is as follows; a grocer tosses her a random green fruit and she catches it, then she stops walking and realizes that everything else around her stopped too. She starts walking back and forth while watching an old woman drop and rewind her library books. 
As the woman moves, her actions control everyone around her; an old man moving side to side with a TV, another young man on his cell phone and an Asian man crossing the street while preoccupied with reading a magazine. The young woman makes a mistake and takes too many steps and watches as she causes the Asian man to be hit by a Plymouth Reliant car. Shocked, she tries retracing her steps and starts back at where the grocer tosses her the fruit and takes a few steps to the side and starts walking again. Since it's not the same path as the first time, the events have changed. Instead of her catching the fruit, the man on the cell phone is instead, hit by it and he drops his phone. As he bends down to pick it up he accidentally kicks it into the path of a bicycle that has to swerve to miss him but instead nearly hits the old man with the TV and causes him to drop it. 
This all results in the Asian man avoiding the hit and the video ends with her walking away. There is a short piano-only chorus in the middle of the song that was cut from the video. As with the "Be My Escape" video, exclusions visually include Dave Douglas singing background vocals, and Matt Thiessen playing the piano. The video was released in October 2005.
In 2006, the song was nominated for a Dove Award for Rock Recorded Song of the Year at the 37th GMA Dove Awards.