The Fleshtones were formed in 1976 in Whitestone, New York by '''Keith Streng''' (b. September 18, 1955, New York, New York) and Marek Pakulski (b. August 23, 1956, Lewiston, Maine), two roommates who discovered that a previous tenant had left behind some instruments in the basement of the house they were renting. Streng, on guitar, and Pakulski, on bass, were soon joined by neighborhood friends '''Peter Zaremba''' (b. September 16, 1954, Queens, New York) on harmonica, keyboards, and vocals, and Lenny Calderon (b. 1958, New York) on drums.
In the late 70s, The Fleshtones earned a local following and played often in Manhattan at CBGB and Max's Kansas City.  Later, they found a favorite venue at Club 57 on St. Mark's Place. The Fleshtones were the first band to be booked or to play at several famous venues, including Irving Plaza and Danceteria in Manhattan, Maxwell's in Hoboken, New Jersey, and the original   in Washington D.C.. 
The Fleshtones shared a rehearsal space with The Cramps on the Bowery in 1977. The following year, The Fleshtones signed with Marty Thau's Red Star Records (a roster that included Suicide and Real Kids, among others artists), recorded their first album, and with filmmaker/artist M. Henry Jones produced ''Soul City'', a performance-animation video composed of hand-painted cutouts. The Fleshtones' first single "American Beat" was released in 1979 (re-recorded in 1984 as part of the soundtrack of the Tom Hanks' movie ''Bachelor Party''.)
In 1980, with the Red Star Records album unreleased (later issued on cassette on ROIR, and subsequently on CD and vinyl), the Fleshtones were signed by Miles Copeland at I.R.S. Records (R.E.M., The Go-Go's) where they would work with producers Richard Mazda and Richard Gottehrer. The band replaced Calderon with drummer '''Bill Milhizer''' (b. September 21, 1948, Troy, New York), appeared in the British Punk/New Wave concert film ''Urgh! A Music War'', and released its first EP ''Up-Front.'' Four discs on I.R.S. followed: ''Roman Gods'' (1982), ''Hexbreaker!!'' (1983), and the live ''Speed Connection'' and ''Speed Connection II'' (1985). In 1982, they appeared on Dick Clark's ''American Bandstand'' TV show.
Despite having a large cult following, the band never achieved commercial success: ''Roman Gods'' debuted at #174 on Billboard   s album chart, the highest position that a Fleshtones album has attained.
Zaremba was the host of ''I.R.S. Records Presents The Cutting Edge'' on MTV from 1984 to 1987. The I.R.S. Records-produced show featured up and coming underground artists. The program was short-lived (airing in a late night time slot didn't help accumulate a wide audience) but the format later revived as ''120 Minutes''. Zaremba's MC talents surfaced again in the late-90s at New York City's "Cavestomp" Garage Rock festivals.
In the mid-80s, The Fleshtones regularly played at the Pyramid Club on Avenue A in the East Village, and were instrumental in helping to start Wigstock, the drag-queen festival that became a New York City staple.
In the late 80s, The Fleshtones were without major-label support, though they continued to tour America and Europe steadily, including shows opening for Chuck Berry and James Brown.  In 1987, The Fleshtones made an appearance on the final episode of Andy Warhol's ''Andy Warhol's Fifteen Minutes,'' an MTV program, during which they backed up famed English stage actor Ian McKellen as he recited William Shakespeare's Twentieth Sonnet. 
The Fleshtones recorded the title track to the 1987 camp-horror film ''I Was a Teenage Zombie'' that same year. They released ''Fleshtones vs. Reality'' (studio) in 1987 and ''Soul Madrid'' (live) in 1989. I.R.S. Records released a best-of compilation, ''Living Legends'', in 1989.  
In late 1986, Pakulski left the Fleshtones.  He was replaced by Robert (Burke) Warren, who left the band in 1988.  Fred Smith of Television and Andy Shernoff of The Dictators were interim bass players in the studio and on tour until 1990.
The Fleshtones were one of the last bands to play at Windows on the World atop the World Trade Center; they played  there five weeks before the 9/11 attacks, and in 2002 played at a Night of Remembrance and Hope festival at CBGB.
In December 2003 The Fleshtones played at a CBGB 30th Anniversary show along with The Dictators, and in August 2004 played Little Steven's Underground Garage Festival at Randalls Island in New York City with 39 other bands, including The New York Dolls, Iggy Pop, The Strokes, and Bo Diddley.
In the 90s and 00s, in addition to self-producing in Paul Johnson's Compactor basement studio in Brooklyn, New York, The Fleshtones worked with musician-producers Dave Faulkner, Peter Buck, Steve Albini, Rick Miller, Jim Diamond, Lenny Kaye, and Ivan Julian.  
In 2003, The Fleshtones signed with Yep Roc Records, which has released ''Do You Swing?'' (2003), ''Beachhead'' (2005), ''Take A Good Look'' (2008), ''Stocking Stuffer'' (2008), and ''Brooklyn Sound Solution'' (2011).
Fleshtones side projects have included Peter Zaremba's Love Delegation, and Streng's bands Full Time Men (which featured Peter Buck) and The Master Plan (with Andy Shernoff).