The '''blinds''' are forced bets posted by players to the left of the dealer button in flop-style poker games. The number of blinds is usually two, but can be one or three.
The small blind is placed by the player to the left of the dealer button and the big blind is then posted by the player to the left of the person sitting in the small blind.  The one exception to this rule is when there are only 2 players (a "heads-up" game).  In this case the player on the button is the small blind, and the other player is the big blind.
After the cards are dealt, the player to the left of the big blind is the first to act during the first betting round.  If all players call the big blind, the big blind is then given an extra opportunity to raise.  This is known as a ''live blind''.  If the live blind checks, the betting round then ends.
Generally, the "big blind" is equal to the minimum bet. The "small blind" is normally half the big blind. In cases where posting exactly half the big blind is impractical due to the big blind being some odd-valued denomination, the small blind is rounded down to the nearest practical value.  For example, if the big blind in a live table game is $3 then the small blind will usually be $1 or $2 since most casinos do not distribute large quantities of $0.50 poker chips.
The blinds exist because Omaha and Texas hold 'em are frequently played without antes, allowing a player to fold his hand without placing a bet. The blind bets introduce a regular cost to take part in the game, thus inducing a player to enter pots in an attempt to compensate for that expense.
In poker tournament play, blinds serve a dual purpose.  In addition to the purpose explained above, blinds are also used to control how long the tournament will last.  Before the tournament begins, the players will agree to a blinds structure, usually set by the tournament organizer.  This structure defines how long each round is and how much the blinds increase per round.  Typically, they are increased at a smooth rate of between 25% and 50% per round over the previous round.  As the blinds increase, players need to increase their chip counts (or "stacks") to stay in the game.  The blinds will eventually consume all of a player's stack if he or she does not play and win more.
There are two main goals for the blinds structure:
If desired, antes can be added to further increase the pressure to win more chips.
If each player in a tournament starts with 5,000 in chips and after 4 hours, the big blind is 10,000 (with a small blind of 5,000), it will be very difficult for a player with only 15,000 in chips to stay in the game.