The name Xtra is also used with the separate entity Yahoo!Xtra, a joint venture web portal between Telecom (49% stake) and Yahoo!7 (51% stake). The venture was formed in December 2006 replacing the XtraMSN web portal and includes additional features for Xtra broadband customers.
In 2008 Telecom dropped the Xtra brand name from products and services, using Telecom instead (Xtra broadband became Telecom broadband for example).
From the time of Xtra's inception, Xtra has been providing dial-up internet throughout New Zealand. In 1999 Telecom created New Zealand's only ADSL service. Telecom later allowed other ISPs to access its ADSL networks (under increasing government and public pressure). Today, it is widely believed that Telecom has provided unfair and monopolistic terms of trade regarding its wholesale ADSL services, and some claim that it continues to do so.
As a subdivision of Telecom New Zealand, Xtra has retained some monopoly of its parent company. To many people, this monopoly is regarded as an unfair advantage over other ISPs. Many lobbyists, including Slingshot's CEO Annette Presley, have persuaded New Zealand's Communications Ministry to force the unbundling of Telecom's local loop, so as to make fairer trading terms and lessen Xtra's ISP monopoly.
During 2001 Xtra and Actrix (New Zealand Internet Service Providers) won a High Court injunction to get themselves off the Open Relay Behavior-modification System (ORBS) anti-spam blacklist operated by Alan Brown. ORBS had been a blacklist of IP addresses relating to open mail relays, which can be abused by spammers to send unsolicited bulk e-mail. Hundreds of organisations subscribed to the list, including Bigfoot.com and at least one other large free mail provider. They rejected e-mail from any IP address listed in ORBS.
The court action led (indirectly) to the end of one of the oldest DNSBL services.
Xtra's "Go Large" plan was introduced as New Zealand's first completely unlimited ADSL service in November 2006; however, there was much public criticism and disappointment at the instability and general slowness of the newly introduced plan. The Go Large Plan was advertised with unlimited data usage and maximum speed. What was not clearly stated on advertisements, however, was that there was a fair use policy and traffic management that restricted users to a download limit between 4pm and 12am. If one were to continually exceed this limit, they would be placed in a "download pool", or contacted with offers to switch to another plan. This triggered a lot of media attention and an investigation was launched. By the 22nd February 2007, Telecom had decided to refund all of its Go Large customers (approximately 60,000), with amounts of at least $130 per customer. This had been caused in part by the overwhelming complaints and criticisms Telecom Xtra had received due to under-delivering on the promises of the Go Large plan. It is speculated that the refund may have cost Telecom Xtra between 7.5 and 8.5 million NZ dollars.
The plan was eventually grandfathered, and in mid-2009 was succeeded by the Big Time plan, where Xtra openly informs users about traffic management. As of 30th October 2009, Telecom cancelled the Go Large broadband plan for all existing customers, offering instead alternative plan options such as the Big Time plan.
On the 20th May 2010 Telecom cancelled Big Time and will be forcing all customers to move back to a capped plan.
Several other MSN services besides the portal were cobranded with Xtra in the XtraMSN brand (e.g. Hotmail). Several versions of capitalising XtraMSN have been used by Telecom and Microsoft New Zealand in their promotional literature.
In 2007 Xtra changed to Yahoo in Microsoft's place. Their main portal is now . During the change over Telecom experienced much backlash over a change in email set up. Part of the agreement between Yahoo and Xtra provided that Xtras email addresses be moved over to Yahoo servers in Australia. This required settings changes in order for customers to access their YahooXtra "Bubble" email accounts. This required uses to change basic settings such as mail server, but also more advanced settings such as port numbers and authentication.
The move to Yahoo!Xtra Bubble has caused trouble for many small business owners and website hosting companies in New Zealand.  Yahoo's aggressive antispam policies have caused business owners to lose bookings and have caused major delays for some customers in receiving emails.
The Dominion Post brought the problem to the fore with an article printed on the 26 November 2006, "Buck Passed as Mail Binned". The responsibility for the trouble has been shunned by Xtra who seem unable to make any changes to Yahoo's antispam filtering system.  Xtra have pushed the blame back to the hosting companies, "Telecom spokesman Nick Brown denies there are technical problems with the service, and blames web-hosting companies for forwarding mail without filtering it first for spam."  The trouble with their denial is that Xtra/Yahoo's email system also forwards spam in the same manner.
Reports of Xtra's email troubles are appearing on blogs, forums and newsletters as people realise that emails are not arriving.  New Zealand Tourism Online's October newsletter reported that they, "found several clients who have not been getting accommodation enquiry or booking emails due to the filter system.".
One of Xtra's solutions to the problem has been telling their users to add the sender of the email to their contacts list.  This has caused the email be redirected to the inbox, however the immediate deferral of email by Yahoo's email servers can cause delays of many hours. This is a problem that Xtra have inherited by joining with Yahoo.
Yahoo have denied that they use greylisting practices.