Grove School serves students with dyslexia, obsessive compulsive disorder, Asperger syndrome, Tourette's Syndrome, Attention Deficit Disorder, Bipolar disorder, Major Depressive Disorder, mild bulimia nervosa and mild anorexia nervosa. Grove School does not accept students with a diagnosis of moderate to severe cutting, conduct disorder, moderate to severe oppositional defiant disorder or chronic substance abuse problems.
As of 2005 there were 105 students at Grove School, just one of whom was a day student. There was about a 60:40 male-female student ratio. 
The majority of the students were from Connecticut, New York, Massachusetts and New Jersey. Some other states are represented such as Illinois, Georgia, Ohio, California, Virginia, Pennsylvania, Maryland, and Delaware.
There are 3 psychiatrists, 7 therapists, 30 teachers (24 of whom are also dormitory staff), and 12 advisors. Half the teachers are certified in Special Education in CT and the other half are content area certified in CT. While the student to staff ratio is 4:1 the student to on-duty staff ratio is much lower.
There is a SAT preparation program available for juniors and seniors which is especially tailored for Grove School.
In the 2004 SAT 20% scored over 600 on verbal, 20% scored over 600 on math and 25% scored over 1200 combined on the 2004 SAT.
Some 2004 and 2005 graduates of Grove School attended the following colleges: Union College, Suffolk University, Ithaca College, Manhattanville College, Alfred University and others. Since its inception Grove graduates have attended Curry College, Mitchell College, Quinnipiac University, Sacred Heart University, Merrimack College, Clark University, Berkshire Community College, Purdue University, Mount Ida College, University of Connecticut, Berklee College of Music, and others.
Some graduates of 2007 and 2008 are or were attending the following colleges: Frostburg State University, St. Thomas Aquinas College, New England College, UConn, Virginia Commonwealth University, NYIT, Wagner College, Ohio Wesleyan University, Curry College, and Mitchell College.
Statistics of former students who graduate from college are not recorded.
Students see a therapist twice a week for individual therapy and a psychiatrist as necessary for medication management. They also meet in group therapy once a week. 
There is a nurse's office on campus as well as three nurses and one nurse assistant. The nurses and nurse assistant may refer students to physicians if they show medical need. 
Students may also be referred to a registered dietician, an occupational therapist, a physical therapist and/or a speech therapist.
Grove School has a varsity and junior varsity coed soccer team and basketball team. Grove School also has a boy's varsity and junior varsity baseball team, and a girl's softball team.  In the 2005-2006 school year, there is a poetry club, outdoors club, and Student Council. Traditional activities the student council plans includes pep rally, fall carnival, junior-senior prom, dress up dinners (which is a semi-formal dress code), and Halloween Dance. Regular Activities are also an important part of the campus life.
Grove School has many dorms set up around campus. The dorms include: White House, Middle House, The Olshin, The Lodge, The Perlman, The Redlich, The Patch, Charles House, Grey House, Blue House, and Green House.