In the game, each player represents a company that owns power plants and tries to supply electricity to cities. Over the course of the game, the players will bid on power plants and buy resources to produce electricity to provide power to the growing number of cities in their expanding network.
The game comes with a double-sided board with a map of the United States of America and Germany on either side. 
In each round, players buy power plants in an auction, buy resources to power their plants, build new cities to power, and collect income.
The game ends after one player builds a fixed number of cities. The winner is the player who can supply electricity to the most cities with his network. Tie breakers first look at who has the most money, then the most cities.
The original game of Funkenschlag had players draw their networks using crayons instead of playing on a fixed map. This feature (along with other changes) was removed when Friedemann Friese reworked the game.  The new game is also called Funkenschlag in the German market, but is sold under various names elsewhere.
The game is currently available under various names for different markets, most featuring the same game play. A few editions, however, offer a slightly different play experience because they ship with non-standard maps. 
The German and U.S. editions are virtually identical and they feature the same Germany/USA maps. Any small differences are unintentional consequences of the translation from the original German into English, and most mistakes have been corrected by Rio Grande Games as new editions have been issued.
This edition was published in 2007 as a promotional tie-in with EnBW, a power company in the German state of Baden-Wurttemberg. The German map differs from the one in the original edition in that the city of Karlsruhe (the location of EnBW's head-quarters) appears rather than the neighboring city of Mannheim. The second map included in the game is a new map not available elsewhere, featuring EnBW's home state of Baden-Wurttemberg. A rule difference between this edition and the original is that determining player order is done after the power plant auction. A difference in the included power plant deck: with 41 plants rather than 42 in the original game, the deck does not include plant #29.
The Czech/Slovak edition features the Central Europe map (from the Central Europe/Benelux expansion) and the Germany map.
The French edition features the France map (from the France/Italy expansion) and a new map not available elsewhere: Quebec. The Quebec map makes more use of the renewable power plants to represent the regional availability of hydro-electricity.
The game is also available in Polish, Italian, Spanish, Dutch, Chinese, Korean, Portuguese, and Japanese. While these editions feature the original maps of Germany/USA (and thus are more like translations of the 2F game than a new edition) each new deal with a local publisher has coincided with a release of an expansion featuring that publisher's home country.
All expansions requires the original game to play.
The ''France & Italy Expansion'' for ''Power Grid'' was published in 2005.  The expansion provides a new double-sided map allowing play in France and Italy. Along with the maps are small rule changes to reflect the power culture in these two countries. France, a land that has embraced nuclear power, has an earlier start with atomic plants and more uranium available. Italy has fewer coal and oil resources, but more garbage.
The ''Benelux & Central Europe Expansion'' for ''Power Grid'' was published in 2006.  This expansion provides a new double-sided map, this time for play in Benelux and Central Europe.  Again, there are small rule changes to reflect the power culture in these two regions. Benelux (Economic union of Belgium, the Netherlands and Luxembourg) has more ecological power plants and more availability of oil.  Central Europe has rules changes in Steps 2 and 3, and limits on what type of power plant may be used to power cities in different regions (countries) of the map.
The ''Power Plant Deck 2 Expansion'' for ''Power Grid'' was published in 2007.  The expansion provides a second set of power plant cards, offering variety in gameplay. 
It was released at Spiel (the annual game fair in Essen) in 2007.
The ''Brazil/Spain & Portugal Expansion'' (aka Brazil/Iberia) was published in 2009.  Another map expansion, this time for play in Brazil and Spain/Portugal.  Again, there are small rule changes to reflect the power culture in these two regions.  On the Brazilian side, biogas takes the place of garbage, and resources are more scarce than in the original game.  Brazil also includes special game preparation rules regarding biogas plants.  On the Spain and Portugal side, Uranium is important, but not at the beginning of the game.  Initially, uranium is not added to the market in Step 1, but it is rapidly added in Step 2.  This side also has special preparation rules by which certain plants are set aside and re-added to the deck during Step 2.  Additionally, special nuclear rules apply to Portugal, namely that players with networks only in Portugal are not allowed to own nuclear power plants.  Both sides of the map also include their own resource resupply tables.
This upcoming expansion is to be released October 2010. 