The Philippines is a founding member of the United Nations;
Economically, the Philippines is participant in the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation, Asian Development Bank, the Colombo Plan, Group of 24, G-20, G-77, the World Bank, Next Eleven and the World Trade Organization (WTO).
Philippine foreign policy is based on the advancement of Filipino ideals and values, among which include the advancement of democracy and advocacy for human rights worldwide.
The nation is currently actively engaging with regional neighbors in Southeast Asia through the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (as a founding member) with the intention of strengthening regional harmony, stability, and prosperity. It has been a supporter of East Timor since the latter's independence and has expanded trade links with its traditional allies Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, and Thailand. Relations with Vietnam and Cambodia have thawed in the 1990s after their entry into the ASEAN.
Those American ties have affected Filipino international relations. The Republic of the Philippines considers itself a staunch ally of the United States and has supported many points of American foreign policy. This is evident in the Philippines' participation in the Iraq War and the War on Terror. Speaking to this support, U.S. President George W. Bush praised the Philippines as a bastion of democracy in the East and called the Philippines America's oldest ally in Asia. President Bush's speech on October 18, 2003 was only the second U.S. Presidential address to the Philippine Congress; U.S. President Dwight D. Eisenhower delivered the first.
While the Philippines' relationship with the United States remains strong, the administration of President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo has sought to establish closer ties to its earlier colonizer, Spain. This was inspired by the attendance of King Juan Carlos and Queen Sofia at the June 12, 1998 celebration honoring the centennial of the Philippines' independence from Spain. President Macapagal-Arroyo made two official visits to Spain during her presidency.
The Armed Forces of the Philippines has been a participant in various regional conflicts, including the Korean War and the Vietnam War. Recently, the Philippines sent peacekeeping forces to Iraq in addition to civilian doctors, nurses and police. However, the Filipino mission was later recalled as collateral for the release of a Filipino hostage. As part of a UN Peacekeeping Operation, Philippine Army General Jaime de los Santos became the first commander of troops responsible for maintaining order in East Timor.
The Philippines is in tension with rival international claimants to various land and water territories in the South China Sea. The Philippines is in dispute with the People's Republic of China over the Malampaya and Camago gas fields. The two countries are also in dispute over the Scarborough Shoal. Additionally, the Philippines has a disputed claim over the Spratly Islands.
Relations with other Asian nations have been strong. Japan, which has been an active donor of aid, has close ties with the country. Relations with China have recently been expanded, especially with regards to the economy. The presence of a large South Korean expat community has led to the expansion of relations between the two nations. India has also been an important partner, as have countries outside of Asia such as Australia, Mexico, New Zealand, and Saudi Arabia.
In recent years the Philippines has been distancing itself from the West due to its active role in the Non-aligned Movement and the G-77. This trend is reflected in its recent positions on Kosovo and Israel.
As concerns over terrorism in South East Asia have grown in recent years, Australia has become the second largest provider of defense training to the Philippines after the United States. In 2003, the governments of Australia and the Philippines signed a MOU pertaining to the combating of international terrorism and transnational crime.
Subsequently, in May 2007 on a visit to Australia by President Arroyo, Australia and the Philippines signed a Status of Visiting Forces Agreement.
Australia assisted the Philippines and the United States in battles in the Philippines during World War II.
On June 2009, The Philippines and Brazil made their pledges as they signed mutual cooperation agreements in the fields of bio-energy and agriculture. The two countries committed themselves to take the necessary steps to implement the signed Memorandum of Understanding on Cooperation in Agriculture and the Memorandum of Understanding on Bioenergy Cooperation. The Philippines and Brazil signed six memoranda of understanding and agreements on the development and production of renewable energy, and agriculture cooperation. It intends to    facilitate technical cooperation... on the production and use of biofuels, particularly ethanol, and promote the expansion of bilateral trade and investment in biofuel.   
On April 2009, The Philippines and Brunei signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) that seeks to strengthen the bilateral cooperation of the two countries in the fields of agriculture and farm-related trade and investments. The MOU further strengthening bilateral cooperation between the two Southeast Asian countries, particularly in the fields of agriculture and farm-related trade and investments. The two countries have agreed to cooperate in plant science, crops technology, vegetable and fruit preservation, biotechnology, post-harvest technology, livestock, organic agriculture, irrigation and water resources and Halal industry.
Philippine   Canadian relations officially began in 1972 when the first Canadian mission in 1949 was upgraded to a full embassy. But years before that   in the 1890s, Canadian investments had preceded Canadian diplomacy in Manila.
Trade between Manila and Ottawa has grown steadily. The Philippines is Canada   s largest agricultural-food export market in Southeast Asia. The Canadian International Development Agency works actively in the far-flung communities with local governments and nongovernmental organizations, in the areas of agricultural cooperatives, local governance and small-business development. More than 60 percent of the Canadian International Development Agency   s resources targets strife-torn Mindanao to help restore peace and rebuild lives and properties.
On June 2009, The Philippines and Croatia have concluded two agreements on cooperation in the fields of culture and sports, which will pave the way for greater people-to-people exchanges between the two countries. The agreements were a Memorandum of Agreement on Cultural Cooperation, which aims to promote better understanding between the peoples of the two countries and a Memorandum of Understanding on Cooperation in the Field of Sports.
See Denmark   Philippines relations
The Philippines was actively involved in the United Nations peacekeeping forces in East Timor during its move towards independence.  When several nations recognized East Timor's sovereignty, the Philippines began official diplomatic relations between the two governments with the establishment of an embassy in Dili.
The Philippines has pledged increased commerce and trade with East Timor and has also sought to cultivate cultural and educational exchanges.  The two nations share a legacy in Asia as being the region's only states with Roman Catholic and other  Christian majority populations.
Ever since East Timor's independence the Philippine Military has also supported the Military of East Timor by deploying a number of soldiers to assist in peacekeeping missions and training for the soldiers of the East Timorese army.
The European Union and the Philippines shares diplomatic, economic, cultural and political relations. The European Union has provided     3 million to the Philippines to fight poverty and     6 million for counter-terrorism against terrorist groups in the Southern Philippines. The European Union is also the third largest trading partner of the Philippines with the Philippines and The European Union importing and exporting products to each other. There are at least (estimated) 31,961 Europeans (not including Spaniards) living in the Philippines.
During the centennial of the French Revolution in 1889, Rizal sought to organize a conference that called Association Internationale des Philippinistes was to be launched with Ferdinand Blumentritt as President and Edmond Plauchut as Vice President.
The French also permitted Philippine hero Jose Rizal to live in exile in France where he wrote the books ''Noli Me Tangere'' and ''El Filibusterismo''. These books were also inspired by the French Literary giant Alexandre Dumas, pere.
On June 26, 1947 the Philippines and France signed a Treaty of Amity which established diplomatic relations with the two countries.
There are about 700 French living in the Philippines for either education, business, work or other reasons.
The French Ministry of Culture is active in promoting French Culture through its school, Alliance Francaise de Manille's activities. The French Embassy in the Philippines has sponsored fashion shows, film festivals, art exhibits, wine launches and numerous concerts. It is the prime mover and initiator of the annual Fete de la Musique in Manila (at one time, one of the top ten fetes in the world). There is also an Alliance Francaise de Cebu in Cebu City.
There is a Philippine embassy in Athens. Greece has an embassy in Manila and an honorary consulate general. There are around 40,000 Filipinos living and working in Greece, making them one of the largest foreign communities in Greece. In addition, it is estimated that there are over 22,000 Greeks living in the Philippines. Greece and the Republic of the Philippines also share economic and trading relations.
Indian elements in Philippine culture point to early relations between the two societies.  However, some works posit that the influx of Indian cultural elements into the Philippines is understood only in terms of the developments in the intervening regions between these two areas, the Malayan Peninsula and the Indonesian Archipelago, where there was intensified process of Indianization from the 2nd through the late 14th centuries A.D.  Indian influences would have reached the Philippines from the 10th through the early 14th centuries, based on the events in these two regions, and not necessarily through direct migration from the Indian subcontinent to the Philippines.  Artifacts of Indian orientation have been found in some islands of the Philippines but are not very extensive.  The golden image of the female Boddhisattva which was found in Agusan, was related to the development of Buddhism in Southeast Asia dating back to the late 13th and 14th centuries.  The introduction of Sanskrit words and literature may be dated to the 10th and 12th centuries.  Until now, Sanskrit words are still found in abundance in various Philippine languages.  Then there is the folk narrative among the Maranao, known as Maharadia Lawana which shows an Indian character and whose story is very similar to the Indian epic Ramayana.    
During the period 1762-1764, during the various Anglo-Spanish wars, 600 Sepoy (or native Indian) troops arrived in the Philippines as part of the military expedition of the East India Company.  When the British troops withdrew, many of the Sepoys mutinied and refused to leave.  They settled in what is now Cainta, Rizal.  The region in and around Cainta still has many Sepoy descendants.  
During the 18th century, there was robust trade between Manila and the Coromandel Coast of Bengal, involving Philippine exports of tobacco, silk, cotton, indigo, sugar cane and coffee.
The Philippines established diplomatic relations with India on 16 November 1949. The first Philippine envoy to India was the late Foreign Secretary Narciso Ramos. 
Seven years after India   s independence in 1947, the Philippines and India signed a Treaty of Friendship on 11 July 1952 in Manila to strengthen the friendly relations existing between the two countries.  Soon after, the Philippine Legation in New Delhi was established and then elevated to an .  However, due to foreign policy differences as a result of the bipolar alliance structure of the Cold War, the development of bilateral relations was stunted.  It was only in 1976 that relations started to normalize when Mr. Aditya Birla, one of India   s successful industrialists, met with then President Ferdinand E. Marcos to explore possibilities of setting up joint ventures in the Philippines.  This resulted in the establishment of Indo-Philippine Textile Mills, Inc. (Indo-Phil), then the largest Indian investment in the country.  Indo-Phil currently employs 2,000 Filipino workers and supplies 40% of Philippine domestic demand for yarn. 
In commemoration of the 60th anniversary of Philippines   India diplomatic relations and pursuant to Presidential Proclamation 1924, the month of November 2009 was proclaimed as Philippines   India Friendship Month by then President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo.
The Policy Consultation Talks between the two countries was established in 2000.  The talks, which are held annually and conducted by the foreign offices of the two countries on the level of senior officials, aimed at discussing bilateral issues and regional and international issues of common concern.
The first RP   India Security Dialogue was held in Manila on 12 March 2004.  The Philippines and India agreed to establish a security dialogue that would serve as a policy forum for sharing security assessments and for reviewing and giving direction to cooperation in bilateral/regional security and defense matters.
Both countries also signed a Joint Declaration for Cooperation to Combat International Terrorism to complement the ASEAN-India Joint Declaration to Combat International Terrorism which was adopted by the Heads of Government and States of ASEAN and India on 8 October 2003 in Bali, Indonesia.  The declaration seeks to enhance intelligence and information sharing on counter-terrorism measures, strengthen capacity-building efforts through training and education, capability and readiness, including training and technical assistance; and to continue working together in the fight against the cyber crime and terrorist misuse of cyber space.
The Trade Agreement between the Philippines and India was signed on 29 May 1979.  In 1995, following the first Philippine Trade Mission to India, a Joint Working Group and a Joint Business Council were set up to assess and identify potentials for trade as well as identify new areas for collaboration.  Since then, bilateral meetings have been held regularly.
The agreement to establish a Joint Commission on Bilateral Cooperation was signed during the State Visit to India of President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo on 5 October 2007.  The establishment of the Joint Commission on Bilateral Cooperation aims to further strengthen and develop the cooperation in the field of trade, economic, scientific, technological and other fields of cooperation.  The meeting of the Joint Commission will be co-chaired by the two countries    Ministers for Foreign Affairs who will meet once every two years. 
Preparations for the inaugural session of the Joint Commission on Bilateral Cooperation (JCBC) in 2011 are under way.  The meeting will be hosted by India.
Ambassador Aladin G. Villacorte presented his Letters of Credence to H.R. Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, President of the Islamic Republic of Iran at ceremonies held at the Presidential Palace in Tehran on September 10, 2007.
In a brief statement, Ambassador Villacorte expressed his warm felicitations on behalf of President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo and the Filipino people, underscoring the Philippine commitment to see full range of our relations to grow and mature    particularly in the fields of trade and investment, tourism and culture.
Ambassador Villacorte also emphasized that both Philippines and Iran have collaborate on issue of global concern.    Indeed we have made significant contributions to the promotion of the better understanding among nations through interfaith dialogue and cooperation.
There is also a population of thousands of Iranians living in the Philippines, mostly in Metro Manila.
The Irish and the Filipinos have long had a close relationship, and are especially close in modern times. The Republic of Ireland has a sizeable Filipino community because it is a major employer of Filipino nurses in Europe.
Considered a key vote in the creation of a Jewish state, the Philippines was the only Asian nation to vote in favor of a United Nations partition resolution on November 29, 1947. The partition resolution created the country of Israel in  the former British Mandate of Palestine. Full diplomatic relations between the Philippines and Israel did not occur until 1957. The  opened in Tel Aviv in 1962; the Israeli embassy opened in Manila in the same year. A Memorandum of Understanding was signed by the two countries in 1997, further cementing bilateral political dialogue between the foreign ministries. There are approximately 60,000 Filipino workers, in Israel.
See also Japan   Philippines relations
Relations between the Philippines and Japan have rapidly improved since the end of World War II. Modern relations between the Philippines and Japan are very close and Japan is a key trading, economic and possibly military ally of the Philippines. Japan has also assisted the Philippines in building tunnels, bridges and highways (motorway) in Metro Manila, and is a main source of rail equipment and advisor for rail transport development. In 2005/2006 Japan dropped an US$8 billion debt with the Philippines and after the Leyte Mud slide Japan deployed soldiers to Leyte to assist Filipino and foreign workers. There are thousands of Japanese nationals/citizens (civilians) living in the Philippines (see Ethnic groups in the Philippines for details). Japanese business people have opened a large number of businesses in the Philippines offering jobs to Filipino workers.
Philippines has an embassy in Kuala Lumpur, and Malaysia has an embassy in Manila. The people of the two neighboring countries speak similar languages, and have a long history of close economic and political relations. They are both founding members of ASEAN, and are important trading partners. The two countries have participated in joint conservation measures in the Sulu Sea, which lies between the two countries. Malaysia has assisted in peacekeeping efforts in the Muslim insurgency in Mindanao. The countries are both involved in ongoing disputes over ownership of the Spratly Islands and the Philippines has a claim over the Sabah state in northern Borneo though this is currently not being actively pursued.
The Netherlands is currently one of Philippines most important trading partners within the EU. The two have shared major trading partnership back to when the Philippines was a Spanish colony.
The Philippines and New Zealand share normal diplomatic, trade, (small scale) military and economic relations. The Philippines and New Zealand were/are also partners in the Korean War, Vietnam War and War on Terror.
There are over 16,000 Filipinos residing in New Zealand and in turn there are 2,000- New Zealanders in the Philippines.
The Philippines has an embassy in Wellington and 2 other consulates, one in Auckland and in Christchurch.
The New Zealand police is currently helping the Philippine National Police combat methamphetamine. The New Zealand Police also helps in providing training to the Philippine National Police.
The official visit by Pakistan President Pervez Musharraf to the Philippines on April 18, 2005 signaled increased relations between the two nations. Four agreements were signed in the presence of President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo and visiting Pakistani President Pervez Musharraf in the presidential palace:
Apart from the four agreements, President Musharraf also assured Pakistan's full support for the Philippine government's efforts to end the decades old rebellion in the southern islands of Mindanao.
On March 2009, The Philippines and Papua New Guinea entered into a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) that would enhance the cooperation between the two countries on the development of fisheries. The MoU will facilitate technology transfer in aquaculture development, promotion of shipping ventures, investments, technical training, joint research, and    strategic complementation    of each country   s plans in the    Coral Triangle        or the waters between the Philippines, Indonesia, and the Pacific Islands. The fisheries trade is significantly responsible for recent overall trade growth between the Philippines and Papua New Guinea.
The Philippines and China established diplomatic relations on June 9, 1975 with the signing of the Joint Communique by leaders of the two countries. Since then bilateral relations between the two countries have developed steadily despite some difficulties. Both countries have maintained high level contacts and exchanges.
Several major bilateral agreements were signed between the two countries over the years, such as: Joint Trade Agreement (1975); Scientific and Technological Cooperation Agreement (1978); Postal Agreement (1978); Air Services Agreement (1979); Visiting Forces Agreement (1999); Cultural Agreement (1979); Investment Promotion and Protection Agreement (1992); Agreement on Agricultural Cooperation (1999); Tax Agreement (1999); and Treaty on Mutual Judicial Assistance on Criminal Matters (2000). In May 2000, on the eve of the 25th anniversary of their diplomatic relations, the two countries signed a Joint Statement defining the framework of bilateral relations in the 21st century.
Bilateral relations between the Philippines and China have significantly progressed in recent years. The growing bilateral relations were highlighted by the state visit to China of Philippine President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo on 29   31 October 2001. During the visit, President Arroyo held bilateral talks with top Chinese leaders, namely President Jiang Zemin, NPC Chairman Li Peng, and Premier Zhu Rongji. President Arroyo also attended the 9th APEC Economic Leaders Meeting held in Shanghai on October 20   21, 2001, where she also had bilateral talks with President Jiang.
During President Arroyo's visit, eight important bilateral agreements were signed.
See Philippines   Romania relations
Philippine ambassador to Moscow, Russia Ernesto V. Llamas, reported to the Department of foreign affairs that the Philippines and Russia observed 30 years of formal, diplomatic relations on June 2, 2006, through an exchange of top-level officials in the mass media and a recognition
Russia has an embassy in Manila. The Philippines has an embassy in Moscow, and two honorary consulates (in Saint Petersburg and Vladivostok).
Russian Ambassador to the Philippines said on Tuesday, April 24, that Russia is laying the infrastructure to become a major oil supplier to Asian countries and is considering proposals to build an oil refinery and storage facilities in the Philippines to serve Southeast Asia. Southeast Asian countries have expressed interest in Russia's plans to become an important energy provider in the region and Moscow should carefully plan how it could assume that crucial role, Ambassador Vitaly Vorobiev told foreign correspondents.
Due to a sharp increase in the number of Filipino nationals being sought to work in private homes throughout Russia, the Philippine Government has deemed it necessary to impose new requirements on the direct hiring of Filipino housekeepers and nannies in Russia in order to secure their well-being through placement in qualified households as well as ensure the engagement of only competent staff.
South Korea is one of the Philippines' largest trading partners.  The two nations were especially close as the Armed Forces of the Philippines, under the United Nations command of Douglas MacArthur, were pledged to fight for South Korea and its allies in the Korean War.
The Philippines was the lone Spanish colony in Asia for almost three and a half centuries, and the relationship between the two countries continues to be strong, primarily due to a shared culture and religion. Philippine President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo concluded her second state visit in Spain in July 2006, bringing along millions of dollars of Spanish investments, particularly in Tourism and Information Technology. The Spanish king, Juan Carlos I, also reiterated in Mrs. Arroyo's visit, his support for her project in the Philippines to re-establish Spanish as an official language in the  country. He and his wife, Queen Sofia attended the 1998 centennial celebrations in Manila, commemorating 100 years of independence from Spain. The mediation of King Juan Carlos I is said to have produced the pardon and liberation of 2 Filipina domestic workers sentenced to death in Kuwait and the UAE.
The Philippines recognize the One China Policy but has relations to the Republic of China (ROC, also known as ''Taiwan'') through the Manila Economic and Cultural Office in Taipei and Taipei Economic and Cultural Office in Manila. Both offices were established in 1975 and were organized as non-profit and non-stock private corporations.
Total Investment Amount: US$1.1 billion (Taiwan is the 5th largest foreign investor in the Philippines)
Philippine Exports to Taiwan: US$3.1 billion
Philippine Imports from Taiwan: US$2.3 billion
OFWs in Taiwan: 87,000 (the 2nd largest foreign worker nationality group in Taiwan)
Trips to the Philippines by Taiwanese: 73,000 people (the 5th in foreign tourist arrivals in the Philippines)
By early March 2011, the Philippines deported 15 Taiwanese drug pushers to Beijing,China. The ROC protested with this action. The Philippine government sent Manuel Roxas II to talk with ROC President Ma Ying-jeou. During the visit, Roxas mentioned that the Philippines "regret" their actions. But the ROC maintained that the Philippines apologize for their action. The mission failed, so a second one was sent, headed again by Roxas. The mission, however, failed. From then on, ROC-Philippine relations became strained.But now the ROC and Philippines are back to normal.
The UK and the Philippines have good relations. On 2002 President Arroyo and the then Prime Minister Tony Blair met to talk about Poverty and Terrorism. Then on December 2007 President Arroyo met Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II to talk about the situation of Filipinos in the UK.
The Philippines has been one of the UK's major recruitment countries for nurses and over 80,000 Filipino nurses and care-givers work in the UK. The total Philippine community in the UK is estimated to be about 150,000. There are estimated to be some 15,000 British nationals living in the Philippines. About 65,000 British nationals visit the Philippines annually.
The UK has also supplied the Philippine military with the Simba APC, Alvis Scorpion Tank, and the Peacock class patrol vessel.
The Philippines considers the United States as its closest ally: economically, militarily and politically. This is in part of the historical connection between the Philippines and the United States, as well as the superpower status of the US.  The United States was the architect of the current form of government in the Philippines through a series of acts of the United States Congress towards the creation of a commonwealth.
The two societies also share some cultural identities: the plans of Manila and Baguio City were designed by Daniel Burnham
A largely Roman Catholic country, the Pope appointed several Americans as bishops of the various Philippines dioceses during the territorial and commonwealth years, including leadership over the Archdiocese of Manila.
Shortly after the conclusion of the Spanish-American War and the transfer of sovereignty over the Philippines from Spain to the United States via the Treaty of Paris which ended that war, the insurgent First Philippine Republic government declared war on the United States. The Philippine-American War ended with the loss of more than 4000 American soldiers, and the deaths of up to 1,000,000 Filipinos.  In the US, this war is largely forgotten, or remembered simply as the aftermath of the Spanish-American War.  In the Philippines, it is remembered as a patriotic struggle for independence, and for the brief institution of the First Philippine Republic.
The Philippines Embassy is located in Washington, D.C.  With the geographic enormity of the United States and its large number of Filipino resident aliens, the Philippines established several official consulates: Agana, Chicago, Honolulu, Los Angeles, New York City, Saipan and San Francisco.  Honorary consulates were opened in other locations.
Since the Spanish-American War, the United States has had a military presence in various forms in the Philippines.  Filipinos fought alongside Americans in World War I, World War II, Korean War and Vietnam War.  Today, the two are allies in the War on Terrorism.
In 2003, U.S. President George W. Bush declared the Philippines as a major non-NATO ally, an important defense designation of the United States.  Now defunct, the Philippines joined the American-developed South East Asia Treaty Organization during the Cold War.  SEATO was a NATO-type military alliance created to combat Communist threats in Southeast Asia.
Today, the two countries are primarily partners in counterterrorism.  Both the Philippines and the United States share intelligence and engage in military exercises in Mindanao and RIMPAC in Hawaii.
The Philippines and the United States supported each other in wars such as:
The Mutual Defense Treaty Between the Republic of the Philippines and the United States of America was signed and ratified on August 30, 1951 in Washington, D.C. between representatives of the Philippines and the United States. The overall accord contained eight articles and dictated that both nations would support each other if either the Philippines or the United States were to be attacked by an external party.
The Philippines has bilateral agreements with the United States and with Australia relating to the status of visiting forces.
Under commonwealth law, the U.S. President drafted Filipinos into service during World War II to fight under the American flag.  The Roosevelt Administration promised veteran benefits afforded to Americans for Filipinos.
Ever since the end of the Cold War relations between the Philippines and Vietnam has warmed rapidly. Today the Philippines and Vietnam are economic allies and have a free trade deal with each other. Both nations are a part of Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC). The Philippines and Vietnam have conducted joint military exercises together in the South China Sea and are trying to find ways to turn the Spratly Islands from an area of conflict to an area of cooperation. Vietnam is also sometimes called the only communist military ally of the Philippines. The Philippines and Vietnam are also monitoring China's expansion into the South China Sea making sure that China is no threat to either Philippine or Vietnamese islands in the South China Sea. The Philippines also imports a large amount of writing material, clothes and other products from Vietnam. On May 2009, The Philippines has inked an agreement with Vietnam to cooperate in the fight against crimes and ensuring social order. On January 2010, the Philippine Stock Exchange (PSE) has signed a memorandum of understanding with the Vietnam bourse    for mutual collaboration and communication of information and experience    to facilitate the development and efficient operations of both securities markets.
The Spanish Administration governed various Pacific island colonies from Manila.  These include the present-day Caroline Islands, Guam, Northern Marianas Islands, Palau and parts of Micronesia, all of which were given separate administrations under American oversight after Spain transferred power to the United States in accordance with the Treaty of Paris.  Spanish Manila also governed possessions in Borneo, Halmahera, Taiwan, Pulau Ternate and Pulau Tidore, all of which transferred to non-American entities after the Spanish-American War.
While the transfer of power after Spanish colonial rule was made clear through treaties, other territories' sovereignty were not as clear.  Many of those disputes continue today.
Sabah, the largest region which the Philippines claim, is now an integral part of Malaysia. On January 23, 1878, Sulu Sultan Jamalul Alam leased his territory in Borneo, in which is now Sabah, to Austrian Gustavus von Overbeck. The Sultan was paid 5,000 Ringgit every year for the lease. In 1920, despite calls made by Washington to London regarding Sabah, the latter was still made a crown colony of the United Kingdom. On September 16, 1963, the United Kingdom formally ceded Sabah to Malaysia. Philippine Presidents Diosdado Macapagal and Ferdinand Marcos openly claimed Sabah. The latter even ordered Sabah to be put into the Philippine map. Despite challenges of the Philippine government to bring the matter of the dispute to the International Court of Justice (ICJ), or International Court of Justice, Malaysia still rejects those calls. During 2003, violent mass deportations of illegal Filipinos residing in Sabah resulted in more clamor for the Sabah claim. Up to this day, Malaysia still pays the annual rent of 5,000 Malaysian Ringgit to the Sultan's heirs.
The Scarborough Shoal (Panatag Shoal), located west of Palauig, Zambales, are claimed by the Philippines, the People's Republic of China and the Republic of China.  Currently, a Philippines naval fleet guards the area. The Philippines bases its claim on its close proximity of the Scarborough Shoal to the Philippines.  It also says that the Scarborough Shoal is within the Filipino Exclusive Economic Zone and argues ''terra nullius''.  A Yuan Dynasty map dated as early as 1279 is the basis for the claim of the People's Republic of China and the Republic of China.  They argue that the area was historically used by their fishermen.
The Spratly Islands are a group of islands, reefs, and rocks located about 300 kilometers West of Aborlan, Palawan. The Philippines, along with the People's Republic of China, the Republic of China, Malaysia, Vietnam, and Brunei expressed claims. The Philippines officially staked a claim to some of the islands during the United Nations convention, although it was first expressed in 1956, when Tomas Cloma, a Philippine mariner, officially declared some of the eastern Spratlys as a protectorate of the Philippines. Based on proximity and on the United Nations Archipelagic Doctrine, the Philippines can claim some of the Spratlys as an Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ). Whether these arguments (or any other used by the Philippines) would hold up in court is debatable but possibly moot, as the PRC and Vietnam seem unwilling to legally substantiate their claims and have rejected Philippine challenges to take the dispute to the World Maritime Tribunal in Hamburg.
The case of Sipadan and Ligitan, which were in dispute between Malaysia and Indonesia, was taken into the ICJ, in which the former won. Sipadan and Ligitan are technically part of Sabah state, and thus would be part of the claim of the Sulu Sultanate's heir, the Philippines.
The country, an archipelago, serves as breeding ground for locally produced marijuana and hashish and is possible that it is illegally shipped to East Asia, the United States, and other Western markets; serves as a transit point for heroin and crystal methamphetamine.