In addition to its flagship site, Ancestry.com operates Genealogy.com, MyFamily.com, and Rootsweb.com, which contains free basic information, but primarily serves as a portal to Ancestry.com, and owns Footnote.com, which provides images of historical records. Family Tree Maker software, developed and marketed by the company, is the largest selling genealogical software in the world. 
Under its subsidiaries, Ancestry.com operates foreign sites that provide access to services and records specific to other countries in the languages of those countries. These include several countries in Europe (covered by Ancestry.com Europe S.a r.l.) as well as Australia, Canada, and China.
In 1990, Paul Allen (not to be confused with Microsoft cofounder Paul Allen) and Dan Taggart, two Brigham Young University graduates, founded '''Infobases''' and began offering Latter-day Saints (LDS) publications on floppy disks. Allen's brother Curt and his brother-in-law Brad Pelo had founded Folio Corporation, where Paul Allen had worked in 1988.  Infobases chose to use the Folio infobase technology which Allen was familiar with as the basis for their products.
The first products were floppy disks and compact disks sold from the back seat of their car. In 1994 Infobases was named among ''Inc.'' magazine   s 500 fastest-growing companies. Their first offering on CD was the LDS Collectors Edition, released in April 1995, selling for $299.95, which was offered in an on-line version in August 1995.
On January 1, 1997, Infobases' parent company, Western Standard Publishing, purchased Ancestry, Inc., publisher of ''Ancestry'' magazine and genealogy books. Founded in 1983 by John Sittner as a genealogy newsletter, ''Ancestry'' magazine had been launched in January 1994. Western Standard Publishing's CEO was Joe Cannon, one of the principal owners of Geneva Steel.
In July 1997, Allen and Taggart purchased Western Standard's interest in Ancestry, Inc. At the time, Brad Pelo was president and CEO of Infobases, and president of Western Standard. Less than six months earlier, he had been president of Folio Corporation, whose digital technology Infobases was using. In March 1997, Folio was sold to Open Market for $45&nbsp;million. The first public evidence of the change in ownership of ''Ancestry Magazine'' came with the July/August 1997 issue, which showed a newly reorganized Ancestry, Inc., as its publisher. That issue's masthead also included the first use of the Ancestry.com web address.
More growth for Infobases occurred in July 1997 when Ancestry, Inc. purchased Bookcraft, Inc., a publisher of books written by leaders and officers of the LDS church. Infobases had published many of Bookcraft's books as part of its LDS Collector's Library. Pelo also announced that Ancestry's product line would be greatly expanded in both CDs and online. Alan Ashton, a longtime investor in Infobases, and founder of WordPerfect, was its chairman of the board. Allen and Taggart began running Ancestry, Inc. independently from Infobases in July 1997, and began creating one of the largest online subscription-based genealogy database services.
In April 1999, to better focus on its Ancestry.com and MyFamily.com Internet businesses, Infobases sold the Bookcraft brand name and its catalog of print books to its major competitor in the LDS book market, Deseret Book. Included in the sale were the rights to Infobases' LDS Collector's Library on CD. A year earlier, Deseret Book had released a competing product called GospeLink, and the two products were combined as a single product by Deseret Book.
The MyFamily.com website launched in December 1998, with additional free sites beginning in March 1999. The site generated one million registered users within its first 140 days. The company raised more than US$90&nbsp;million in venture capital from investors and changed its name on November 17, 1999 from Ancestry.com, Inc., to MyFamily.com, Inc. Its three Internet genealogy sites were then called Ancestry.com, MyFamily.com, and FamilyHistory.com. Sales for 2002 were about US$62&nbsp;million, and those for 2003 were US$99&nbsp;million.
In March 2004, the company opened a new call center in Provo as a result of outgrowing their old call center in Orem. The new call center accommodates about 700 agents at a time. Heritage Makers was acquired by MyFamily.com in September 2005, and sold a year later in August 2006. The Ancestry.ca website was opened on January 24, 2006. In March 2006, MyFamily opened a new office in Bellevue, Washington as part of the MyFamily business unit. Encounter Technologies was acquired in April 2006.
On December 19, 2006, the company changed its name to "The Generations Network." While the company had been offering free access to Ancestry.com at LDS Family History Centers, that service was terminated on March 17, 2007 because of the inability to reach a mutually agreeable licensing agreement between TGN and the LDS Church.  Recently, however, service was reinstated at several of the larger Family History Centers.
On July 6, 2009, the company changed its name to "Ancestry.com".
In 2010, Ancestry sold its book publishing assets to Turner Publishing. In the same year, the company discontinued the publication of ''Ancestry Magazine'', after 25 years of publication and ''Genealogical Computing''.
Ancestry.com became a publicly traded company on NASDAQ (symbol: ACOM) on November 5, 2009 with an initial public offering of 7.4 million shares priced at $13.50 per share underwritten by Morgan Stanley, Bank of America Merrill Lynch, Jefferies & Company, Piper Jaffray, and BMO Capital Markets.
The company continued its partnership with NBC for the second season of the Who Do You Think You Are? television series in 2011.
Ancestry.com is a subscription-based genealogy research website with over 5&nbsp;billion records online.  The majority of records are from the US, though records are being added for other countries, such as Canada, the UK, and European countries. Some records are free for anyone to access, but the majority are accessible only by paid subscription.
On June 22, 2006, Ancestry.com completed the indexing and scanning of all of the United States Federal Census records from 1790 through 1930.
Ancestry.com was nominated for a 2007 CODiE Award in the "Best Online Consumer Information Service" category.
Ancestry.com set up a site in early 2006 called the Family Heritage Project which allowed customers to order a personalized book containing census images, photos and other information on up to four generations of a particular family. New orders were disallowed in December 2006, the book was made no longer available for order, and the site now redirects to the Ancestry.com store.
Family Tree Maker (FTM) is advertised as "the #1 selling genealogy software". As with other genealogy software, FTM allows the researcher to keep track of information collected during research and to create reports, charts, and books containing that information.  The software was originally developed by Kenneth Hess of Banner Blue Software, which was purchased by Broderbund in 1995. It passed through the hands of The Learning Company, Mattel, and others before coming under its current ownership.
A redesigned Family Tree Maker 2008 was released August 14, 2007. The 2009 version of the program corrected some of the errors and omissions of its predecessor, and introduced a few new features. Family Tree Maker 2010 claims to further enhance the radical re-design and be more powerful and feature-packed with faster navigation and quicker load times.
A version for the Mac was released in 1997, but due to low market demand was discontinued for over a decade.  A new version of Family Tree Maker for Mac was finally released November 4, 2010.
Family Tree Maker Version 16 was awarded a CODiE Award in the "Best Consumer Productivity Solution" category in 2006.
Past genealogy programs.