A '''combat knife''' (also commonly called a trench knife, '''fighting knife''', or '''tactical knife''') is a knife designed for military use, specifically for close combat. Since the end of trench warfare, however, most military knives have been primarily designed for utility/tool use (clearing foliage, chopping branches for cover, opening ammunition crates, etc.) rather than for effectiveness in hand-to-hand combat.
Daggers and dirks have the longest association with combat knives dating to antiquity.  The English may have been the first to combine utility with defense when they introduced the "kidney dagger" in 1350.Walker(1993) p. 28  French and Italian daggers of the 14th century were the first to introduce the tapered and double edge point as a response to improvements made in armor design and the need for penetration.
The rise in use of firearms led to the decline in combat daggers, until 1827 with the introduction of Jim Bowie's Bowie Knife.  The Bowie knife proved to be a capable design, replacing tools and weapons such as the tomahawk and in some instances a sidearm (as firearms were not 100% reliable) on the American Frontier.  In the early 1900s the large Bowie Knives were made in smaller sizes as knives became regarded as tools and eating utensils more than as weapons.Walker(1993) pp. 50-55
Modern combat knives come in many shapes and sizes with most military forces today standardizing the types of combat knives issued to soldiers. The Chilean Commando forces, for instance, are trained in the use of the Corvo knife, a traditional Chilean military weapon. The Gurkha regiments favor the Kukri, a broad-bladed curved weapon that more closely resembles a machete or Filipino Bolo than a knife. In the United States Marine Corps, the standard issue combat knife since World War II has been the KA-BAR knife.
During World War II a knife designed specifically for combat was the British Fairbairn-Sykes, which has a double-edged design primarily for stabbing an enemy, through heavy clothing if necessary. It was designed by William E. Fairbairn and Eric A. Sykes, famous combatives teachers of the era, for fighting instead of for field/utility use.  The Fairbairn-Sykes knife inspired several similar knives of the era such as the V-42 Stiletto designed by Lt. Colonel Robert T. Frederick who commanded the joint US and Canadian First Special Service Force and the United States Marine Raider Stiletto designed by Lieutenant Colonel Clifford H. Shuey.
In the United States, Knifemaker Bo Randall began production of the "All Purpose Fighting Knife" giving it the designation of "Number 1" in his catalog.  Between 1942 and 1945, Randall Made Knives produced 4,000 of these knives for US Troops in the war, with approximately 1,058 subcontracted out to another firm to meet the demand.  In the 1950s Randall would return to the pattern of the Bowie knife for several of his combat knife designs.Pacella (2002)pp. 130-131
One of Randall's designs which became a popular fighting knife for troops was the Number 14 "Attack" Model.  During Vietnam, Randall received feedback from Captain George Ingraham, a Combat Surgeon in the US Army's 94th Medical Detachment.  Ingraham's request was for serrations on the spine to cut through the fuselage of downed aircraft to rescue trapped personnel and a hollow handle to allow storage of survival gear.  Randall made the changes and the result was the first of the modern survival knives.
In the 1980s, Cold Steel, a Ventura, California based firm, began offering combat knives for sale in the US.  The firm was initially known for its push-daggers, but became known for popularizing what would be called "The American Tanto".  To this day, Cold steel is regarded for producing combat knives with influences from various cultures and historical time periods. 
Bill Harsey later teamed up with Chris Reeve to design the Yarborough Knife presented to each graduate of the United States Army Special Forces Qualification Course. In the latest step of this evolution, Bill Harsey and Chris Reeve have collaborated with the father of the Modern Army Combatives Program, Matt Larsen to design the LHR Combat knife.
In the 1990s, Strider Knives began producing combat knives.  Early designs were tanto and bowie style blades ground from ATS-34 steel with a proprietary heat treat by Paul Bos.  After 2003, the company began manufacturing blades primarily of S30V steel.  Early models featured paracord wrapped handles similar to those made by Ek Knives.
Buck Knives' lockback knife was originally marketed as a "folding hunting knife" and while it became popular with sportsmen, it saw use with military personnel as it could perform a variety of tasks.  Custom knife makers began making similar knives, in particular was Guatemalan-born knifemaker Bob Terzuola.  Terzuola is credited with coining the phrase "Tactical Folder".
In the 1990s in the United States, as a response to restrictive gun laws, tactical folding knives became popular.  The trend began with custom knifemakers such as Bob Terzuola, Michael Walker,  Mel Pardue, Ernest Emerson, Ken Onion, Chris Reeve, Rick Hinderer, Warren Thomas, and Warren Osbourne.  These knives were most commonly built as linerlocks, although Osbourne introduced the Axis lock.  Blade lengths varied from 3&nbsp;inches to as long as 12&nbsp;inches, but the most typical models never exceeded 4&nbsp;inches in blade length for legal reasons in most US Jurisdictions.
In response to the demand for these knives, production companies offered mass-produced tactical folding knives.  Companies such as Benchmade, Kershaw Knives, Buck Knives, Al Mar Knives, Gerber Legendary Blades, Kershaw Knives and Spyderco collaborated with tactical knifemakers; in some cases retaining them as full-time designers.  Tactical knifemakers such as Ernest Emerson and Chris Reeve went so far as to open their own mass-production factories with Emerson Knives, Inc. and Chris Reeve Knives.
There has been criticism against the notion of a "Tactical Folding Knife". Students of knife-fighting point out that any locking mechanism can fail and that a folding knife regardless of lock strength can never be as reliable as a fixed-blade combat knife. Lynn Thompson, martial artist and CEO of Cold Steel pointed out in an article in ''Black Belt'' magazine that most tactical folding knives are too short to be of use in a knife fight and that even though he manufactures, sells, and carries a tactical folder, it is not ideal for fighting.