In early 1986, Mitchell and Larry Klein visited Peter Gabriel's Ashcombe House recording studio in Bath, England. Since Gabriel had mostly finished his album "So" by that time, he offered Mitchell and Klein the use of his studio if they wanted to record. They did, and the result was the track "My Secret Place" which was a duet between Mitchell and Gabriel. Mitchell told Musician magazine about this song: "It's a love beginning song. The song's about the threshold of intimacy. It's a shared thing so I wanted it to be like the Song of Soloman, where you can't tell what gender it is. It's the uniting spirit of two people at the beginning of a relationship".
In February 1987, Mitchell saw Billy Idol performing his song "To Be A Lover" on the Grammy Awards show. She felt he captured the original spirit of rock'n'roll along with a new spark of energy, and would be perfect for a cameo on her song "Dancin' Clown". Idol came over to Mitchell's studio one evening a few days after the Grammys and recorded his part, complete with yelps and howls. Mitchell told Macleans magazine about this pairing up: "It was for the contrast he provided. It's a great little cameo for him, and he brings real life to the part." Later, Tom Petty recorded his cameo on the same song.
About ''Chalk Mark'', Mitchell told interviewer Kristine McKenna: "I've discovered that with your focus no longer on finding a mate, you get a heightened sense of community, and I've become a bit more political - not too political though".
Contemporary commercialism is addressed in the songs "Number One", "Lakota" which deals with the destruction of Native American culture and the unusual "The Reoccuring Dream" was constructed from samples Mitchell collected by recording TV commercials on her VCR for 2 weeks. "Cool Water" (a Mitchell rewrite of the Bob Nolan original) also discusses water pollution.
War is explored in two very different stories: "The Tea Leaf Prophecy (Lay Down Your Arms)" tells the tale of Mitchell's parents meeting during World War II after a surprisingly prophetic tea-leaf reading, while "The Beat of Black Wings" is about an embittered Vietnam vet named Killer Kyle, who found it difficult to get the sound of helicopter blades out of his head. This song may be based on a scene from the film adaptation of ''The Looking Glass War''.
In the more straight-forward lovesongs, Mitchell sings of intimacy in "My Secret Place", and young, rambunctious love in "Snakes and Ladders" and "Dancin' Clown".
The first official single from the album was "My Secret Place". It was released in March 1988 and "bubbled under" for a few weeks on the Billboard Hot 100 charts. The video, shot on grainy, atmospheric black & white film featuring Mitchell and Peter Gabriel, got some airplay on VH-1, where it premiered in May 1988.
Billboard magazine's Steve Gett reviewed the new album and awarded it an early rave. Other reviews were mostly very favorable, and the fact that there were cameos by many well-known musicians brought it a great deal of notice. The album improved on the chart position of her previous album, 1985's ''Dog Eat Dog'', peaking at #45 on the Billboard Top Album chart.
To promote the album, Mitchell also travelled to the UK in May and appeared on the Channel 4 music show ''Wired'' where she performed "Number One" and gave an exclusive world premiere of a brand new song called "Fourth of July" which would later be retitled "Night Ride Home" and be recorded as the title track for her next album. She also visited Australia and appeared on a several television shows including ''The Midday Show with Ray Martin'', ''Rock Arena'', and the morning show ''Sunday'' where she again performed "Number One" and "Fourth of July".
All tracks composed by Joni Mitchell; except where indicated