The show, in its live form, finished in May 2007, although repeats of past episodes were still broadcast until the closure of the Pokerzone channel the following year.
The show featured coverage of online poker cash games, single table "sit and go" tournaments, and multi-table tournaments. The games featured are from the Prima Poker network of sites, and are broadcast with a short delay, with all players' cards visible. The presenters also discuss viewers' emails and text messages on poker issues.
A regular feature from February, 2006 was the "Beat The Presenter" tournament, in which one of the presenters plays a single table tournament while the programme is being broadcast, and then analyses their play along with their co-presenter after it is completed.
In 2006, Poker Night Live offered its regular online players the chance to win places in a special PokerBowl show. The six qualifiers visited the PokerZone studio to play in a "live" tournament. The show was broadcast in September 2006 with Ken "Snappit" Hawkins beating Andrew "Gilberto" Parkhouse heads up.
Throughout its run, the show featured a number of different presenters, some of them expert players and others relatively new to the game. Hosts on the UK version of Poker Night Live included:
Guests in the commentary box have included:
Several celebrities have been known to play on the TV broadcast tables, including:
In February 2006, a Canadian version was created for Casino and Gaming Television (now called GameTV).  The Canadian version ran for two hours, instead of the four hour run-time of the UK show.  The format was similar with more focus on Sit and Go tournaments and No Limit Cash tables featuring Canadian players.  The show aired live Wednesday to Sunday at 11:00 p.m. to 1:00 a.m. EST.  Repeated episodes were aired Monday and Tuesday at 11:00 p.m. and 7 days a week from 4:30 p.m. to 6:30 p.m.
The show was cancelled in December 2006 when CGTV was rebranded to GameTV.
Presenters on the Canadian version have included: