Jeppesen is headquartered in Inverness. Retrieved 2010-02-04., an unincorporated area of Arapahoe County, Colorado, with offices around the world including Neu Isenburg (Germany), Crawley (United Kingdom), Gothenburg (Sweden) and Canberra (Australia). The company employs approximately 3,200 people.. Retrieved 2007-11-28.
Jeppesen's charts are often referred to by pilots as Jepp charts or just simply Jepps, due to the charts' de facto popularity.  This defacto popularity extends to electronic charts, which are increasingly favored over paper charts by pilots and mariners as mobile computing devices, electronic flight bags, integrated electronic bridge systems and other display devices become more common and readily available.
The terminal at then-under-construction Denver International Airport was named in honor of Jeppesen founder Elrey Borge Jeppesen in February 1991.
The company was founded in 1934 by Elrey Borge Jeppesen, a pilot himself working for Varney Airlines, who was the first to make aeronautical charts for pilots to navigate in flight. The information he collected and the charts he drew were at first only for personal use, but fellow pilots quickly saw the benefits of using these charts and Jeppesen started selling copies of his chart book for 10 dollars. Other pilots started to collect data on their own routes and handing this to Jeppesen for him to include in his navigation book.
United Airlines, the airline Jeppesen worked for in the late 1930s after Varney Airlines had merged with several other companies to form United Airlines, was one of the first airlines to start using Jeppesen's charts. After a while the chart business started taking up so much of Jeppesen's time that he quit his job as a Captain and became dedicated to making charts.
In 1941, Jeppesen moved the company from Salt Lake City, Utah, to Denver, Colorado.. Retrieved 2007-11-28.
In 1947, Jeppesen and the forerunner to the Federal Aviation Administration collaborated to introduce standard instrument approach procedures and to establish the National Flight Data Center.. Retrieved 2007-11-28.
In 1973, Jeppesen NavData(R) was first used commercially in flight management computer guidance systems (FMCGS).
In 1974, Jeppesen entered the flight training business when Times-Mirror merged it with Sanderson Films.
Jeppesen began a series of acquisitions which added to its product and service offerings:
Bottlang Airfield Manual added visual flight rules (VFR) approach and airport information for Europe;
Icarus, which became OpsData, added runway and performance analysis, which is used to plan and optimize aircraft takeoff and landing performance;
In 1989, Jeppesen purchased Lockheed DataPlan, a flight planning and weather services company.  Jeppesen's current president and chief executive officer, Mark Van Tine, formerly worked for this company.. Retrieved 2007-11-28.
Between 1990 and 1995, Jeppesen expanded globally by opening offices in Australia and China to serve customers in the Asia - Pacific region, and continued to expand through acquisition by purchasing TannGuide, which became the JeppGuide airport directory; APU, which became part of OpsData; and International Aviation Publishers, which created aviation maintenance training manuals;
In 1996, Jeppesen introduced JeppView, which provided a complete, worldwide library of terminal aeronautical charts on CD-ROM;
Also in 1996, Jeppesen acquired MentorPlus, a maker of PC-based aviation and marine moving map and flight planning applications;
In 1998, Jeppesen introduced Internet-based delivery of NavData updates.
In 2000, Jeppesen purchased Nobeltec, a Portland, OR based company that provides marine navigation software and charts;
Also in 2000, Jeppesen itself was acquired by The Boeing Company.  Boeing bought Jeppesen from the Tribune Company, which had acquired Times-Mirror and was selling off its non-core assets;
In 2002, Jeppesen's first commercial electronic flight bag and Internet-based chart delivery were introduced;
In 2003, Jeppesen became the first commercial organization to be certified by the FAA as a Qualified Internet Communications Provider (QICP);
In 2004, Jeppesen acquired SBS International, a New York, NY based provider of crew scheduling services.  Jeppesen acquired SBS through an arrangement with Boeing, which had purchased SBS in 2001;
In 2006, Jeppesen purchased Carmen Systems, a provider of crew scheduling and disruption management software.  The company was headquartered in Gothenburg, Sweden, and had approximately 300 employees..  Jeppesen quickly consolidated Carmen and SBS product offerings and locations;
In 2007, Jeppesen purchased C-MAP, a provider of digital maritime cartography, data services and other navigational information.  C-MAP became part of Jeppesen's marine division.  It has operations in Italy, the United Kingdom, Norway, Greece, Poland, Russia, India, Japan, South Korea, Singapore, Malaysia, Australia and the United States;
In 2008, Jeppesen purchased Ocean Systems, Inc., an Alameda, CA based provider of vessel and voyage optimization solutions for commercial marine operations;
Also in 2008, Jeppesen received FAA approval for its Airport Moving Map application for Class 2 electronic flight bags;
In 2009, Jeppesen received FAA approval to design and validate required naviation performance (RNP) procedures in the United States;
Also in 2009, Jeppesen sold its Nobeltec product line to Signet USA.
In 2010, Jeppesen received approval from the Civil Aviation Safety Authority of Australia to design, validate and maintain both required navigation performance and conventional instrument approach procedures;
Also in 2010, Jeppesen was named the 2010 INFORMS Prize winner for its organization-wide use of operations research.
On October 23, 2006, the ''New Yorker'' reported that Jeppesen handled the logistical planning for the CIA's extraordinary rendition flights.  The allegation is based on information from an ex-employee who quoted Bob Overby, managing director of the company as saying "We do all of the extraordinary rendition flights   you know, the torture flights. Let   s face it, some of these flights end up that way. It certainly pays well." The article went on to suggest that this may make Jeppesen a potential defendant in a law suit by Khaled El-Masri.  Jeppesen was named as a defendant in a lawsuit filed by the ACLU on May 30, 2007, on behalf of several other individuals who were allegedly subject to extraordinary rendition. The suit was dismissed in February, 2008 on a motion from the United States government, on theory that proceeding with the case would reveal state secrets and endanger relations with other nations that had cooperated.
On May 16, 2011, the Supreme Court declined to review the decision of the Ninth Circuit to dismiss the case.