The '''''Mars Global Surveyor''''' ('''''MGS''''') was a US spacecraft developed by NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory and launched November 1996. It began the United States's return to Mars after a 10-year absence.  It completed its primary mission in January 2001 and was in its third extended mission phase when, on 2 November 2006, the spacecraft failed to respond to messages and commands. A faint signal was detected three days later which indicated that the craft had gone into safe mode. All attempts to recontact the Mars Global Surveyor and resolve the problem failed. In January 2007 NASA officially ended the mission.
The ''Surveyor'' spacecraft, fabricated at the Lockheed Martin Astronautics plant in Denver, is a rectangular-shaped box with wing-like projections (solar panels) extending from opposite sides. When fully loaded with propellant at the time of launch, the spacecraft weighed . Most of ''Surveyor'''s mass lies in the box-shaped module occupying the center portion of the spacecraft. This center module is made of two smaller rectangular modules stacked on top of each other, one of which is called the equipment module and holds the spacecraft's electronics, science instruments, and the 1750A mission computer. The other module, called the propulsion module, houses ''Surveyor'''s rocket engines and propellant tanks.
Five scientific instruments fly onboard ''Mars Global Surveyor'':
The Mars Orbiter Camera (MOC) science investigation used 3 instruments: a narrow angle camera that took (black-and-white) high resolution images (usually 1.5 to 12 m per pixel) and red and blue wide angle pictures for context (240 m per pixel) and daily global imaging (7.5&nbsp;km per pixel). MOC returned more than 240,000 images spanning portions of 4.8 Martian years, from September 1997 and November 2006. A high resolution image from MOC is either 1.5 or 3.1&nbsp;km wide.  So any image from this camera is at most 3.1&nbsp;km wide.  Often, a picture will be smaller than this because it has been cut to just show a certain feature. These high resolution images may be 3 to 10&nbsp;km long.  When a high resolution image is taken, a context image is taken as well.  The context image shows the image footprint of the high resolution picture.  Context images are typically 115.2&nbsp;km square with 240 m/pixel resolution.
The ''Surveyor'' spacecraft was launched from the Cape Canaveral Air Station in Florida on 7 November 1996 aboard a Delta II rocket. The spacecraft traveled nearly 750 million kilometers (466 million miles) over the course of a 300-day cruise to reach Mars on 11 September 1997.
Upon reaching Mars, ''Surveyor'' fired its main rocket engine for the 22-minute Mars orbit insertion (MOI) burn. This maneuver slowed the spacecraft and allowed the planet's gravity to capture it into orbit. Initially, Surveyor entered a highly elliptical orbit that took 45 hours to complete. The orbit had a periapsis of  above the northern hemisphere, and an apoapsis of  above the southern hemisphere.
After orbit insertion, ''Surveyor'' performed a series of orbit changes to lower the periapsis of its orbit into the upper fringes of the Martian atmosphere at an altitude of about . During every atmospheric pass, the spacecraft slowed down by a slight amount because of atmospheric resistance. The density of the Martian atmosphere at such altitudes is comparatively low, allowing this procedure to be performed without damage to the spacecraft. This slowing caused the spacecraft to lose altitude on its next pass through the orbit's apoapsis. Surveyor used this aerobraking technique over a period of four months to lower the high point of its orbit from  to altitudes near .
On 11 October, the flight team performed a maneuver to raise the periapsis out of the atmosphere. This suspension of aerobraking was performed because air pressure from the atmosphere caused one of ''Surveyor'''s two solar panels to bend backward by a slight amount. The panel in question was slightly damaged shortly after launch in November 1996. Aerobraking was resumed on 7 November after flight team members concluded that aerobraking was safe, provided that it occurs at a more gentle pace than proposed by the original mission plan.
Under the new mission plan, aerobraking occurred with the low point of the orbit at an average altitude of , as opposed to the original altitude of . This slightly higher altitude resulted in a decrease of 66 percent in terms of air resistance pressure experienced by the spacecraft. During these six months, aerobraking reduced the orbit period to between 12 and 6 hours.
From May to November 1998, aerobraking was temporarily suspended to allow the orbit to drift into the proper position with respect to the Sun. Without this hiatus, 'Surveyor'  would complete aerobraking with its orbit in the wrong solar orientation. In order to maximize the efficiency of the mission, these six months were devoted to collecting as much science data as possible. Data was collected between two to four times per day, at the low point of each orbit.
Finally, from November 1998 to March 1999, aerobraking continued and shrank the high point of the orbit down to . At this altitude, ''Surveyor'' circled Mars once every two hours. Aerobraking was scheduled to terminate at the same time the orbit drifted into its proper position with respect to the Sun. In the desired orientation for mapping operations, the spacecraft always crossed the day-side equator at 14:00 (local Mars time) moving from south to north. This geometry was selected to enhance the total quality of the science return.
The spacecraft circled Mars once every 117.65 minutes at an average altitude of 378 kilometers (235 miles). It is in a near polar orbit (inclination = 93  ) which is almost perfectly circular, moving from being over the south pole to being over the north pole in just under an hour. The altitude was chosen to make the orbit sun-synchronous, so that all images that were taken by the spacecraft of the same surface features on different dates were taken under identical lighting conditions. After each orbit, the spacecraft viewed the planet 28.62   to the west because Mars had rotated underneath it. In effect, it was always 14:00 for ''Mars Global Surveyor'' as it moved from one time zone to the next exactly as fast as the Sun. After seven sols and 88 orbits, the spacecraft would approximately retrace its previous path, with an offset of 59&nbsp;km to the east. This ensured eventual full coverage of the entire surface.
In its extended mission, MGS did much more than study the planet directly beneath it. It commonly performed rolls and pitches to acquire images off its nadir track. The roll maneuvers, called ROTOs (Roll Only Targeting Opportunities), rolled the spacecraft left or right from its ground track to shoot images as much as 30   from nadir. It was possible for a pitch maneuver to be added to compensate for the relative motion between the spacecraft and the planet. This was called a CPROTO (Compensation Pitch Roll Targeting Opportunity), and allowed for some very high resolution imaging by the onboard MOC (Mars Orbiting Camera).  
In addition to this, MGS could shoot pictures of other orbiting bodies, such as other spacecraft and the moons of Mars. In 1998 it imaged what was later called the Phobos monolith, found in MOC Image 55103.Optech press release, "," 3 May 2007., Mars Institute website. Retrieved 27 July 2009.
After analyzing hundreds of high-resolution pictures of the Martian surface taken by the orbiting Mars Surveyor spacecraft, a team of researchers found that weathering and winds on the planet create landforms, especially sand dunes, remarkably similar to those in some deserts on Earth.
Image:Layers in a crater in Arabia.JPG|Layers in an old crater in Arabia, as seen by Mars Global Surveyor (MGS). Layers may form from volcanoes, the wind, or by deposition under water. The craters on the left are pedestal craters. 
Image:Schiaparelli basin crater.jpg|Layers in crater found within the Schiaparelli crater basin as seen by Mars Global Surveyor.  Image from the Sinus Sabaeus quadrangle.
Image:Layers in Monument Valley.jpg|Layers in Monument Valley.  These are accepted as being formed, at least in part, by water deposition.  Since Mars contains similar layers, water remains as a major cause of layering on Mars.
Image:Buttes and layers in Aeolis.jpg|Buttes and layers in Aeolis quadrangle, as seen by Mars Global Surveyor.
Image:Exhumed crater in Noachis.JPG|Crater that was buried in another age and is now being exposed by erosion, as seen by the Mars Global Surveyor.  Image is located in the Noachis quadrangle.
Image:Exhumed Lava Flows.jpg|Lava flows were once covered over, now these platy flows are being exposed.
Image:Exhumed Crater.jpg|Crater was buried, now it is being exhumed by erosion.  Image located in Ismenius Lacus quadrangle.
Image:Exhumed Craters.jpg|The northern hemisphere appears smooth, but the craters are covered over.  Here, a group of craters are patially exposed.  Image located in Cebrenia quadrangle.
Image:Gully in Phaethontis.jpg|Group of gullies on north wall of crater that lies west of the crater Newton (41.3047 degrees south latitude, 192.89 east longitide).  Image taken with Mars Global Surveyor.  Image is located in the Phaethontis quadrangle.
Image:Gullies and tongue-shaped glacier.jpg|Gullies in a crater in Eridania quadrangle, north of the large crater Kepler.  Also, features that may be remains of old glaciers are present.  One, to the right, has the shape of a tongue. 
Image:Kaiser Gullies.JPG|Gullies on one wall of Kaiser Crater.  Gullies usually are found in only one wall of a crater.
Image:Gullies in Gorgonum.jpg|Full color image of gullies on wall of Gorgonum Chaos.  Image is located in the Phaethontis quadrangle.
Image:Phaethontis surface.JPG|Close up image of Phaethontis surface taken with Mars Global Surveyor.  Pits are thought to be caused by buried ice turning into a gas.
Image:Mantle on Cliff.JPG|The mantle drapes most of the area.  Note the absence of boulders on the cliff face.  An area that shows the edges of the mantle is circled.  Image located in Ismenius Lacus quadrangle.
Image:Mantle material from MGS.jpg|Mantle material, as seen by MGS.
Image:Steep cliff in Ismenius Lacus taken with MGS.JPG|Steep Cliff in Ismenius Lacus quadrangle with smooth mantle covering its face.
Image:Dust devil tracks in Eridania.JPG|Pattern of large and small tracks made by giant dust devils as seen by Mars Global Surveyor.  Image is located in Eridania quadrangle.
Image:Kepler Crater.JPG|Kepler (Martian crater) showing dust devil tracks, as seen by Mars Global Surveyor.  Kepler is a large crater in the Eridania quadrangle.
Image:Dust Devil with Labels.JPG|Dust Devil, as seen by MGS.
Image:Dust Devil with Shadow.JPG|Dust Devil in action showing shadow to the right.  Image located in Cebrenia quadrangle.
Image:South pole changes in two year period.JPG|Changes in South Pole from 1999 to 2001, as seen by Mars Global Surveyor.  Notice how swiss-cheese type holes have grown in the two years.
Image:Swiss Cheese in South.JPG|Swiss Cheese Terrain, as seen by MGS.  Largest mesa in image is 4 meters high.  
Image:Swiss Cheese Layers.JPG|Layers in Swiss Cheese Terrain.  There is a bright upper layer and a darker lower layer.
Image:Swiss Cheese Terrain close-up.JPG|Close-up view of Swiss Cheese Terrain.  Polygonal pattern was probably formed by shallow troughs.
Image:Cerauniustholus.jpg|Ceraunius Tholus, one of many volcanoes found on Mars.
Image:LavaFlows from MGS.JPG|Lava flows in the Tharsis quadrangle.
Image:Young and Old Lava Flows.JPG|Image shows both young and old lava flows from the base of Olympus Mons.  The flat plain is the younger flow.  The older flow has channels with levees along their edges.  The presence of levees is quite common in many lava flows.
Image:Small Volcano mgs.jpg|Small Volcano in Phoenicis Lacus quadrangle.  Image is 1.9 miles wide.
Image:Boulders from MGS.JPG|House-sized boulders are scattered throughout this image.
Image:Boulders near Volcano.JPG|These boulders are near Ascraeus Mons, a Martian volcano.  Volcanoes on Mars probably form hard boulders made up of basalt that is resistant to erosion in the current environment of Mars.
Image:Labeled Streaks.JPG|Dark streaks were discovered with the sensitive camera of the MGS.
Image:Changes in Slope Streaks.JPG|Many streaks underwent changes during the many years that MGS functioned.
Image:Tikonravev Crater Floor.JPG|Tikonravev Crater Floor, as seen by Mars Global Surveyor. Click on image to see dark slope streaks and layers.  Tikonravev Crater is in the Arabia quadrangle.
Image:Dark streaks in Diacria.JPG|Dark streaks in Diacria quadrangle, as seen by Mars Global Surveyor.
Mars Global Surveyor functioned as a communications satellite relaying data back to Earth from the MER surface landers. Portions of MGS had been scheduled to remain active until at least September 2008 to support MER.
On '''November 2, 2006''', NASA lost contact with the spacecraft after commanding it to adjust its solar panels. Several days passed before a faint signal was received indicating that the spacecraft had entered safe mode and was awaiting further instructions.
On '''November 20, 2006''', the Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter spacecraft attempted to image ''Mars Global Surveyor'' to verify the orientation of the spacecraft. The effort was unsuccessful. 
On '''November 21 and 22, 2006''', ''Mars Global Surveyor'' failed to relay communications to the Opportunity rover on the surface of Mars. In response to this complication, Mars Exploration Program manager Fuk Li stated, "Realistically, we have run through the most likely possibilities for re-establishing communication, and we are facing the likelihood that the amazing flow of scientific observations from Mars Global Surveyor is over."
On '''April 13, 2007,''' NASA announced the loss of the spacecraft was caused by a flaw in a parameter update to the spacecraft's system software. The spacecraft was designed to hold two identical copies of the system software for redundancy and error checking. Subsequent updating to the software encountered human error when two independent operators updated separate copies with differing parameters followed by a corrective update that unknowingly included a memory fault which resulted in the loss of the spacecraft.
Originally, the spacecraft was intended to observe Mars for 1 Martian year (approximately 2 Earth years). However, based on the vast amount of valuable science data returned, NASA had previously extended the mission three times.
Data from MGS have also been used to perform a test of the general relativistic Lense-Thirring effect which consists of a small precession of the orbital plane of a test particle moving around a central, rotating mass such as  a planet. The interpretation of the out-of-plane Root-Mean-Square (RMS) time series of MGS in terms of such a relativistic feature of motion by L. Iorio was criticized by K. Krogh; however, L. Iorio supported his thesis with new arguments.
On 6 December 2006 NASA released photos of two craters called Terra Sirenum and Centauri Montes which appear to show the presence of water on Mars at some point between 1999 and 2001. The pictures were produced by the Mars Global Surveyor and are quite possibly the spacecraft's final contribution to our knowledge of Mars and the question of whether life or water exists on the planet.
Hundreds of gullies were discovered that were formed from liquid water, possible in recent times.  These gullies occur on steep slopes and mostly in certain bands of latitude.
A few channels on Mars displayed inner channels that suggest sustained fluid flows.  The most well-known is the one in Nanedi Valles.  Another was found in Nirgal Vallis.
Image:Mars Global Surveyor 1.jpg|Surface of Mars taken by the Mars Global Surveyor and released on 16 October 2000.
Image:M1501228a.jpg|Surface of Mars taken by the Mars Global Surveyor.
Image:M1501228b.jpg|Surface of Mars taken by the Mars Global Surveyor.
Image:Moc2 166a msss.gif|Surface of Mars taken by the Mars Global Surveyor on 10 August 1999.
Image:Moc2 166b msss.gif|Surface of Mars taken by the Mars Global Surveyor on 10 August 1999.
Image:mgs_express.gif|The Mars Express spacecraft image taken by ''Mars Global Surveyor''. 
Image:mgs_odyssey.gif|The Mars Odyssey spacecraft image taken by ''Mars Global Surveyor''.
Image:Gully in Phaethontis.jpg|Group of gullies on north wall of crater that lies west of the crater Newton (41.3047 degrees south latitude, 192.89 east longitide).  Image taken with Mars Global Surveyor.
Image:Layers in a crater in Arabia.JPG|Layers in an old crater in Arabia, as seen by Mars Global Surveyor (MGS)Mars Global Surveyor  Layers may form from volcanoes, the wind, or by deposition under water. The craters on the left are pedestal craters. 
Image:Coprates layers.JPG|Layers in the canyon wall in Coprates quadrangle, as seen by Mars Global Surveyor.
Image:Banded terrain in Hellas.JPG|Banded or taffy-pull terrain in Hellas, as seen by Mars Global Surveyor.  Origin is unknown at present.
Image:Lava flow in Elysium.JPG|Lava flow in Elysium.  There are many lava flows in the Elysium quadrangle.  In this one, the lava flowed toward the upper right.  Image taken by Mars Global Surveyor.
Image:Bright rays in Memnonia.JPG|Bright rays caused by impact throwing out a bright lower layer.  Some bright layers contain hydrated minerals.  Picture taken with Mars Global Surveyor.  Location is Memnonia quadrangle.
Image:PIA05229 label.jpg|Mars Global Surveyor orbiter's photograph of Opportunty Rover's landing site showing "hole in one."
Image:Inverted channelsmgs.JPG|Inverted Channels in Aeolis quadrangle.  It is believed that stream channels became raised features after coarse materials were deposited and cemented.
Image:Distributaryfanmgs.jpg|Picture probably is of a delta that formed in a huge lake.  The area is of great interest to geologists.  Evidence of life may be found in this location.
Image:Parvonis Mons mgs.JPG|Pavonis Mons, located on the equator in Tharsis quadrangle.