Padua began in 1956 when the Franciscan Sisters, who cared for the parish primary school of St Anthony, were no longer able to cater for the large number of boys in their school. At the request of Sister Mary Bernadette O   Callaghan OSF, the Friars, who had taken charge of the Kedron parish since 1929, agreed to begin a separate school for boys.
Fr. Damian Nolan OFM, was appointed nominal Rector of the new school, which began with two lay teachers, Mrs Eileen Cameron and Mr John Fox, and 89 boys in Years 4, 5 and 6. The Friars began teaching in the school in 1957 with the arrival of Fr Alban Mitchell OFM, Fr Angelo O   Hagan OFM, and a little later Fr Odoric (Hugh) Fathers OFM.
Since that time, Padua has developed with many extensions and facilities. At present there are over 1200 students enrolled at the College.
In November 2006, former Rector and now current Chaplain Fr. John Boyd-Boland released his book "On A Cragged Hill - A Fifty Year Story" reliving the events and history of Padua College since its beginnings in 1956.
Sport is an important part of the college curriculum. The College is a member of the Associated Independent Colleges (AIC) and Combined Independent Colleges (CIC) whose sporting competitions usually take place on Saturdays. The member colleges of the AIC association are Marist College Ashgrove, Iona College, St Patrick's College, St Edmund's College, St Peters Lutheran College, St Laurence's College, Villanova College and Padua College. Members of the CIC association are Marist College Ashgrove, Iona College, St Patrick's College, St Laurence's College, Villanova College, Brisbane Grammar School, Brisbane Boys' College, The Southport School, Churchie, Gregory Terrace, Nudgee Junior College and Padua College. In 2009 Nudgee College (Boondall) and Moreton Bay Boys' College were welcomed into the CIC Association. 
Padua has traditionally been a great and strong rugby league school. Padua College has won the confraternity shield numerous times with their last title in 2005. With a proud and successful past, producing many famous 'players' like Paul Vautin, Shane Perry, David Stagg, David Shillington, David Bouveng and Dane Carlaw to name a few. The college has produced arguably the most NRL players and origin players to come from a school in Queensland, with five Origin players coming from Padua alone. Although in the AIC, rugby league is not played, Padua proves to be one of the stronger rugby union schools usually finishing in the top 4 out of the 8 school competition. Padua College also is a competitive soccer school. Padua's first XI in 1999 won the soccer aggregate in the second year of the AIC competition. Padua's first VI in 2001 and 2006 won volleyball premierships. Just recently, Padua's basketball teams have shown dominance in AIC. In 2009, Padua's First V, Second V and 16 A's all won premierships. Basketball proved to be Padua's most successful sport in 2009 coming away with three premierships and finishing in the top 4 in the AIC aggregate. In 2010, the basketball proved to be very strong once again with the First V winning the premiership for the second year in a row. In AIC, Padua's main arch rivals are SPC. Marist College Ashgrove also is a major rival as most of the boys from both schools know each other due to the fact that they live in the same north-west suburbs of Brisbane.
All boys attending the College are required to represent Padua in co-curricular activities. The College offers students the opportunity to participate in debating and public speaking events, chess competitions and music and drama programs. In addition, the College also enters teams into the Associated Independent Colleges competition for the following sports: Swimming, Water Polo, Cricket, Volleyball, Rugby, AFL, Football (soccer), Tennis, Basketball, Golf, Athletics. Chess and Cross Country.
All boys are encouraged to compete in the College's annual Inter-House Swimming, Cross Country and Athletics Carnivals. Padua College has its playing fields on a 73,000m2 site at Elliot Road Banyo for cricket, rugby and soccer. 
Padua has a well-equipped Music Department which includes a recording studio and sound-proof drum room. Tuition is available in all orchestral instruments. The orchestras at the college are generally of a high quality and a wide variety of instruments are available for student hire. Students are frequently encouraged to take up viola as the high prevalence of students who quit provides a large amount of instruments for hire. Students are encouraged to become members of the Concert Bands, Big Band, String Orchestras and Symphony Orchestra. All Year 8 students study piano and guitar as part of the ordinary school curriculum. Music is taught as a Board Subject in Years 9 through to 12. Every alternate year the boys and girls from Mt Alvernia and Padua College produce a stage musical. Recent productions have included ''Joseph and the Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat'', ''Les Miserables'', ''Jesus Christ Superstar'', and ''Oliver!''. The latest collaborative production between the two schools is ''High School Musical: The Musical!'', released in May 2010.
Padua College has an outdoor education centre called "Amaroo" at Pomona on the Sunshine Coast. Most year levels visit the camp every year. Amaroo is located on 68.8 hectares of lush rainforest and boasts luxurious facilities including a high and low ropes course and rock climbing walls. The outdoor education centre is located closely to Lake Cootharaba and canoeing is involved regularly.  
In addition to in-school facilities and the Outdoor Education Centre, the school owns 73,000m2 of playing fields on Elliot Rd, Banyo, which is used for rugby, soccer and athletics carnivals.
All boys are placed into house groups when they enrol at the college. Each house has approximately 250 boys in the secondary. These houses are:
House colours: red (for military fortitude and magnanimity) and White (for peace and sincerity).
House symbol: A hand - the pledge of Faith, sincerity and justice.
Motto:    Fuimus    (We have been)
House Champions: 2004, 2007
House colours: gold (for generosity), and Black (for constancy).
House symbol: An eel - the ancient symbol for wisdom. Young eels are known as "Griggs".
Motto:  "Ut prosim    (That I may be of use)
House Champions: 1996, 1997, 1998, 1999, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2005, 2006
House colours: blue (for loyalty and truth), and White (for peace and sincerity).
House symbol: A swan - a symbol for poets and the hieroglyphic of a musical person.
Motto:     Moriendo Modulor    (Dying, I sing)
House Champions: 2000
House colours: green (for prosperity, success and new beginnings), and White (for inner purity).
House symbol: An ostrich - a symbol of willing obedience and serenity.
Motto:     Valens et Volens    (Able and willing)
House Champions: 2008, 2009, 2010