2007 ''The Office''
Born William Charles Schneider in Los Angeles, he grew up in Coarsegold, California, a small town near Yosemite National Park. His grandparents, mother, and father were musicians, and he took a liking to music at a very early age. At 13, he received his first guitar from a Sears mail order catalog. He became a professional musician during his high school and college years. Upon his mother's remarriage, his name was changed to Chuck Ertmoed.
He decided to try life as a traveling musician and made his way on a global excursion, during which he changed his name again, to Creed Bratton. He traveled through Europe, Africa and the Middle East. Appearing with his group the Young Californians, he played guitar at a large folk festival in Israel. Fellow American and guitarist Warren Entner witnessed Bratton's performance, and asked him to give him a call when he got back to the United States. In 1966, they formed a partnership and recruited the remaining members needed for their group, the 13th Floor. Bratton played lead guitar, Rick Coonce played drums, Entner played rhythm guitar, and Kenny Fukomoto played bass. They recorded a demo and sent it to Dunhill, a new record company headed by Lou Adler.
Producers/songwriters P.F. Sloan and Steve Barri heard the demo and liked it. They needed new band members for a folk rock group that they had created in 1965. The 13th Floor lost their bass player to the draft during this time, and quickly recruited Rob Grill. They changed their name to The Grass Roots for prior name recognition and went straight to the top 10 with their first recording, "Let's Live for Today" in 1967. The group continued in their hit-making vein and toured the United States. Iconic hit songs such as "Midnight Confessions" cemented their standing as major contributors to the rock music scene.
The Grass Roots had top songwriters offering their best songs to them and they wrote many songs themselves. Bratton co-wrote "Beatin' Round the Bush", "No Exit", and "Hot Bright Lights", and self-composed "Dinner for Eight" and "House of Stone". Bratton played with the group on their first four albums     ''Let's Live for Today'', ''Feelings'', ''Golden Grass'', and ''Lovin' Things''     three of which charted and ''Golden Grass'' received a gold record certification. He took part in the first ten singles released, eight of which charted and ''Midnight Confessions'' received a gold record certification.
The Grass Roots played at the Fantasy Fair and Magic Mountain Music Festival on Sunday June 11, 1967 in the "summer of love" as their top ten hit "Let's Live For Today" was hitting the airwaves. This music festival is important because it occurred before the Monterey Pop Festival but did not have a movie to document it for the ages (see List of electronic music festivals). On Sunday October 27, 1968 they played at the San Francisco Pop Festival and then played at the Los Angeles Pop Festival and Miami Pop Festival in December of that year as their top ten hit "Midnight Confessions" was hitting the airwaves.
In 2001 and 2002, Bratton released three albums showcasing his solo recordings since the 1960s with the assistance of Peter White. In 2007, he presented an induction award to The Wrecking Crew at the Musicians' Hall of Fame. In 2008, he released another album of new music with producer Jon Tiven. In 2010, Bratton released another new album titled "Bounce Back" with producer Dave Way.
Bratton began to pursue an acting career in 1969. He has appeared in films such as ''Mask'' and ''Heart Like a Wheel''.  He is a current cast member (playing a fictional version of himself) on NBC's Emmy and SAG award winning ''The Office''. In 2008, he appeared in a short film with Kyle Gass titled "Just One Of The Gynos", which won an award for best short film at the 2008 Malibu International Film Festival. He appeared in the feature film ''Labor Pains'' in 2009. His latest film projects are ''The Ghastly Love of Johnny X'', written, produced and directed by Paul Bunnell, ''I Am Ben'', written, produced and directed by Mathew Brady and Gaelan Connell and ''Terri'' produced by David Guy Levy. ''Terri'' was selected by the Sundance Film Festival 2011 to appear in the US dramatic competition. It was one of only 16 films selected from 1,102 submissions to the US dramatic category.