The , also referred to as the '''Imperial Family''' or the '''Yamato Dynasty''', comprises those members of the extended family of the reigning Emperor of Japan who undertake official and public duties. Under the present Constitution of Japan, the emperor is the symbol of the state and unity of the people.  Other members of the imperial family perform ceremonial and social duties, but have no role in the affairs of government. The duties as an emperor are passed down the line to children and their children's children and so on.
The Japanese monarchy is the oldest continuous hereditary monarchy in the world. The imperial house recognizes 125 monarchs beginning with the legendary Emperor Jimmu (traditionally dated to February 11, 660 BC) and continuing up to the current emperor, Akihito; see its family tree. However, there is no historical evidence for the genealogical relationships, and in most cases even the existence of, the first 25 emperors.
The 1947 Imperial Household Law defines the imperial house as: the ; the ; the ; the ; the  and ; the imperial grandson who is heir apparent (''kotaison'',          ) and his consort; the male-line  and their consorts; the unmarried male-line ;  and their consorts; and the . The legitimate children and male line grandchildren of an emperor are        ''shinno'' (imperial princes) in the case of males and           ''naishinno'' (imperial princesses) in the case of females. More distant male line descendants are ''o'' (princes) or ''nyoo'' (princesses). 
After the removal of eleven collateral branches from the Imperial House in October 1947, the official membership of the imperial family has effectively been limited to the male line descendants of the Emperor Taisho, excluding females who married outside the imperial family and their descendants.
There are presently 23 members of the imperial family:
The following family tree shows the lineage of the current members of the Imperial family (living members in '''bold'''). Princesses who left the imperial family upon their marriage are indicated in ''italics'':
Under the terms of the 1947 Imperial Household Law, ''naishinno'' (imperial princesses) and ''nyoo'' (princesses) lose their titles and membership in the imperial family upon marriage, unless they marry the Emperor or another member of the imperial family. Three of the five daughters of Emperor Showa, the two daughters of Prince Mikasa, and most recently, the only daughter of the Emperor Akihito left the imperial family upon marriage, taking the surnames of their husbands. The eldest daughter of Emperor Showa married the eldest son of Prince Higashikuni Naruhiko in 1943. The Higashikuni family lost its imperial status along with the other collateral branches of the imperial family in October 1947. The living former imperial princesses are:
In addition to these former princesses, there are also several people of Imperial descent in the eleven cadet branches of the dynasty (Asaka, Fushimi, Higashi-Fushimi, Higashi-kuni, Kan'in, Kaya, Kitashirakawa, Kuni, Nashimoto, Takeda, and Yamashina) that left the imperial family in October 1947. The Showa emperor's eldest daughter, Higashikuni Morihito (Shigeko), and his third daughter, Takatukasa Toshimichi (Kazuko), died in 1961 and 1989, respectively.
Historically, the succession to the Chrysanthemum Throne has generally passed in male line of the imperial lineage. The imperial clan previously included specially designated collateral lines or shinnoke (princely houses), too. The surviving shinnoke and several other branches of the extended imperial clan (the oke) were reduced to commoner status in 1947.
Before the Meiji Restoration, Japan had eight female ''tenno'' or reigning empresses, all of them daughters of male line of the imperial clan. None ascended purely as a wife or as a widow of an emperor. None of these empresses married or gave birth after ascending the throne.
Article 2 of the Constitution of Japan provides that "The Imperial Throne shall be dynastic and succeeded to in accordance with the Imperial Household Law passed by the Diet." ''The Imperial Household Law of 1947'' enacted by the 92nd and last session of the Imperial Diet, retained the exclusion on female dynasts found in the 1889 law. The government of Prime Minister Yoshida Shigeru hastily cobbled together the legislation to bring the Imperial House in compliance with the American-written Constitution of Japan that went into effect in May 1947. In an effort to control the size of the imperial family, the law stipulates that only legitimate male descendants in the male line can be dynasts; that ''naishinno'' (imperial princesses) and ''nyoo'' (princesses) lose their status as imperial family-members if they marry outside the imperial family; that ''shinno'' (imperial princes), other than the crown prince, ''o'' (princes), unmarried imperial princesses and princesses, and the widows of imperial princes and princesses may, upon their own request or in the event of special circumstances, renounce their membership in the imperial family with approval of the Imperial House Council; and that the Emperor and other members of the imperial family may not adopt children.
Before September 2006, there was a potential succession crisis since no male child had been born into the imperial family since Prince Akishino in 1965. Following the birth of Princess Aiko, there was some public debate about amending the Imperial House Law to allow female descendants of an emperor and their descendants to succeed to the throne. In January 2005, Prime Minister Koizumi Junichiro appointed a special panel of judges, university professors, and civil servants to study changes to the Imperial House Law and to make recommendations to the government. On October 25, 2005, the commission recommended amending the law to allow females in the male line of imperial descent to succeed to the throne. Since the birth of a male son to another of Akihito's children the issue has been left in abeyance by both the public and successive governments. Also see Japanese Imperial succession controversy.
Historically, any male member of the Imperial Family was titled o by default, with shinno (      ; literally ''relative-prince'') and its female equivalent naishinno (         ; literally '' relative-princess'') being special titles granted by the Emperor. After the Meiji Restoration, the difference between o and shinno were altered. A shinno or naishinno was a legitimate Imperial Family member descended from an Emperor down to the great grandchild. The term "legitimate Imperial Family" excludes anyone not connected by a direct ''male line'' descent, as well as the descendants of anyone who renounced their membership in the Imperial Family, or were expelled from the Imperial Family. Shinno also included the heads of any of the shinnoke. A provision of law which never had an opportunity to be applied also stipulated that if the head of a shinnoke succeeded to the Chrysanthemum Throne, then his brothers would acquire the title of shinno, as well as their descendants (down to the grandchildren?). The Emperor could also specially grant the title of shinno to any o.
In 1947, the law was changed so that shinno only extended to the male-line grandchildren of an Emperor. The Imperial Family was also drastically pruned, disestablishing the oke and shinnoke. The consort of an o or shinno has the suffix -hi (   ) to o or shinno.