Warren is known to many as the voice behind the DX entrance music, and after this Jim Johnston (head of WWE music) became so impressed with Warren, that he offered him further vocal work. Over the course of the next four years, Warren recorded several songs for the WWF(E). In 1998, Warren made his television debut at WrestleMania XIV, performing a screeching version of "America The Beautiful" and the National Anthem, for which he was booed heavily, as the fans and national media in attendance considered disrespectful. However, it was revealed in 2002 that this disrespect was a WWE-instructed work meant to generate further heat on the DX stable.. Warren and the band also performed the DX ring entrance music later the same night as DX came to the ring, and again five months later at the 1998 SummerSlam. In 1999, Warren may have recorded parts of the music but not the vocals for "No Chance in Hell," which was used for the Royal Rumble pay-per-view (and would later become Mr. McMahon's theme song in various versions). The "No Chance In Hell" vocal track was done by Peter Bursuker at the studio of Jim Johnston in Stamford, CT WWE HQ. However, Warren does sing in the background of "No Chance In Hell"'s chorus. Later that year Warren recorded the vocals for Triple H's theme "My Time". This song was featured on the platinum album ''WWF The Music, Vol. 4''. He also recorded the ''Superstars'' theme from 1997. His last appearance was a cameo on the Run-D.M.C. "The Kings" music video, directed by David Sahadi. Warren, along with Bro-Kin, recorded an unreleased song for WWE's ''Tough Enough II'' which never made it onto the show.
In July 2007, Warren and Bro-Kin signed an agreement with Total Nonstop Action wrestling (TNA), which involved use of the band's music on TNA's TV shows (such as ''iMPACT!''), PPVs and DVDs worldwide. Their song "Low" was used as the theme for No Surrender 2007, "Separate" for Genesis 2007 and "For The Vein" for Final Resolution 2008. Further cuts of other songs appeared (and continue to do so) on various TNA video packages.
On March 5, 2009, Warren announced via  that the band had released their album "La Violencia" on iTunes, Amazon and Napster which is now available to purchase.
Warren returned to WWE headquarters in Stamford, Connecticut in August 2009 to record vocals to a new DX theme, coinciding with the return of the D-Generation X stable consisting of Triple H and Shawn Michaels, to active WWE competition.  The recording session saw Warren re-united in the studio with WWE music composer Jim Johnston for the first time in over 7 years.
Chris is now living in Rockland County, New York.