Ghansoli houses a mookambika temple which is one of the oldest landmarks in Ghansoli. The Railway link from Thane (  at 10.59&nbsp;km away from Thane) to Vashi/Nerul has greatly increased accessibility to Ghansoli. Being a newly developed node,the locality is a good place to live with apartments available at low rates. Shetakari Shishkan Sanstheche Vidyalaya is a school in Ghansoli village. ASP English Convent High School and  Tilak International school are also working in Ghansoli city.
Among the other religious places of worship is a mosque close to the railway station and a Roman Catholic church in Ghansoli village called Our Lady of the Forsaken Church.There is also a very big ashram for Sikh community very close to sector-1.
Ghansoli is one of the many gaothans taken up for development by Cidco. Presently the present Ghansoli city is divided into 2 parts Ghansoli gaon (village) & the developed Ghansoli sectors. While developed Ghansoli sectors hosts many modern buildings, the older gaon still retains a rural look.
Not much is known about the history of Ghansoli ( A small fishermans village that it was..) . however the village was a part of the Salt Satyagraha movement. During the satyagraha movement as many of the national leaders like Dr Rajendra Prasad, Kasturba Gandhi, Sarojini Naidu assembled in ghansoli gaon. gathered salt from Airoli & Diva gaon and sold them in Thane Market
BUSES : Ghansoli is well connected by BEST buses. One can reach Mulund / Nahur and Navi Mumbai using BEST bus service. Buses with AS prefixed to their route numbers are air-conditioned (AC) buses. NMMT plys buses between Thane and Ghansoli. It may be noted that NMMT bus frequency are low with the exception of AC Volvo bus number 123.
Commercial taxis with yellow number plates, ferry passengers on their way to Mumbai. They pick up passengers from Sector 5, 8 and 10 bus stops. It is advisable to negotiate the fare before boarding. It is not advisable to board such taxis early in the morning or late at night. Avoid boarding private cars (white number plates) and vehicles registered outside Mumbai (MH06 and above). 
BEST Bus frequency: The frequency of BEST buses going towards Ghansoli from Powai / SEEPZ greatly reduces after 8:30PM. The only bus available would be 512 from Mulund to Nerul with intervals of 20 minutes. NMMT AC Volvo 123 is the only bus you can get after 9PM from Powai / SEEPZ / Borivili. The best way to reach Ghansoli after 9PM is to reach Bandup Sonapur Junction (near Nirmal Lifestyle) and take bus 512 or private vehicles going towards Ghansoli. You can also come by Auto to Airoli toll bridge and take an auto.
Auto and Taxi: Autos and taxis are available at Airoli toll bridge for Mumbai. 
TRAINS: Local trains are available to Thane and Vashi / Nerul from Ghansoli railway station every 15&nbsp;minutes.
These are pure vegetarian restaurants with affordable snack and meal options.
Courier service companies have small offices in Ghansoli e.g. The Professional Couriers