Historically the islet has been referred to in Irish folklore, and since the late sixteenth century it has been noted in written records, although it is likely that some northern Atlantic fishing crews knew of the rock before these historical accounts were made. In the twentieth century the location of the islet became a major concern due to oil and fishing rights, spurring continued debate amongst several European nations.
Rockall has also been a point of interest for adventurers and amateur radio operators who variously in the past have landed on or occupied the islet for up to several months, although fewer than twenty individuals have ever been confirmed to have landed on Rockall.
In 1956 the British scientist James Fisher referred to the island as "the most isolated small rock in the oceans of the world."
The ownership of Rockall is disputed, as are the exploration and fishing rights on the surrounding Rockall Bank and Trough, and the Rockall Plateau. The islet is claimed by Denmark (for the Faroe Islands), Iceland, Ireland and the United Kingdom. All four governments have made submissions to the commission set up under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. The issue will be included in the provisional agenda of the next meeting of the commission to be held in New York from 7 March to 21 April 2011 and recommendations pursuant to Article 76 of the Convention will be made.
The United Kingdom, for administrative purposes, initially treated Rockall as part of Inverness-shire, under the terms of the Island of Rockall Act 1972. Subsequent UK Acts of Parliament have affirmed the islet's position as part of the Comhairle nan Eilean Siar council area for local government functions.
 (although ''rocail'' can also be translated as "tearing" or "ripping"). There may also be an etymological link with the Old Norse 'hrukka'.
The first literary reference to the island, where it is called ''Rokol'', is found in Martin Martin's ''A Description of the Western isles of Scotland'' published in 1703. In the book the author gives an account of a voyage to the archipelago  of St. Kilda and its proximity to Rockall: "... and from it lies Rokol, a small rock sixty leagues to the westward of St. Kilda; the inhabitants of this place call it 'Rokabarra'."
Dutch mapmakers P. Plancius and C. Claesz show an island 'Rookol' northwest of Ireland in the their ''Map of New France and the Northern Atlantic Ocean'' (Amsterdam, c. 1594). The name 'Rocabarraigh' is also used in Scottish Gaelic folklore for a mythical rock which is supposed to appear three times, the last being at the end of the world: "''Nuair a thig Rocabarra ris, is dual gun teid an Saoghal a sgrios''" (When Rocabarra returns, the world will likely come to be destroyed).
It has most recently been suggested that the name is really Old Norse, and derives from the word ''*rok'' (as in Icelandic ''rok''), meaning 'foaming sea', and ''kollR'', meaning 'bald head', a word which appears in other local names in Scandinavian-speaking areas.Coates (1990) pp. 49   54, esp. 51-2. The Gaelic name would then be derivable from the Norse form.
The islet of Rockall makes up the eroded core of an extinct volcano (a volcanic plug), and is one of the few pinnacles of the surrounding Helen's Reef. It is located , or 162.7&nbsp;nmi,Gob a' Ghaill, Soay, St Kilda approximately Mean Low Water Springs/Mean High Water Springs ETRS89/WGS84 57  49   40.8   N 8  38   59.7   W, grid reference NA 05518,01471. Distance to Rockall approximately 301.370km (187.263mi) (162.728nmi). To determine the coordinates of the most likely closest points, I used Memory-Map 1:25,000. Measured the distances by using the Geoscience Australia website; to determine which of the points is the most probable closest point. Did the same for Hirta and North Uist. Checking these grid references on O.S 1:25 000 Explorer 454 and 460 paper maps, will confirm the accuracy of the grid references. O.S Coordinate transformer will confirm the accuracy of the latitudes-longitudes. Regarding the distances stated. They are based on the assumption, that the coordinates for Rockall in this article are correct. west of the islands of St Kilda, Scotland, and 430 kilometres (267.2&nbsp;mi)Method: With the Ordnance Survey Ireland, Discovery, Donegal, 1, 1:50 000, 3rd Edition, 2005 map. Used a ruler to measure grid references, at the most likely closest points. Imputed the grid references into Ordnance Survey Ireland's Co-ordinate converter, to obtain the latitudes and longitudes. Then used the Geoscience Australia website, to determine which of the points is closest. Rinardalliff Point, Bloody Foreland, Low Water Mark, approximately grid reference B 81037,33888 = ETRS89 55  9   6.52   N 8  17   53.472   W. Distance to Rockall approximately 429.948km (267.157mi). With my GPS and Google Earth, I determined that Bloody Foreland is the closest part of mainland Ireland to Rockall. Having checked the coast down to Mayo. My GPS displays FL.W.G.7.5s Lighted Navaid at WGS84 55.15832  N 8.28335  W (55  9   29.952   N 8  17   0.06   W), on Bloody Foreland. This is possibly the Light Beacon shown on the map. Distance to Rockall approximately 430.178km (267.300mi). However, the coordinates seem to be about 60 metres from Light Beacon shown on the map. Tory Island closest point, approximately grid reference B 84093,47575 = ETRS89 55  16   29.486   N 8  15   3.684   W. Distance to Rockall approximately 423.296km (263.024mi). north-west of Donegal in Ireland. The surrounding elevated seabed is called the Rockall Bank, lying directly south from an area known as the Rockall Plateau. It is separated from the Western Isles by the Rockall Trough, itself located within the Rockall Basin. (Also known as the "Hatton Rockall Basin".) The Anton Dohrn Seamount is a submarine elevation on Rockall Trough about halfway between Rockall and the Outer Hebrides.
Cold-water coral mounds have been identified in the region, They are currently being researched.  Rockall lies near the Darwin Mounds, deep-water coral mounds about 185&nbsp;km (100&nbsp;nmi or 115&nbsp;mi) north-west of Cape Wrath.
These corals are long-lived and slow-growing; a justification for designating Rockall and the Rockall as a Marine Protected Area.   
Rockall is mapped by the Ordnance Survey, but as it is officially outside the OSGB grid it is usually shown as an inset without gridlines on a mainland sheet. The nearest point on land from Rockall is , or 162.7&nbsp;nmi, east at the uninhabited Scottish island of Soay in the St Kilda archipelago. The nearest inhabited area lies 303.3 kilometres (188.4&nbsp;mi), or 163.8 nmi, east at Hirta, the largest island in the St Kilda group, which is populated intermittently at a single military base. The nearest permanently inhabited settlement is , or 198.1&nbsp;nmi, west of the headland of Aird an Runair, near the crofting township of Hogha Gearraidh on the island of North Uist at  )}}. North Uist is part of the ''Na h-Eileanan Siar'' council area of Scotland.
The island's only permanent macroorganism inhabitants are common periwinkles and other marine molluscs. Small numbers of seabirds, mainly fulmars, northern gannets, black-legged kittiwakes, and common guillemots, use the rock for resting in summer, and gannets and guillemots occasionally breed successfully if the summer is calm with no storm waves washing over the rock. In total there have been just over 20 species of seabird and 6 other animal species observed (including the aforementioned molluscs) on or near the islet.
The exact position of Rockall and the size and shape of the Rockall Bank was first charted in 1831 by Captain A.T.E. Vidal, a Royal Navy surveyor. The first scientific expedition to Rockall was led by Miller Christie in 1896 when the Royal Irish Academy sponsored a study of the flora and fauna.
The RV ''Celtic Explorer'' surveyed the Rockall Bank and North West of Donegal in 2003.
Rockall is made of a type of peralkaline granite that is relatively rich in sodium and potassium. Within this granite are darker bands richer in the alkali pyroxene mineral aegirine and the alkali amphibole mineral riebeckite. The dark bands are a type of granite that geologists have named "rockallite", although use of this term is now discouraged. In 1975, a new mineral was discovered on Rockall. The mineral is called bazirite, (chemical composition BaZrSi3O9), named after the elements barium and zirconium. Rockall forms part of the deeply eroded Rockall Igneous Centre that was formed as part of the North Atlantic Igneous Province, approximately 55 million years ago, when the ancient continent of Laurasia was split apart by plate tectonics. Greenland and Europe separated and the north-east Atlantic Ocean was formed between them.''Igneous Rocks of the British Isles'' edited by D.S. Sutherland, 1982, Wiley
There have been disasters on the neighbouring Hasselwood Rock and Helen's Reef (the latter was not named until 1830).
There have also been reports in national newspapers in both Ireland and the United Kingdom that at least two unexploded bombs from World War II lie within a 250-metre radius of Rockall. At present, no attempts have been made to remove them.
The United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea states,    Rocks which cannot sustain human habitation or economic life of their own shall have no exclusive economic zone or continental shelf.    
The convention was ratified by all four states in dispute over the Rockall Plateau     Iceland on 26 January 1985, Ireland on 21 January 1996, the United Kingdom on 25 July 1997 and Denmark on 16 November 2004. 
The twenty-fourth session of the United Nations Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf (CLCS) was held in New York from 10 August to 11 September 2009. Iceland,
On 7 November 1988 the United Kingdom and Ireland agreed a delineation which ignores Rockall's existence and have granted exploration rights.
Rockall is within the Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) claimed by the United Kingdom.
The nearest (seasonally) inhabited land to Rockall is Hirta, and the nearest permanently inhabited land is North Uist, both of which are in the United Kingdom (see above). In 1997 the United Kingdom ratified the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. In doing so it relinquished its right to claim an exclusive economic zone (EEZ) of 200&nbsp;nmi (370&nbsp;km) extending onward from the rock, as the agreement states that ''"Rocks which cannot sustain human habitation or economic life of their own shall have no exclusive economic zone or continental shelf"''. However, as Rockall lies within 200&nbsp;nmi (370&nbsp;km) of both St Kilda and North Uist, the island itself remains within the EEZ of the United Kingdom and, as such, under international law the UK can claim "   the sovereignty of the coastal state in relation to the exploitation, conservation and management of natural and living resources fishery and mineral resources" of the rock itself and an area of territorial waters extending for  around it. Furthermore, the United Kingdom and Ireland have signed an EEZ boundary agreement which includes Rockall in the United Kingdom area.
Rockall, and a large sea area around it, was declared as coming under the jurisdiction of Scots law under the Scottish Adjacent Waters Boundaries Order () in 1999. This sea area is co-terminous with the UK's EEZ.
The date for the earliest recorded landing on the island is often given as 8 July 1810, when a Royal Navy officer named Basil Hall led a small landing party from the frigate  to the summit.  However, research by James Fisher of the 1955 landing (see below) in the log of the Endymion and elsewhere, indicates that the true date for this first landing was Sunday 8 September 1811.
The ''Endymion'' was taking depth measurements around Rockall when it drifted away in a haze. The expedition made a brief attempt to find the frigate in the haze, but soon gave up and returned to Rockall. After the haze became a fog, the lookout sent to the top of Rockall spotted the ship again, but it turned away from Rockall before the expedition in their boats reached it. Finally, just before sunset, the frigate was again spotted from the top of Rockall, and the expedition was able to get back on board. The crew of the ''Endymion'' reported that they had been searching for five or six hours, firing their cannon every ten minutes. Hall related this experience and other adventures in a book entitled ''Fragment of Voyages and Travels Including Anecdotes of a Naval Life''.
The next landing was accomplished by a Mr Johns of , whilst the ship was on a mission, from June and August 1862, to make a survey of the sea bed prior to the laying of a transatlantic telegraph cable. Johns managed to gain foothold on the island, but failed to reach the summit.
On 18 September 1955 at precisely 10.16 am, in what would be the final territorial expansion of the British Empire, the island was officially annexed by the British Crown when Lieutenant-Commander Desmond Scott RN, Sergeant Brian Peel RM, Corporal AA Fraser RM, and James Fisher (a civilian naturalist and former Royal Marine), were deposited on the island by a Royal Navy helicopter from  (coincidentally named after the man who first charted the island). The team cemented in a brass plaque on Hall's Ledge and hoisted the Union Flag to stake the UK's claim. The inscription on the plaque read:
In 2010, it was revealed that the plaque had gone missing. An Englishman, Andy Strangeway, announced his intention to land on the island and affix a replacement plaque in June 2010.
The formal annexation of Rockall was announced by the Admiralty on 21 September 1955. The initial incentive for this had little to do with any territorial claim to rights of exploitation of the seas around the island. It was the test firing of the UK's first guided nuclear weapon, the American-made Corporal missile. The missile was to be launched from South Uist and over the North Atlantic. The Ministry of Defence was concerned that the unclaimed island would provide a unique opportunity for the Soviet Union to spy on the test by placing surveillance equipment on the island; and so in April 1955 a request was sent to the Admiralty to seize the island, and declare UK sovereignty lest it become an outpost for foreign observers.
On 10 February 1972, the Island of Rockall Act received Royal Assent to make the island administratively part of the Isle of Harris (St Kilda being administratively part of Harris), in what was then Inverness-shire, fully incorporating it into the United Kingdom. A navigational beacon was later installed on the island and the UK declared that no ship would be allowed within a  radius of the rock. In United Kingdom law, it now falls administratively under the Outer Hebrides.
Former SAS member and survival expert Tom McClean lived on the island from 26 May 1985 to 4 July 1985 to affirm the UK's claim to the island.
Rockall 2011 is an expedition to be undertaken by Nick Hancock in order to raise money for the charity Help for Heroes. The challenge is to land on Rockall and survive solo for 60 days thereby setting a record for the longest occupation of Rockall. It is proposed that this landing will coincide with the 200th anniversary of the first recorded landing on Rockall, by the Royal Navy in 1811.
The Faroe Islands are an autonomous region of the Kingdom of Denmark. Since 1948 they have had self-government in almost all matters except defence and foreign affairs. Consequently their interests in Rockall are represented by Denmark. On their behalf, Denmark claims continental shelf rights in the Hatton-Rockall area.
A communique issued by the Prime Minister's Office on 7 May 1985 announced the designation of not only the seabed in the immediate vicinity of the Faroes but also a vast area of the Rockall plateau to the south west. The press release which accompanied the communique indicated that the legal basis of this designation was the assumption that ''"the Faroe Islands are part of the microcontinent"'' formed by the ''"Faroes-Rockall Plateau"'', an ''"elevated plain with its summit in the Faroe Islands"''.
Iceland does not claim the rock itself, considering it irrelevant as far as delimitation of EEZs and continental shelf is concerned. Iceland however claims an extended continental shelf in the Hatton-Rockall area.
Iceland considers St Kilda to be ''"a minuscule, effectively uninhabited, islet, categorized under article 121(3) of the Law of the Sea Convention"''. Furthermore St Kilda lies outside the British territorial sea limit. Therefore it is not an ''"equitable basepoint for an equidistant line"''.
Iceland ratified UNCLOS in 1985; it was the first Western country to do so. A regulation was issued by the government in that same year outlining the area where Iceland claimed continental shelf rights for itself; the regulation
In 2001, Iceland began working on its submission to the Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf; it is scheduled to finish in 2007. The most important aspect of this work is to survey the entire ocean floor in the areas claimed outside the EEZ and, in Iceland's case, a part of the area inside the EEZ as well. In all, 1.3&nbsp;million square kilometres (500,000 sq mi) have been surveyed by Icelandic marine research institutions for this purpose, an area 13 times larger than the land area of Iceland. The commission does however not make proposals regarding areas that are claimed by two or more states unless they have already reached an agreement on its division. Therefore Iceland's submission is expected to deal only with the area that just Iceland has claimed and not the Hatton-Rockall area. Iceland also hosted an informal meeting of all parties to the dispute in 2001. It was the first such meeting regarding the dispute where all four countries participated.
 (the islet being nearer to the Republic of Ireland than to the island of Great Britain) while the UK's claim was based on Rockalls's distance from nearby islands. Rockall is 430 kilometres (267 miles) from Donegal in the Republic of Ireland. Ireland regards Rockall as merely an uninhabitable rock without any territorial waters and thus irrelevant when determining the boundaries of the exclusive economic zones.
According to a Written Parliamentary Answer from the Irish Minister of Foreign Affairs on 14 June 1990, an agreement
More recently, on 11 June 2003, the Irish Minister for Communications, Marine and Natural Resources gave a Written Parliamentary Answer, stating: "Ireland claims an extended continental shelf ... up to more than 500 nautical miles (926&nbsp;km), particularly in the Hatton   Rockall area".
As the United Nations
Independent Irish politician Sean Dublin Bay Rockall Loftus (1927   2010), a former Lord Mayor of Dublin (1995   1996), long advocated that Ireland make a territorial claim on Rockall, and enthusiastically supported Greenpeace's occupation. Loftus, who had changed his name by deed poll to "Sean Dublin Bay Loftus" to highlight his campaign for the protection of the environment of Dublin Bay, changed it again, adding "Rockall" to demonstrate his commitment to an Irish claim on the islet.
In 1997, the environmentalist organisation Greenpeace occupied the islet for a short time as a publicity stunt, calling it Waveland, to protest against oil exploration. Greenpeace declared the island to be a "new Global State" (in this case qualifying it as a micronation) called '''Waveland''', and offered citizenship to anyone willing to take their pledge of allegiance. The British Government's response was simply to give them permission to be there, and otherwise ignore them. Indeed, when asked, the Home Office responded that since Rockall was part of the United Kingdom, and since the UK was a free country, Greenpeace were perfectly entitled to be at Rockall.
Ongoing talks have been held over the last five years with the aim of reaching an agreement which will end the dispute over territorial rights to Rockall-Hatton basin.
Representatives from the UK, Ireland, Iceland, and Denmark (the last acting on behalf of the Faroe Islands), met in Reykjavik, Iceland in September 2007
Ownership of the rock itself did not form part of the negotiations.
In November 2007, talks were held in Copenhagen. Here a template for a deal was secured by Irish, Danish, British and Icelandic diplomats.
As a follow-up to Copenhagen, the Government of Ireland was to host negotiations. They were due to commence in January 2008, but were postponed because of elections in the Faroe Islands. The talks are hoped to bring the four nations closer to reaching an agreement over the Rockall-Hatton basin. It is understood a final deal is not likely to be agreed at the Dublin meeting.
The 1955 British landing, complete with the trappings such as the hoisting the flag, caused a certain amount of popular amusement, with some seeing it as a sort of farcical end to imperial expansion. The satirists Flanders and Swann sang a successful piece entitled "Rockall", playing on the similarity of the word to the vulgar expression "Fuckall". Similarly, in ''The Goon Show'' episode "Napoleon's Piano" Seagoon made a less-than-triumphant landfall on Rockall with the titular piano. Rockall was the launching site for the prototype "Jet propelled guided NAAFI" in the Goon Show episode of the same name. ''Musty Mind'', the parody of ''Mastermind'' on the lunchtime radio programme of Noel Edmonds featured a send-up subject, ''The Cultural and Social History of Rockall''. And the cast of ''I'm Sorry, I'll Read That Again'' claimed to have spent the break between two series of the programme making a "triumphant tour of Rockall".
In literature, it has been suggested that Rockall is the rock which forms the setting for William Golding's novel ''Pincher Martin''. '' '', a 1957 novel by T. H. White, is set inside Rockall. William Sarjeant's series of fantasy novels, ''The Perilous Quest for Lyonesse'' is set in an imaginary version of Rockall. Ben Fogle made a claim to Rockall by sticking a post-it note onto the rock bearing the words "Property of Ben Fogle" in his book ''Offshore''.
In Steve Bell's ''Guardian'' cartoon strip, one of the characters a penguin annexes and claims Rockall as the "People's Republic of Rockall".
In music, Irish rebel music band the Wolfe Tones released a track called "Rock on Rockall" that argues against the supposed British ownership of the rock and supports an Irish claim.
In Part Seven of his novel,  The Cruel Sea, author Nicolas Monsarrat has the fictitious British naval corvette ''Saltash'' receive a message ordering it to "Remain on patrol in vicinity of Rockall" as the end of the Second World War approaches.