 0) while on the right side of the MPP the curve is falling (dP/dV 
This method is the most common. The algorithm perturbs the operating voltage in a given direction and samples dP/dV. If dP/dV is positive, then the algorithm knows it adjusted the voltage in the direction toward the MPP. It keeps adjusting the voltage in that direction until dP/dV is negative.
P&O algorithms are easy to implement, but they sometimes result in oscillations around the MPP in steady-state operation. They also have slow response times and can even track in the wrong direction under rapidly changing atmospheric conditions.
This method uses the PV array's incremental conductance dI/dV to compute the sign of dP/dV. INC tracks rapidly changing irradiance conditions more accurately than the P&O method. However, like the P&O method, it can produce oscillations and be confused by rapidly changing atmospheric conditions. Another disadvantage is that its increased complexity increases computational time and slows down the sampling frequency.
This method makes use of the fact that the ratio of maximum power point voltage and the open circuit voltage is 0.76. The problem with this method arises from the fact that it requires momentarily setting the PV array current to 0 to measure the array's open circuit voltage. The array's operating voltage is then set to 76% of this measured value. But during the time the array is disconnected, the available energy is wasted. It has also been found that while 76% of the open circuit voltage is a very good approximation, it does not always coincide with the Maximum power point.
The fill factor, more commonly known by its abbreviation ''FF'', is a parameter which, in conjunction with the open circuit voltage and short circuit current of the panel, determines the maximum power from a solar cell. Fill factor is defined as the ratio of the maximum power from the solar cell to the product of Voc and Isc.
PV cells have a single operating point where the values of the current (I) and Voltage (V) of the cell result in a maximum power output. These values correspond to a particular load resistance, which is equal to V/I as specified by Ohm's Law. The power P is given by ''P=V*I''. A PV cell has an exponential relationship between current and voltage, and the '''maximum power point''' (MPP) occurs at the knee of the curve where d''P''/d''V''=0. At this point the characteristic resistance equals that of the load resistance.
Maximum power point trackers utilize different types of control circuit or logic to search for this point and thus to allow the converter circuit to extract the  maximum power available from a cell.
Traditional solar inverters perform MPPT for an entire array as a whole. In such systems the same current, dictated by the inverter, flows though all panels in the string. But because different panels have different IV curves, i.e. different MPPs (due to manufacturing tolerance, partial shading, etc.) this architecture means some panels will be performing below their MPP, resulting in the loss of energy. 
Some companies (see power optimizer) are now placing peak power point converters into individual panels, allowing each to operate at peak efficiency despite uneven shading, soiling or electrical mismatch.
At night, an off-grid PV power system uses batteries to supply its loads. Although the battery pack voltage when fully charged may be close to the PV array's peak power point, this is unlikely to be true at sunrise when the battery is partially discharged. Charging may begin at a voltage considerably below the array peak power point, and a MPPT can resolve this mismatch.
When the batteries in an off-grid system are full and PV production exceeds local loads, a MPPT can no longer operate the array at its peak power point as the excess power has nowhere to go. The MPPT must then shift the array operating point away from the peak power point until production exactly matches demand. (An alternative approach commonly used in spacecraft is to divert surplus PV power into a resistive load, allowing the array to operate continuously at its peak power point.)
In a grid-tied photovoltaic system, the grid is essentially a battery with near infinite capacity. The grid can always absorb surplus PV power, and it can cover shortfalls in PV production (e.g., at night). Batteries are thus needed only for protection from grid outages. The MPPT in a grid tied PV system will always operate the array at its peak power point unless the grid fails when the batteries are full and there are insufficient local loads. It would then have to back the array away from its peak power point as in the off-grid case (which it has temporarily become).
MPPTs can be designed to drive an electric motor without a storage battery. They provide significant advantages, especially when starting a motor under load. This can require a starting current that is well above the short-circuit rating of the PV panel. A MPPT can step the panel's relatively high voltage and low current down to the low voltage and high current needed to start the motor. Once the motor is running and its current requirements have dropped, the MPPT will automatically increase the voltage to normal. In this application, the MPPT can be seen as an electrical analogue to the transmission in a car; the low gears provide extra torque to the wheels until the car is up to speed.