Dr. Bradford is Chiricahua Apache Indian and served as Ambassador to the United States for the Miami Tribe of Indians of Indiana. He is a former Professor at Indiana University School of Law - Indianapolis, and recently completed a Masters in Business Administration at the Warrington College of Business Administration at the University of Florida. In addition he previously served as counsel to the Miami Tribe of Indians of Indiana.
Bradford graduated ''summa cum laude'' from the University of Miami School of Law, where he served as project editor of the ''University of Miami Law Review'' and was a member of the Order of the Coif. He also received an LL.M. from Harvard University and a Ph.D. from Northwestern University. He is Chiricahua Apache Indian and served as Ambassador to the United States for the Miami Tribe of Indians of Indiana.
Bradford joined the faculty of Indiana University School of Law Indianapolis in the fall of 2002 after serving in the Army Reserve. He also served at the War Gaming and Simulation Center, National Defense University, Fort McNair, Virginia, and was a "self-proclaimed" adviser to Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Shalikashvili. At Indiana University, he specialized in teaching international law, federal Indian law, property, national security/foreign relations law, and the laws of armed conflict.
Before resigning from Indiana University (see below), he was one of fewer than 15 tenured or tenure-track academic legal faculty members of American Indian origin in the U.S.
In 2005 Bradford accused Professor Florence Roisman of opposing his tenure because of some of his conservative views. The official reason given was that Prof. Bradford was "uncollegial." The feud became a national one when Fox News and ''FrontPage magazine.com'', among others, continually reported on the controversy.  Bradford claimed that his support of the Iraq War and his refusal to sign a letter in defense of Ward Churchill were contributing factors. "The presumption was that I've got to sign this thing because I'm an Indian, but I can't do that," he said.
In an open letter in July 2005, Professor Mary Harter Mitchell defended the faculty's posiiton and claimed that Bradford had been "slandering me for some time, and now that the Indianapolis Star has added libel to slander." Mitchell stated that she had never voted against granting Tenure to Bradford and that Bradford was not even elidigble for Tenure at the time he went public with his claims. She also argued that the  deliberations by the school   s Promotions and Tenure Committee are confidential and claim that "Bradford   s statements on this matter must therefore have been either concocted by him or derived from persons who have violated a core professional ethic of confidentiality." She also wrote that Bradford's "continual slander of me (and Prof. Roisman) to students, to colleagues, and now to the general public, an intention to blame his predicament on particular persons whom he has demonized with a frightening degree of out-of-control fury and distortion."
However, on Thursday August 25, Indiana State Representative Jeffrey Thompson spoke with Dr. Charles R. Bantz, Chancellor of Indiana University Purdue University Indianapolis, during which Chancellor Bantz reportedly admitted that Bradford was eligible for tenure, had correctly applied for tenure, and that he had an outstanding case for tenure. In early September 2005, Thompson stated that Chancellor Bantz had ordered IU-Indy Law School to vote on tenure for Bradford.
The previously non-binding poll was 10-5 in favor which meant that five professors believed that Mr. Bradford had a low probability of receiving tenure. Although unanimity is not required for a faculty to award tenure, such a significant dissent might have been seen as a sign that the faculty was unsure of Bradford's fitness, especially since university administrations rarely grant tenure to someone against whom one-third of the department has voted. 
Critics contrasted Bradford's publication record to that of Professor Mary Harter Mitchell, who with Roisman had filed an "ethics complaint" against Bradford. Mitchell has only one small book of case law published in 1982 and two scholarly articles, the most recent of which was published in 1987 - meaning that Bradford had published ten times more legal scholarship than Professor Mitchell had in only one-eighth the time. It was also claimed that Mitchell's licence to practice law in Indiana was suspended in 2003 for cause (and remained suspended as of September 2005).
There appears to be utterly no basis for this claim, however.  The Indiana Supreme Court's official Roll of Attorneys records indicate there were no pending or prior disciplinary actions against Prof. Mitchell, who died on November 4, 2009.
See http://hats.courts.state.in.us/rollatty/roa2_out.jsp?sel=20
It was soon discovered that Bradford many of the postings in support of Bradford on Indy Law Net were in fact written by Bradford himself under alternate accounts (all of the messages came from the same IP address). Bradford later admitted to using fake names to post    cheap shots, schoolyard bickering.    In October 2005, Bradford stated that Judge David J. Dreyer of Marion Superior Court had issued a temporary restraining order barring professors from speaking ill of or taking any actions against Bradford. However, Court records and sources both indicate that Bradford never filed for any sort of injunction and that no restraining order was ever issued. 
Bradford's claims that he had served in the Army infantry from 1994 to 2001, that he had been a major in the Special Forces, and that he had been awarded a Silver Star, also came under scrutiny. Ret. Army Lieut. Col. Keith R. Donnelly and ''Indianapolis Star'' columnist Ruth Holladay both expressed concern about Bradford's claims and independently requested Bradford   s military records. In a subsequent column, Holladay reported that while Bradford did serve in Army Reserve from 1995 to 2001, he saw no active duty, was never in the infantry, had won no awards, was discharged as a second lieutenant.
On December 2, 2005, Susanah Mead, interim dean of the law school, released the following statement: "Professor William Bradford has resigned his position as associate professor at the IU School of Law     Indianapolis effective January 1, 2006 to pursue other employment opportunities and interests."
In the fall of 2005 Bradford served as a visiting professor at The College of William & Mary; at this time his profile said he was an Associate Judge Pro Tempore, Court of Appeals, for the Fort Sill Apache Nation. He then considered joining the visiting faculty of Victoria University of Wellington School of Law in New Zealand in Spring 2006.
William Bradford is currently seeking his MBA at the Warrington College of Business, the business school of the University of Florida.