Vassar was the first of the Seven Sisters colleges, which were strictly for women. It was founded by its namesake, brewer Matthew Vassar, in 1861 in the Hudson Valley, about 70&nbsp;mi (115&nbsp;km) north of New York City.  The first person appointed to the Vassar faculty was the astronomer Maria Mitchell, in 1865. Vassar adopted coeducation in 1969. However, immediately following World War II, Vassar accepted a very small number of male students on the G.I. Bill. Because Vassar's charter '''prohibited''' male matriculants, the graduates were given diplomas via the University of the State of New York. These were reissued under the Vassar title after the school formally became co-ed.
Vassar's campus, also an arboretum, is 1,000 acres (4&nbsp;km  ) marked by period and modern buildings. The great majority of students live on campus. The renovated library has unusually large holdings for a college of its size. It includes special collections of Albert Einstein, Mary McCarthy, and Elizabeth Bishop.
In its early years, Vassar was associated with the social elite of the Protestant establishment. E. Digby Baltzell writes that "upper-class WASP families educated their children at colleges such as Harvard, Princeton, Yale, and Vassar." Before becoming President of the United States, Franklin Delano Roosevelt was a Trustee.
In recent freshman classes, minority students have comprised up to 27% of matriculants. International students from over 45 countries comprise 8% of the student body.  In May 2007, falling in with its commitment to diverse and equitable education, Vassar returned to a need-blind admissions policy wherein students are admitted by their academic and personal qualities, without regard to financial status.
Roughly 2,400 students attend Vassar. About 60% come from public high schools, and 40% come from private schools (both independent and religious). The overall female-to-male ratio is about 60:40, slightly above the standard for a liberal arts college. More than 85% of graduates pursue advanced study within five years of graduation. They are taught by more than 270 faculty members, virtually all of whom hold terminal degrees in their fields.
Vassar president Frances D. Fergusson served for two decades. She retired in the spring of 2006, and was succeeded by Catharine Bond Hill, former provost at Williams College.
Vassar confers the A.B. degree in more than 50 majors, including the Independent Major, in which a student may design a major, as well as various interdisciplinary and multidisciplinary fields of study. Students also participate in such programs as the Self-Instructional Language Program (SILP) which offers courses in Hindi, Irish/Gaelic, Korean, Portuguese, Swahili, Swedish, Turkish, and Yiddish. Vassar has a flexible curriculum intended to promote breadth in studies. While each field of study has specific requirements for majors, the only universal requirements for graduation are proficiency in a foreign language, a quantitative course, and a freshman writing course. Students are also strongly encouraged to study abroad, which they typically do during one or two semesters of their junior year. Students (usually juniors) may apply for a year or a semester away either in the U.S. or abroad. Vassar sponsors programs in China, England, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Mexico, Morocco, Spain and Russia; students may also join preapproved programs offered by other colleges. Students may also apply for approved programs at various U.S. institutions, including the historically Black colleges and members of the Twelve College Exchange.
All classes are taught by members of the faculty, and there are no graduate students or teachers' assistants. The most popular majors are English, biology, political science, psychology and economics. Vassar also offers a variety of correlate sequences, or minors, for intensive study in many disciplines.
Vassar is one of the top 25 '''liberal arts colleges''' (national universities not included) in the ''U.S.News & World Report'' rankings. Forbes Magazine ranked Vassar in the top 25 "America's Best Colleges" rankings. In 2009, Vassar College was named among the ten ''best value'' liberal arts colleges in the United States by Kiplinger   s Personal Finance.
Vassar is home to one of the largest undergraduate library collections in the U.S. The library collection today - which actually encompasses eight libraries at Vassar - contains over 1.6 million volumes and 7,500 serial, periodical and newspaper titles, as well as an extensive collection of microfilm and microfiche. Vassar has been a Federal depository library for selected U.S. Government documents since 1943 and currently receives approximately 25% of the titles available through the Federal Depository Program. Since 1988, Vassar has been a New York State Reference Center, part of the New York Depository Program. The library also selectively purchases United Nations documents.
Vassar competes in Division III of the NCAA, as a member of the Liberty League.
Basketball plays in Vassar's new Athletics and Fitness Center. Volleyball plays in Kenyon Hall, reopened in 2006. Soccer, baseball, field hockey and lacrosse all play at the Prentiss Fields, which have been completely renovated in 2007 to feature a lighted turf, four grass fields, a baseball field and a track surrounding the turf. Also in 2007, a varsity weight room was opened in the basement of Kenyon Hall, exclusively for the training of varsity athletes.
In 2008, the Vassar men's volleyball team made the school's first appearance in a national championship game, beating UC-Santa Cruz 3-0 in the semifinal before falling to Springfield in the championship game.
On April of 28th and 29th, the Vassar Cycling Team hosted the Eastern Conference Championships in Collegiate Cycling in Poughkeepsie and New Paltz, NY. The competition included a  road race over the Gunks in New Paltz as well as a Criterium in Poughkeepsie just blocks from the school's campus.
In a controversial move, the Vassar Athletics Department decided to revoke the varsity status of the men's and women's rowing team on November 5, 2009, choosing instead to investigate the option of a club team .
The Vassar campus has several buildings of architectural interest. Main Building, formerly housed the entire college, including classrooms, dormitories, museum, library, and dining halls. The building was designed by Smithsonian architect James Renwick Jr. and was completed in 1865. It was preceded on campus by the original observatory. Both buildings are National Historic Landmarks.  The Rombout House was purchased by the college in 1915 and added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1982.
Many beautiful old brick buildings are scattered throughout the campus, but there are also several modern and contemporary structures of architectural interest. Ferry House, a student cooperative, was designed by Marcel Breuer in 1951. Noyes House was designed by Finnish-American architect Eero Saarinen. A good example of an attempt to use passive solar design can be seen in the Mudd Chemistry Building by Perry Dean Rogers. More recently, New Haven architect Cesar Pelli was asked to design the Lehman Loeb Art Center, which was completed in the early 1990s. In 2003, Pelli also worked on the renovation of Main Building Lobby and the conversion of the Avery Hall theater into the $25 million Vogelstein Center for Drama and Film, which preserved the original 1860s facade but was an entirely new structure.
Matthew Vassar was known for declaring that "art should stand boldly forth as an educational force." The art collection at Vassar dates to the founding of the College, when Vassar provided an extensive collection of Hudson River School paintings to be displayed in the Main Building.  Referred to as the Magoon Collection, it continues to be one of the best in the nation for Hudson River School paintings. The Frances Lehman Loeb Gallery displays a selection of Vassar's 18,000 articles of art in the building designed by Cesar Pelli (see Architecture). Today, the gallery's collection displays art from the ancient world up through contemporary works. The collection includes work by European masters such as Brueghel, Dore, Picasso, Balthus, Bacon, Vuillard, Cezanne, Braque and Bonnard, as well as examples from leading twentieth-century American painters Jackson Pollock, Agnes Martin, Mark Rothko, Marsden Hartley, Georgia O'Keeffe, Charles Sheeler, and Ben Shahn.  The Loeb's works on paper represent a major collection in the United States, with prints by Rembrandt (including important impressions of the "Hundred Guilder Print" and the "Three Trees") and Durer as well as photographs by Cindy Sherman, Diane Arbus, and others. Students at the college can act as liaisons between the art center and the wider college community through work on the Student Committee of the Frances Lehman Loeb Art Center, to which incoming freshman can apply.
Davison, one of Vassar's nine residence houses, was renovated during the 2008-2009 school year. The dorm went offline for that year and its residents were absorbed into the college's remaining residence houses. This is the second dorm to be renovated as part of the school's master plan to renovate all dorms, following Jewett a few years earlier. Lathrop was scheduled to be renovated during the 2010-2011 school year, but renovation has been put off indefinitely due to the economic downturn.
The interior and exterior of the Van Ingen Art Library was renovated from June 2008 - May 2009 in an effort to restore its original design and appearance. This was the library's first major renovation since its construction in 1937.
The school's bookstore, currently located on campus and operated by Barnes and Noble, was to be moved during the 2009-2010 school year to an off-campus location. The expanded bookstore was expected to carry a wider range of merchandise and will serve as a venue for appropriate entertainment. The relocation has been put on hold due to financial restrictions.
There are also preliminary plans for a new science building. Mudd, the chemistry building, may be demolished to make room for the new construction.
Notable Vassar alumni include poet Edna St. Vincent Millay (1917), computer pioneer Grace Hopper (1928), poet Elizabeth Bishop (1934), actress Meryl Streep (1971), CBS News Chief White House Correspondent Chip Reid (1977), television personality Andrew Zimmern (1984),  actress Lisa Kudrow (1985), actress Hope Davis (1986), musician Mark Ronson, journalist Evan Wright (1988), writer-director Noah Baumbach (1991), Flickr founder Caterina Fake (1991), What Not to Wear host Stacy London (1991), ''Survivor: Africa'' winner Ethan Zohn (1996), gallerist, art advisor, and Work of Art judge Jeanne Greenberg Rohatyn (1989), writer Neil Strauss and musician  Victoria Legrand from Beach House.
Notable attendees who did not graduate from Vassar include First Lady Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis, president of the Ford Foundation Susan Berresford, actresses Jane Fonda and Anne Hathaway, actor Justin Long (2000), member of the Beastie Boys Mike D and professional chef Anthony Bourdain.
Notable Vassar faculty include pioneering female astronomer Maria Mitchell and composer Richard Edward Wilson.
Image:Vassar1.jpg
Image:Vassar2.jpg
Image:Vassar3.jpg
Image:Vassar4.jpg
Image:Vassar5.jpg
Image:Vassar6.jpg
Image:Vassar7.jpg
Image:Vassar8.jpg
Image:Vassar9.jpg
Image:Vassar10.jpg
Image:Vassar11.jpg
Image:Vassar12.jpg
Image:Vassar13.jpg
Image:Vassar14.jpg
Image:Vassar15.jpg
Image:Vassar16.jpg