BARGE is formally open to "members of the rec.gambling" community, but registration must be done in advance over the Internet. BARGE organizers include Chuck Weinstock (emeritus), Peter Secor, Michael "mickdog" Patterson (starting in 2007), Nick Christenson (starting in 2008) and Mike Zimmers (emeritus).
The first BARGE was an informal gathering of a small number of participants of the rec.gambling newsgroup in Las Vegas in 1991 during SIGGRAPH, a computer graphics convention. The next year, many of the same players got together and had a poker tournament at the Mirage. The poker tournament was No Limit Hold'em (as it still is, while additional poker tournaments have been added), and nine players participated. Since then, BARGE has been held at various Las Vegas locations (see below for a list).  Attendance has grown steadily, with up to 300 participants expected for 2008. 
In its earlier years, BARGE attendees were interested in Blackjack as much as they were in
Poker.  Some famous Blackjack players (card counters) who have attended BARGE include Andy Bloch, Stanford Wong, Arnold Snyder and 'Mr. M.'  Since around 1998, BARGE attendees and BARGE activities have centered much more around Poker.
In 2006 BARGE was moved to later in the month of August due to a conflict with the World Series of Poker as some attendees participated in both events.
BARGE is the progenitor of all the other annual "ARG" events, including ATLARGE (held in Atlantic City), ESCARGOT (held in the Los Angeles area), FARGO (held at Foxwoods), MARGE (held in Biloxi), and others.
Traditions are extremely important to BARGE.  For example, Scottro (a prominent BARGE participant) denied that his much-washed originally red hat was actually pink, resulting in dozens of players wearing pink baseball hats at the 2006 BARGE, held at the Venetian.  "To Throw Down the Pink Hat" has subsequently come to mean "to challenge someone to a heads-up poker match."
Perhaps the most famous BARGE tradition is "Presto!" as a nickname for a hold'em hand of pocket fives.  The term was originated by Frank Irwin (as slang for a blackjack) but its poker meaning is far more widespread, making appearances on multiple sets of commemorative chips, badges, etc.
Other BARGE traditions include multiple poker tournaments, a blackjack tournament, a video poker tournament, the Official ADB Darkside Craps Crawl, a Sushi outing with Sake tasting, Karaoke night, and the only known Chowaha games played in casino settings for real money.  Chinese Poker has also been played at BARGE for many years.
After the BARGE banquet on Saturday evening, another tradition is played out. 'Reindeer games' -- various exotic poker games -- are spread.  These games include or have included Chowaha, first spread at Binion's
Whenever anyone busts out of a BARGE tournament, they are given a round of applause; not as an ironic gesture, but as a thank-you for participating in BARGE.
The winner of the No-Limit tournament is traditionally tasked with designing a set of chips for next year's BARGE, with some sort of commemorative design.  These chip sets are then sold the next year.  The BARGE Chip Committee, currently headed by Patrick Milligan (circa 2008), helps the winner with the logistics and artwork.
Each year, the Saturday night banquet features a guest speaker.  Past speakers: