Bat Boy was created by former ''Weekly World News'' Editor Dick Kulpa. He debuted as a cover story on June 23, 1992. The original front-page photo of Bat Boy, showing his grotesque screaming face, was the second-best selling issue in the tabloid's history, and he has since evolved into a pop-culture icon. He became the tabloid's ''de facto'' mascot of sorts. The story of Bat Boy was turned into an Off-Broadway musical, '' ''.
According to ''Weekly World News'', Bat Boy has a chaotic sense of morality. He has been said to steal cars and not to come to the aid of the needy. According to the mythos, the only person who cares about the chiropteran child is Dr. Ron Dillon, who discovered him in a West Virginia cave (Lost World Caverns). At the time of capture, he was two feet tall and weighed nineteen pounds. By February 2001, he was 2' 6". In 2004, he was five feet tall and his weight was unknown. He sheds his wings every three years, and regenerates a new pair.
On February 27, 2001, he allegedly attacked a fifth-grader in an Orlando, Florida, park. The girl was nearly ripped to shreds. In October 2006, Bat Boy was captured on film riding on top of a New York City subway car. Bat Boy was said to be living in the subway system's tunnels during this time. This story was converted into a "documentary" video on the Weekly World News web site. The next day, he endorsed presidential candidate Al Gore. Then in October 2008, Bat Boy endorsed John McCain but switched to Barack Obama soon after.
On August 14, 2003, he announced he was running in the California gubernatorial election. 
In November 2008, Bat Boy was seen protesting the passing of Proposition 8.
According to the ''Weekly World News'', the discovery of Bat Boy's family tree on a genealogy chart recently stunned evolutionary scientists who used to think the famed imp was a pitiful, one-of-a-kind mutant - but now believe he belongs to a race of creatures who have interacted with humans for at least 400 years. In the tabloid's account, the chart itself was written on vellum and found in the same Ozark Mountains cave where Dr. Ron Dillon, a biologist, rescued Bat Boy after he was trapped by a falling rock in 1992 (it should be noted, however, that the Ozark Mountains are nowhere near West Virginia). Carbon dating revealed the chart to be over a hundred years old.
He was last spotted in the Portland, Maine area near Rowe Ford in Westbrook Maine.  He was stealing tomatoes from Jamie Puleo who is famous for his seaweed fertilizer and his association with Ralphus and Bastion Booger.  When confronted by Jamie, legend has it that blood curdling screams could be heard as far east as the Old Port section of Portland.
Jamie had a few lacerations but warned locals of the consequences of violating his tomato crop.  Few men if any question Jamie and if they do they never heard from again.
Cartoonist Peter Bagge originally penned the "Adventures of Batboy" for the ''Weekly World News''. According to the cartoon, Bat Boy is currently hitchhiking with a typical American family after resigning from being the President of the United States (and King), has placed ''Weekly World News'' columnist Ed Anger under arrest and saying goodbyes to Beyonce Knowles, a half sasquatch (with whom he was romantically involved), and Dr. Ron. According to past issues of WWN, Bat Boy has joined a death metal/thrash metal band as their lead singer.
On 2006-01-16, artist Danielle Corsetto of ''Girls with Slingshots'' took over for Peter Bagge on the weekly strip.
A musical based on the Bat Boy character premiered at Tim Robbins' Actors Gang Theatre on Halloween, 1997 and has since been produced Off Broadway, in London's West End, and in scores of productions throughout the world. Music and lyrics are by Laurence O'Keefe, with a book by Brian Flemming and Keythe Farley.