While attending Cedar Cliff High School in Camp Hill, Pennsylvania, Brady lettered in football, basketball, and baseball. In football, he was a first team ''USA Today'' All-USA selection, a ''Parade Magazine'' All-America selection and, as a senior, was the Gatorade Pennsylvania Player of the Year, and the recipient of the Bobby Dodd Award (which is given to the nation's top offensive lineman) given by the Touchdown Club of Atlanta.
At Penn State, Brady was a two-time All-Big Ten selection, and a consensus All-America choice as a senior. During his senior year in 1994, he helped his team to an undefeated record, a conference championship, and the school's first Rose Bowl victory. He was ranked seventh in the all-time reception list for the school. He graduated with a degree in exercise and sports science in 1995.
Brady was selected by the New York Jets in the first round (9th overall) of the 1995 NFL Draft, much to the chagrin of the Jets fans in attendance. The fans wanted the team to draft Warren Sapp and showed it by chanting "''We want Sapp! We want Sapp!''"
Brady went on to sign with the Jacksonville Jaguars in 1999 and had his best year in the NFL with the Jaguars as he, in the 2000 season, set career highs with 64 receptions and 729 receiving yards. He was the Jaguars' Man of the Year in 2003. Brady had a reputation with the Jags as a very durable player, having only missed nine games in his twelve seasons in the NFL, and was also known as an outstanding blocker.
His reputation as a durable blocker helped him to land a two-year contract on March 3, 2007 with the New England Patriots to replace departing free agent Daniel Graham at tight end. Patriots coach Bill Belichick was known to have been enamored with Brady dating back to 1995 while he was head coach of the Cleveland Browns. Belichick had reportedly planned to draft Brady that year with the 10th pick   one pick ''after'' the Jets drafted him. When Brady was selected, Belichick traded down to the 30th pick. One website went as far as to label Brady "Belichick's white whale." 
Despite nagging injuries, Brady played In 14 games for the Patriots in 2007, catching nine passes for 70 yards and two touchdowns, culminating with Super Bowl XLII. He was released by New England on February 29, 2008, and retired shortly thereafter.
Brady was a participant in the , a two-week program held at the top American business schools for NFL players preparing for careers after football. Brady attended the workshop at the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania in February and March of 2008. In June 2009, Brady took part in the 2009 NFL/NFLPA "Broadcast Boot Camp," a program designed by the NFL Broadcasting Department and their broadcast partners to prepare players for possible post-playing careers in broadcasting.
Brady was hired by the Big Ten Network as a football analyst for the 2009 season, where he is partnered with Rick Pizzo on the ''Big Ten Football Saturday: Pre-Game Show''.
Brady and his wife Kristi have a son, Kellen and a daughter, Brooke.  A 2004 Sports Illustrated article noted Brady is a U.S. Civil War buff.
On March 21, 2009, he threw out the first pitch at opening day ceremonies for the Green Cove Springs Athletic Association Little League Baseball. Brady will be the honorary chairman of the 2009 Big 33 Football Classic.
As of August 2010, Brady has enrolled at the Florida Coastal School of Law, located in Jacksonville, Florida.