South Coast Metro's boundaries are generally defined as:
When used in residential addresses, the South Coast Metro moniker is generally restricted to apartment complexes, and often is not used on actual mailing addresses. While there is no official zip code for South Coast Metro, a freeway sign signaling the area does exist on the southbound Costa Mesa (55) Freeway at MacArthur.
The South Coast Metro area includes its namesake, South Coast Plaza, along with approximately twenty high-rise office buildings, hotels and residences. This Includes the 21-story Center Tower, the tallest building in Orange County at 285 feet. The area also includes additional retail shopping, entertainment, and several upscale restaurants.
Several prominent outdoor sculptures and other works of arts are displayed in the area around these buildings by artists such as Isamu Noguchi, Jean Dubuffet, Henry Moore, Richard Serra and others.  This sub-section of South Coast Metro is sometimes referred to as the '''Costa Mesa Theater and Arts District'''.
A satellite of the Orange County Museum of Art, called The Orange Lounge, is located inside South Coast Plaza.  Recently, plans have been drawn to move the main museum, currently located in Newport Beach, to a high-rise building in South Coast Metro also containing apartments.
South Coast Metro is served by the San Diego (I-405), Costa Mesa (SR-55), and Corona Del Mar (SR-73) freeways.  During rush hour, the 405-55 interchange becomes one of the most congested in the United States, with an average daily traffic volume of 433,000 cars. The congestion has worsened in recent years despite an upgrade completed in 2005 which included the addition of carpool lane connectors.
Public transportation is provided by bus lines operated by the Orange County Transportation Authority.  South Coast plaza is currently the most-served location in Orange County, connected by 12 bus routes.
South Coast Metro was to be served by several stations of the abandoned CenterLine light rail project, including an underground station at South Coast Plaza.  As a replacement, a bus rapid transit line connecting the area to nearby John Wayne Airport, downtown Santa Ana and Anaheim is being considered for implementation in the future.
Both the cities of Costa Mesa and Santa Ana have plans for additional development in the South Coast Metro area, which over a dozen high-rise buildings currently planned or approved.  However, many of the residential projects, along with others in Orange County, have been delayed in light of the ongoing subprime mortgage crisis and economic downturn.
Two high-rise residential towers, dubbed Skyline at Macarthur Place, were recently constructed in the northeast corner of South Coast Metro by developer Skyline OC. The 25-story towers are marketed as high-end luxury condominiums, and are now the tallest buildings in Orange County by number of floors.