The '''Bangalore Metropolitan Transport Corporation''' (BMTC) is a government agency that operates the public transport bus service in Bangalore, India.
In 1997 BMTC was formed as the result of a split of the Karnataka State Road Transport Corporation, in the context of the city's expansion. The Bangalore Transport Service(BTS) became Bangalore Metropolitan Transport Corporation and the colour scheme was changed from red to a blue and white combination.
BMTC remains a division of KSRTC.
1.  '''Ordinary''':
2. '''Suvarna''': Silver coloured with red lining. Earlier they had Re.1 higher fare than ordinary. Since the revision of fares in June 2010, Suvarna and Ordinary bus tickets cost the same. Many Suvarna buses are now being re-painted into the white and blue color similar to Parisara Vahini buses. Most Survarna buses have LED boards.
3. '''BIG 10''': BIG10 services deploy (Suvarna class of) buses branded in green and bottle green on 12 major corridors coming in from surrounding sub-urbs in the city - Hosur road, Bannerghatta road, Sarjpura road, Kanakapura road, Mysore road etc. These buses are run on a direction based concept where the commuter takes the next (high frequency, every 15 minutes) bus in his/her direction of travel, and if need be, makes a change over to another bus to reach the destination. The service terminates on different points on the radius of the city core, to avoid congesting the city centre. These buses are numbered with a '''G''' prefix.
4. '''BIG Circle''': These buses are white colored with BIG Circle written on the sides and it also has arrows painted in green, red, orange and black. These buses ply on ring roads connecting various parts of the city. Some of these buses are numbered with a '''C''' prefix and others are numbered with a '''K''' prefix.
5. '''Pushpak''': Launched in the late 90's. Single door bus with/without conductors. Driver acts as conductor when there is no conductor (Janapriya Vahini). These are coffee coloured buses with fares similar to Suvarna. Generally provided on contract to IT companies and schools.
6. '''Vajra''': Hi-tech buses from Volvo running on routes serving the IT companies' locations and various residential routes as well. Higher fares about 1.5 to 3 times that of ordinary depending on the route. LED boards.
7. '''Vayu Vajra''': Volvo buses to airport operated from 12 routes. Free Wi-Fi access is provided to the commuters in these buses.
8. '''Atal Sarige''': Low-cost buses with single seats along the windows and LED display. Have a tri-colour outside. On 1 June 2009, to celebrate their first anniversary, the Government of Karnataka and the '''Bangalore Metropolitan Transport Corporation''' sold off a pro-poor bus service called the Atal Sarige. The service aims at providing low-cost connectivity for the economically backward sections of the society to the nearest major bus station.
9. '''Marcopolo AC''': Buses from Tata-Marcopolo collaboration introduced under the JnNURM scheme. Their fare is costilier by Rs. 2 as compared to ordinary buses. Usually ply on routes where volvo is not popular.
10. '''Isuzu AC'': A single bus running between BTM layout and BIAL on a trial basis as substitute for volvo.
BMTC has currently introduced Mercedes Benz buses on a trial basis.
Fares of BMTC are considered to be the highest in the country with respect to the starting stages. However they are not very costly in the later stages. They range from Rs 4/- a km in the first stages to Rs 1/- per km as the distance increases.
The highlight of the BMTC is the daily pass provided at Rs.40/- per day (Rs 35/- for those having BMTC identity cards). It can be used for travel in any bus except the air conditioned ones. It is valid up to midnight on the day of purchase and available with all conductors. AC Bus pass is available for Rs.85/-   
On producing ID cards (voter's card, driving license, etc.), BMTC provides concession of 25% in fares to senior citizens in all types of buses. This came into effect on 1 September 2008.
Children below the age of 12 are given 50% concession.
4. Shantinagar: Near the Central office of KSRTC and BMTC. BMTC Depot 2 and Depot 3 are located here. It is well connected to South and South East Bangalore and the Majestic and Shivajinagar areas.
6. Banashankari Bus Station: This is another important bus station located on Kanakapura Road, close to the Outer Ring Road. It is well connected to all the areas on the inner and outer ring road. 201, 205, 500, 600 are the important routes which start/pass through Banashankari. From market, all buses between 211 and 217B pass through Banashankari. A TTMC is under construction and hence the depot at Banashankari is closed.
BMTC has six bus stations in Bangalore. Apart from these, it also has a number of minor terminuses. It has 34 depots spread all over Bangalore (Depot 1 closed for Shantinagar; 2 others also closed because of TTMC construction) out of which 31 are operational. BMTC aims to build 6 more depots on the city outskirts.
BMTC is also constructing modern bus stations at 10 places in its first phase. These will have places to park vehicles and a separate waiting room for airport-bound passengers with the timings displayed. As of April 2011, the station at Jayanagar 4th block, Kengeri, Vijayanagar and whitefield have been opened.
Introduced on 4 February 2010. It is an event calling all the citizens of Bengaluru to use public transport. The idea behind Bus Day is to observe the changes which can be brought in the city in trying to respect Environment, Traffic Situation, Health of individuals Perception. The Bangalore Metropolitan Transport Corporation (BMTC) campaigned for this day long event with support from the traffic police, Information Technology companies and their employees, and members of Praja.in (a web portal for civic activism).  Since then the 4th of every month is observed as a "Bus Day".