Washington, D.C., has been the capital of the United States since 1800. Eight other cities have served as the meeting place for Congress and are therefore considered to have once been the capital of the United States. In addition, each of the 50 U.S. states and the five principal territories of the United States maintains its own capital.
In 33 of the 50 U.S. states, the state capital is not the state's most populous city. Only two of the state capitals     Trenton, New Jersey, and Carson City, Nevada     border another state, while Juneau, Alaska, shares a border with the Canadian province of British Columbia. The dates listed in the following table indicate the year in which the city started to continuously serve as the state's sole capital. Most states have changed their capital city at least once; see Historical state capitals for details.
An insular area is a United States territory that is neither a part of one of the fifty states nor a part of the District of Columbia, the nation's federal district. Those insular areas with territorial capitals are listed below.
From 1774 to 1800, Congress met in numerous locations; therefore, the following cities can be said to have once been the United States capital:
Before joining the United States as the fourteenth state, Vermont was an independent republic known as the Vermont Republic. Two cities served as the capital of the Republic:
The capital of the state of Vermont is Montpelier.
Prior to becoming a territory of the United States in 1898, Hawaii was an independent nation. Three cities served as its capital:
Before joining the United States under the Texas Annexation in 1845, Texas was an independent nation known as the Republic of Texas. Seven cities served as its capital:
There have been a handful of nations within the current borders of the United States which were never officially recognized as legally independent sovereign entities; however these nations did have ''de facto'' control over their respective regions during their existence.  It must be emphasized that exercising de facto military control over a defined geographic area is not equal to being a nation. The term "nation" as used here is best understood as being used loosely, i.e., as if within quotation marks.
The Confederate States of America had three capitals during its existence.
The Confederate constitutional convention was held in Montgomery, Alabama, in December 1860 because it was the largest and most influential city in the geographic center of the original seven Confederate states (South Carolina, Georgia, Alabama, Florida, Mississippi, Louisiana and Texas) that planned to secede from the Union. The first Confederate capital was established on February 4, 1861 in Montgomery and remained there until it was moved to Richmond after Virginia joined the Confederacy on May 23, 1861. As the Army of Northern Virginia was pushed farther south and Richmond fell under the Federal guns in early 1865, the Confederate government fled using the only viable railroad line available on April 2, 1865 to Danville, Virginia.
The CSA state capitals remained the same as when each state seceded from the Union. Some of the capitals were moved temporarily in an effort to stay ahead of the advancing Federals. As Confederate areas were occupied, the U.S. Army established military districts to govern each area.
Following the surrender of General Lee's Army of Northern Virginia in Appomattox Court House, Virginia, which ended the American Civil War on April 9, 1865, the eleven southern states that seceded from the United States of America to create the Confederate States of America, gradually had their Senators and Representatives recognized and seated by Congress starting with Tennessee on July 24, 1866, then Arkansas on June 22, 1868, Louisiana, Florida, North Carolina and South Carolina on June 25, 1868, then Alabama on July 14, 1868, then Virginia on January 26, 1870, then Mississippi on February 23, 1870, then Texas on March 30, 1870 and finally Georgia on July 15, 1870.
There is some disagreement over whether this recognition by Congress is what determines the status of "statehood". The U.S. Supreme Court decision in ''Texas v. White'' raises questions on this point where the court ruled that Texas never left the Union, and essentially that once a territory is admitted and recognized as a state, it is in perpetuity a state in the Union. The court did allow some possibility of divisibility of the union "through revolution, or through consent of the States."
The State of Franklin was an autonomous, secessionist United States territory created, not long after the end of the American Revolution, from territory that later was ceded by North Carolina to the federal government. Franklin's territory later became part of the state of Tennessee. Franklin was never officially admitted into the Union of the United States and existed for only four years.
The State of Muskogee was a short-lived Native American state in Florida.  It consisted of several tribes of Creeks and Seminoles.  It existed from 1799 to 1803.  It had one capital:
The Republic of West Florida was a short-lived republic consisting of parts of Louisiana, Mississippi, Florida and Alabama.
The Republic of Indian Stream was an independent nation within the present state of New Hampshire.
The Republic of the Rio Grande was an independent nation including land now in  Texas and Mexico.
Before being annexed by the United States in 1848 (following the Mexican   American War), a small portion of north-central California declared itself the California Republic, in an act of independence from Mexico, in 1846 (see Bear Flag Revolt).  The republic only existed a month before it disbanded itself, to join the advancing American army and therefore became part of the United States.
The very short-lived California Republic was never recognized by the United States, Mexico or any other nation.  There was one ''de facto'' capital of the California Republic:
Most of the original Thirteen Colonies had their capitals occupied or attacked by the British during the American Revolution.  State governments operated where and as they could.  The City of New York was occupied by British troops from 1776 to 1783.  A similar situation occurred during the War of 1812, during the American Civil War in many Confederate states, and during the Pueblo Revolt of 1680   1692 in New Mexico.
Twenty-two state capitals have been a capital longer than their state has been a state, since they served as the capital of a predecessor territory, colony, or republic.  Boston, Massachusetts, has been a capital city continuously since 1630, making it the longest-running U.S. capital.  Santa Fe, New Mexico, has been a capital city the longest having become capital in 1610 and interrupted only by the Pueblo Revolt of 1680   1692.
The table below includes the following information:
Citizens of the State of Kansas often pronounce the Arkansas River  in a manner similar to the common pronunciation of the name of their state.