The '''''Magellan''''' spacecraft, also referred to as the ''Venus Radar Mapper'', was a 1,035-kilogram robotic space probe launched by NASA on May 4, 1989, to map the surface of Venus using Synthetic Aperture Radar and measure the planetary gravity. It was the first interplanetary mission to be launched from the Space Shuttle, the first to use an inertial upper stage booster and was the first spacecraft to test aerobraking as a method for circularizing an orbit. ''Magellan'' was the fourth successful, NASA funded mission to Venus and ended an eleven year U.S. interplanetary exploration hiatus.
Beginning in the late 1970s, scientists pushed for a radar mapping mission to Venus.  First seeking to construct a spacecraft titled, Venus Orbiter Imaging Radar, it became obvious the mission would be outside the limits of the budgetary constraints during the following years and was subsequently canceled in 1982. Recommended by the Solar System Exploration Committee, a stripped down mission proposal was resubmitted and accepted as the Venus Radar Mapper in 1983. The proposal included a limited focus and a single primary scientific instrument. In 1985, the mission was renamed ''Magellan'', after the sixteenth-century Portuguese explorer Ferdinand Magellan, for his exploration, mapping and circumnavigation of the Earth, a goal this mission would have for Venus.
The objectives of the mission included:
The spacecraft was designed and built by Martin Marietta and JPL provided mission management for the NASA division. Elizabeth Beyer served as program manager and  Joseph Boyce served as lead program scientist for the NASA headquarters; for operations at JPL, Douglas Griffith served as Magellan project manager and R. Stephen Saunders served as lead project scientist.
To save costs, Magellan was made of many spare parts from various missions, including the Voyager Program, Galileo, Ulysses and Mariner 9. The main body of the spacecraft, a spare from the Voyager missions, was a 10-sided aluminum bus, containing the computers, data recorders, and other subsystems. The spacecraft measured 6.4-meters tall and 4.6 meters in diameter. Overall, the spacecraft weighed 1,035-kilograms and carried 2,414-kilograms of propellant for a total mass of 3449-kilograms.
The data was collected at 750 kilobits/second to the tape recorder and later transmitted to earth to be processed into usable images, by the Radar Data Processing Subsystem (RDPS), a collection of ground computers operated by JPL.
Thick and opaque, the atmosphere of Venus required a method beyond optical survey, to map the surface of the planet. The resolution of conventional radar depends entirely on the size of the antenna, which is greatly restricted by costs, physical constraints by launch vehicles and the complexity of maneuvering a large apparatus to provide high resolution data. The Magellan spacecraft avoided this problem by using a method known as aperture synthesis, where a large antenna is imitated by processing the information gathered, by ground computers.
The ''Magellan'' high-gain antenna, oriented 28     78   to the right or left of nadir, emitted thousands of microwave pulses that passed through the clouds and to the surface of Venus, illuminating a swath of land. The Radar System then recorded the brightness of each pulse as it reflected back off the side surfaces of rocks, cliffs, volcanoes and other geologic features, as a form of backscatter.  To increase the imaging resolution, ''Magellan'' recorded a series of data bursts for a particular location during multiple instances called, "looks".  Each "look" slightly overlapped the previous, returning slightly different information for the same location, as the spacecraft moved in orbit.  After transmitting the data back to Earth, Doppler modeling was used to take the overlapping "looks" and combine them into a continuous, high resolution image of the surface.
Originally, ''Magellan'' had been scheduled for launch in 1988 with a trajectory lasting six months. However, due to the Space Shuttle Challenger disaster in 1986, several missions, including Galileo and ''Magellan'', were deferred until the shuttle flights resumed September 1988.  Intended to be launched with a new, liquid fueled, Centaur-G shuttle deploy-able upper-stage booster, subsequently canceled after the ''Challenger'' disaster, ''Magellan'' had to be modified to attach to a less powerful solid-fueled, Inertial Upper Stage. The next best opportunity for launch would occur in October 1989.
Further complicating the launch however, was the upcoming ''Galileo'' mission to Jupiter, which included a flyby of Venus. Intended for launch in 1986, the pressures to ensure a launch for ''Galileo'' in 1989, mixed with a short launch-window necessitating a mid-October launch, resulted in replanning the ''Magellan'' mission. Weary of rapid shuttle launches, the decision was made to launch ''Magellan'' in May, and into an orbit that would require 1 year and 3 months before encountering Venus.
On August 1, 1990, ''Magellan'' encountered Venus and began the orbital insertion maneuver which placed the spacecraft into a 3 hour and 9 minute, elliptical orbit which brought the spacecraft 295-kilometers from the surface at approximately 10   North during apoapsis and out to 7762-kilometers during periapsis. 
During each orbit, the spacecraft would capture radar data while the spacecraft was nearest to the surface and then transmit it back to Earth as it moved away from Venus.  This maneuver required extensive use of the reaction wheels to continuously rotate the spacecraft as it imaged the surface for 37-minutes and as it pointed toward Earth for 2 hours.  The primary mission intended for the spacecraft to return images of at least 70% of the surface during one Venusian day, which lasts 243 Earth days as the planet slowly spins. To avoid overly redundant data at the highest and lowest latitudes ''Magellan'' alternated between a ''Northern-swath'', a region designated as 90   north latitude to 54   south latitude, and a ''Southern-swath'', designated as 76   north latitude to 68   south latitude. However, due to apoapsis being 10   north of the equatorial line, imaging the South Pole region was unlikely to be possible.
The primary mission began on September 15, 1990, with the intention to provide a "left-looking" map of 70% of the Venusian surface at a minimum resolution of 1-kilometer/pixel.  During cycle 1, the attitude of the spacecraft varied from 2000-kilometers at the north pole, to 290-kilometers near apoapsis.  Upon completion during May 15, 1991, having made 1,792 orbits, ''Magellan'' had mapped approximately 83.7% of the surface with a resolution between 101 to 250-meters/pixel.
Beginning immediately after the end of cycle 1, cycle 2 was intended to provide data for the existing gaps in the map collected during first cycle, including a large portion of the southern hemisphere.  To do this, ''Magellan'' had to be reoriented with 180  , changing the gathering method to "right-looking". Upon completion during mid-January 1992, cycle 2 provided data for 54.5% of the surface, and combined with the previous cycle, a map containing 96% of the surface could be constructed.
Immediately after cycle 2, cycle 3 began collecting data for stereo imagery on the surface that would later allow the ground team to construct, clear, three-dimensional renderings of the surface.  Approximately 21.3% of the surface was imaged in stereo by the end of the cycle on September 13, 1992, increasing the overall coverage of the surface to 98%.
Upon completing cycle 3, ''Magellan'' ceased imaging the surface.  Instead, beginning mid-September 1992, the ''Magellan'' maintained pointing of the high-gain antenna toward Earth where the Deep Space Network began recording a constant stream of telemetry.  This constant signal allowed the DSN to collect information on the gravitational field of Venus by monitoring the velocity of the spacecraft.  Areas of higher gravitation would slightly increase the velocity of the spacecraft, registering as a Doppler shift in the signal.  The space craft completed 1,878 orbits until completion of the cycle on May 23, 1993; a loss of data at the beginning of the cycle necessitated an additional 10 days of gravitational study.
At the end of the fourth cycle in May 1993, the orbit of ''Magellan'' was circularized using an unproven technique known as aerobraking. The circularized orbit allowed a much higher resolution of gravimetric data to be acquired when cycle 5 began on August 3, 1993. The spacecraft performed 2,855 orbits and provided high-resolution gravimetric data for 94% of the planet, before the end of the cycle on August 29, 1994.
The sixth and final orbiting cycle was another extension to the two previous gravimetric studies.  Toward the end of the cycle, a final experiment was conducted, known as the "windmill" experiment to provide data on the composition of the upper atmosphere of Venus.  ''Magellan'' performed 1,783 orbits before the end of the cycle on October 13, 1994, when the spacecraft entered the atmosphere and disintegrated.
Study of the Magellan high-resolution global images is providing evidence to better understand Venusian geology and the role of impacts, volcanism, and tectonism in the formation of Venusian surface structures. The surface of Venus is mostly covered by volcanic materials. Volcanic surface features, such as vast lava plains, fields of small lava domes, and large shield volcanoes are common. There are few impact craters on Venus, suggesting that the surface is, in general, geologically young - less than 800 million years old. The presence of lava channels over 6,000 kilometers long suggests river-like flows of extremely low-viscosity lava that probably erupted at a high rate. Large pancake-shaped volcanic domes suggest the presence of a type of lava produced by extensive evolution of crustal rocks.
Magellan created the first (and currently the best) near-photographic quality, high resolution radar mapping of the planet's surface features.  Prior Venus missions had created low resolution radar globes of general, continent-sized formations.  Magellan, however, finally allowed detailed imaging and analysis of craters, hills, ridges, and other geologic formations, to a degree comparable to the visible-light photographic mapping of other planets.  Magellan's global radar map will remain the most detailed Venus map in existence for the foreseeable future, although the planned Russian Venera-D may carry a radar that can achieve the same, if not better resolution as the radar used by Magellan.
On '''September 9, 1994''', a press release outlined the termination of the Magellan mission.  Due to the degradation of the power output from the solar arrays and onboard components, and having completed all objectives successfully, the mission was to end in mid-October. The termination sequence began in late August 1994, with a series of orbital trim maneuvers which lowered the spacecraft into the outermost layers of the Venusian atmosphere to allow the Windmill experiment to begin on September 6, 1994. The experiment lasted for two weeks and was followed by subsequent orbital trim maneuvers, further lowering the altitude of the spacecraft for the final termination phase.
On '''October 11, 1994''', moving at a velocity of 7-kilometers/second, the final orbital trim maneuver was performed, placing the spacecraft 139.7-kilometers above the surface, well within the atmosphere. At this altitude the spacecraft encountered tremendous friction, raising temperatures on the solar arrays to 126-degrees Celsius.
On '''October 13, 1994''' at 10:05:00 UTC, communication was lost when the spacecraft entered radio occultation behind Venus. The team continued to listen for another signal from the spacecraft until 18:00:00 UTC, when the mission was determined to have concluded. Although much of Magellan was expected to vaporize due to atmospheric stresses, some amount of wreckage is thought have hit the surface by 20:00:00 UTC.
Thus, a final controlled experiment was designed to maximize mission return. This final, low altitude was necessary to study the effects of a carbon dioxide atmosphere.
The final OTM took the periapsis to 139.7&nbsp;km (86.6 miles) where the sensible drag on the spacecraft was very evident. The solar panel temperatures rose to 126 deg. C. and the attitude control system fired all available Y-axis thrusters to counteract the torques. However, attitude control was maintained to the end.
The main bus voltage dropped to 24.7 volts after five orbits, and it was predicted that attitude control would be lost if the power dropped below 24 volts. It was decided to enhance the windmill experiment by changing the panel angles for the remaining orbits. This was also a preplanned experiment option.
At this point, the spacecraft was expected to survive only two orbits.
Magellan continued to maintain communication for three more orbits, even though the power continued to drop below 23 volts and eventually reached 20.4 volts. At this time, one battery went off-line, and the spacecraft was defined as power starved.
Communication was lost at 3:02 AM PDT just as Magellan was about to enter an Earth occultation on orbit 15032. Contact was not re-established. Tracking operations were continued to 11:00 AM but no signal was seen, and none was expected. The spacecraft should land on Venus by 1:00 PM PDT Thursday, October 13, 1994."