Yahoo! Answers is available in 12 languages, but several Asian sites operate a different platform which allows for non-Latin characters. The platform is known as  in Japan, and '''Yahoo! Knowledge''' in Korea, Taiwan, China, and Hong Kong . An Arabic language Q&A platform called '''Seen Jeem''' is available through the Yahoo! subsidiary Maktoob.
Yahoo! Answers was created to replace '''Ask Yahoo!''', their former Q&A platform which was discontinued in March 2006.
Yahoo! Answers is the second most popular Q&A site in the US after Answers.com, according to comScore.
Any question is allowed on Yahoo! Answers, except ones that violate the Yahoo! Answers community guidelines. To encourage good answers, helpful participants are occasionally featured on the Yahoo! Answers Blog. Though the service itself is free, the content of answers are owned by the respective users     while Yahoo! maintains a non-exclusive royalty-free worldwide right to publish the information. Chat is explicitly forbidden in the Community Guidelines, although categories like Politics and Religion & Spirituality are mostly opinion. Users may also choose to reveal their Yahoo! Messenger ID on their Answers profile page. 
In order to open an account a user needs a Yahoo! ID, but can use any name as identification on Yahoo! Answers. A user can be represented by a picture from Yahoo! Avatars or an uploaded picture. When answering a question, a user can perform a Yahoo! or Wikipedia search for research.
Questions are initially open to answers for four days. However, the asker can choose to close the question after a minimum of one hour or extend it for a period of up to eight days. To ask a question one has to have a Yahoo! account with a positive score balance of five points or more.
The points system is weighted to encourage users to answer questions and to limit spam questions. There are also levels (with point thresholds) which give more site access. Aside from this, points and levels have no real world value, cannot be traded, and serve only to indicate how active a user has been on the site. A notable downside to the points/level side is that it encourages people to answer questions even when they do not have a suitable answer to give, in order to gain points. Users also receive ten points for contributing the "Best Answer" which is selected by the question's asker or voted on by the community. Contributors often vote for their own answer regardless of its quality or appropriateness. On the other hand, many people ask questions not to gain more knowledge.
In addition to points awarded for activity, Yahoo! Answers staff may also award extra points if they are impressed with a user's contributions. The Yahoo! Answers community manager has stated that "power users" who defend the company should be thanked and rewarded.
The point system encourages users to answer as many questions as they possibly can, up to their daily limit. Once a user shows that they are knowledgeable within a specific category they may receive an orange "badge" under the name of their avatar naming them a '''Top Contributor'''. The user can then lose this badge if they do not maintain their level and quality of participation. Once a user becomes a "Top Contributor" in any category, the badge appears in all answers, questions, and comments by the user regardless of category.
One can be a Top Contributor of maximum 3 categories. List of Top contributors is updated every Monday. Yahoo answers staff has kept conditions of becoming a TC secret. However, many theories among users exist like:
Out of these, none have an official status. --> This feature began March 8, 2007.
This badge is seen under the name staff members of Yahoo Answers.
This type of badge is found on the name of celebrites (like mentioned above) and government departments like tourism department.
The site has been criticized as being more about social networking than providing accurate information.
Even though members can be academic experts and researchers, Yahoo! Answers' target group and majority is primarily the mainstream; hence, it has been criticized for both its high quantity of dubious questions such as "How is babby formed? How girl get pragnent?" , which sparked an Internet meme, and the reliability, validity, and relevance of its answers. A 2008 study found Yahoo! Answers is suboptimal for questions requiring factual answers and that the quality decreases as the number of users increases.
The number of low-intellect questions and answers has made the site a target of ridicule.
The site does not have a system that filters the correct answers from the incorrect answers. It only allows the user community to choose the best answer from a line-up of answers.
Once the "best answer" is chosen, there's no way to add more answers, not to improve or challenge it; there is a display of thumbs down or thumbs up for each answer, but viewers cannot vote. Also, answers can be briefly comment them, but the comment is not visible by default and is hence hardly read. The only chance to give a better (or correct) answer is the next time the same question is asked, but the older answer will still likely get higher priority in search engines.
Some privacy concerns have been raised regarding embarrassing or private information.
Users are unable to delete questions or answers once a best answer has been selected and users can't delete their account. A user can only "deactivate" an account but the profile, questions, and answers remain visible and searchable.
Image:YahooAnswersGreenSmiley.png|The Yahoo! Answers green smiley.
Image:YahooYamster.gif|Current cartoon Yamster used by staff.
The official Yahoo! Answers mascot is a cartoon hamster called "Yamster". Yamster is a combination, or portmanteau, of the words Yahoo!, Answers, and hamster. The mascot is also used as an avatar for Yahoo! Answers staff.
During beta testing of Yahoo! Answers in 2005, the Director of Product Management would use a Gemmy Kung Fu Hamster to summon employees to meetings. The toy was a battery-operated, dancing, musical plush hamster clothed in a karate uniform. A Yahoo! Answers employee selected a photo of the toy as the staff avatar. A user then questioned the potential trademark/copyright infringement of using such an avatar. At that time, the photo was replaced with the Yahoo! Answers green smiley face. At the beginning of 2006, the green smiley face was replaced by the cartoon Yamster clad in a karate uniform. As of November 2009, the history of Yamster, complete with photos of the toy, was available on the Yahoo! Answers Team Vietnam blog.
Beginning July 2, 2010, Yahoo! Answers began featuring weekly video segments called "Yahoo! Answers On The Street." Hosted by J. Keith van Straaten, the 3-4 minute videos draw on questions from the Answers community and mix together expert interviews with comedic man-on-the-street pieces. A new episode is posted every Monday, with previous episodes archived.
Several celebrities and notables have appeared on Yahoo! Answers to ask questions. These users have an "official" badge below their avatar and on their profile page. During the 2008 U.S. Presidential campaign Hillary Clinton, John McCain, Barack Obama, and Mitt Romney posted questions on Yahoo! Answers in addition to YouTube. In an awareness campaign, "UNICEF Up Close 2007", nine UNICEF ambassadors asked questions. The launch of Answers on Yahoo! India included a question from A. P. J. Abdul Kalam, the President of India at that time. Other guests have included international leaders (Queen Rania of Jordan , candidate for United Nations Secretary-General, Shashi Tharoor ), Nobel Peace Prize laureates (Al Gore, Muhammad Yunus ) and other international activists (Bono, Jean-Michel Cousteau ), intellectuals (Stephen Hawking, Marilyn vos Savant), and numerous other celebrities.
Yahoo! used comScore statistics in December 2006 to proclaim Yahoo! Answers "the leading Q&A site on the web".
 and 15 million users visiting daily. Google Trends reports around 4 million unique visitors (Global) daily. The web analytics website Quantcast reports around 2 million unique visitors (US) daily.
Quantcast traffic statistics for Yahoo! Answers, January 2010:
Google Ad Planner traffic statistics for Yahoo! Answers, December 2009:
Compete Site Analytics traffic statistics for Yahoo! Answers, December 2009:
Yahoo! Answers represents between 1.03% to 1.7% of Yahoo! traffic.