Warren was born in Guthrie, Kentucky, which is almost on the exact TN-KY state line, to Robert Warren and Anna Penn. Warren's mother's family had roots in Virginia, having given their name to the community of Penn's Store in Patrick County, Virginia. Robert Penn Warren graduated from Clarksville High School in Clarksville, Tennessee, Vanderbilt University in 1925 and the University of California, Berkeley in 1926. Warren later attended Yale University and obtained his B. Litt. as a Rhodes Scholar from New College, Oxford, in England in 1930. He also received a Guggenheim Fellowship to study in Italy during the rule of Benito Mussolini. That same year he began his teaching career at Southwestern College (now Rhodes College) in Memphis, Tennessee.
While still an undergraduate at Vanderbilt, Warren became associated with the group of poets there known as the Fugitives, and somewhat later, during the early 1930s, Warren and some of the same writers formed a group known as the Southern Agrarians. He contributed "The Briar Patch" to the Agrarian manifesto ''I'll Take My Stand'' along with 11 other Southern writers and poets (including fellow Vanderbilt poet/critics John Crowe Ransom, Allen Tate, and Donald Davidson). In "The Briar Patch" the young Warren defends racial segregation, in line with the traditionalist conservative political leanings of the Agrarian group, although Davidson deemed Warren's stances in the essay so progressive that he argued for excluding it from the collection. However, Warren recanted these views in an article on the Civil Rights Movement, "Divided South Searches Its Soul", which appeared in the July 9, 1956 issue of ''Life'' magazine. A month later, Warren published an expanded version of the article as a small book titled ''Segregation: The Inner Conflict in the South''.  He subsequently adopted a high profile as a supporter of racial integration. In 1965, he published ''Who Speaks for the Negro?'', a collection of interviews with black civil rights leaders including Malcolm X and Martin Luther King, thus further distinguishing his political leanings from the more conservative philosophies associated with fellow Agrarians such as Tate, Cleanth Brooks, and particularly Davidson.  Warren's interviews with civil rights leaders are at the Louie B. Nunn Center for Oral History at the University of Kentucky.
Warren served as the Consultant in Poetry to the Library of Congress, Poet Laureate, 1944   1945, and went on to win the Pulitzer Prize in 1947, for his best known work, the novel ''All the King's Men'', whose main character, Willie Stark, resembles the radical populist governor of Louisiana, Huey Pierce Long (1893   1935), whom Warren was able to observe closely while teaching at Louisiana State University in Baton Rouge from 1933-42. Warren won Pulitzer Prizes in poetry in 1958 for ''Promises: Poems 1954-1956'', and in 1979 for ''Now and Then''. He is the only writer ever to win the Pulitzer in both fiction and poetry. ''All the King's Men,'' starring Broderick Crawford, became a highly successful film, winning the Academy Award for Best Picture in 1949. A 2006 film adaptation by writer/director Steven Zaillian featured Sean Penn as Willie Stark and Jude Law as Jack Burden.   The opera ''Willie Stark'' by Carlisle Floyd to his own libretto based on the novel was premiered in 1981.
  In 1980, Warren was presented with the Presidential Medal of Freedom by President Jimmy Carter. In 1981, Warren was selected as a MacArthur Fellow and later was named as the first U.S. Poet Laureate Consultant in Poetry on February 26, 1986. In 1987, he was awarded the National Medal of Arts.
Warren was co-author, with Cleanth Brooks, of ''Understanding Poetry'', an influential literature textbook. It was followed by other similarly co-authored textbooks, including  ''Understanding Fiction'', which was praised by Southern Gothic and Roman Catholic writer Flannery O'Connor, and ''Modern Rhetoric'', which adopted what can be called a New Critical perspective.
Warren was secretly married in the summer of 1929 to Emma Brescia until their divorce in 1951. His second marriage was in 1952 to Eleanor Clark, with whom he had two children, Rosanna Phelps Warren (b. 1953) and Gabriel Penn Warren (b. 1955). He lived the latter part of his life in Fairfield, Connecticut, and Stratton, Vermont where he died of complications from bone cancer. He is buried at Stratton, Vermont, and, at his request, a memorial marker is situated in the Warren family gravesite in Guthrie, Kentucky.
In April 2005, the United States Postal Service issued a commemorative stamp to mark the 100th anniversary of Warren's birth. Introduced at the post office in his native Guthrie, it depicts the author as he appeared in a 1948 photograph, with a background scene of a political rally designed to evoke the setting of ''All the King's Men''. His son and daughter, Gabriel and Rosanna Warren, were in attendance.
Vanderbilt University houses the Robert Penn Warren Center for the Humanities, which is sponsored by the College of Arts and Science. It began its programs in January 1988, and in 1989 received a $480,000 Challenge Grant from the National Endowment for the Humanities. The center promotes "interdisciplinary research and study in the humanities, social sciences, and natural sciences."