Boats designed by Farr Yacht Design competed in every Whitbread Round the World Race after 1981, and won the 1986, 1990, 1994 and 1998 races. In 2001 the event was renamed the Volvo Ocean Race. A yacht designed by Farr Yacht Design was victorious in 2002.  However, Farr's Volvo Ocean Race boats fared less well in 2006 as all four of his designs experienced problems after various failures in their Farr-designed keel canting mechanisms, including an abandonment of the yacht ''Movistar'' which was unable to prevent the flow of water through the keel box and, to this day, lies on the ocean floor, unrecovered. 
Farr is the most successful designer of winners of the Sydney to Hobart Yacht Race, having designed 15 overall winners between 1945 and 2003.
Cookson Boatworks developed a new 50' design, using the Farr office to collaborate, called the Cookson 50.
Irish-owned yacht ''Chieftain'', conceived, developed and constructed in 2005 at Cookson's in New Zealand, was the overall winner of the 2007 Rolex Fastnet Race. Shortly after it was launched, ''Chieftain'' finished 5th at Australia's Hamilton Island Race Week, then won class in the 2005 Rolex Sydney to Hobart Yacht Race. 
Also helmed by Sir Peter Blake was the Farr-designed Ceramco New Zealand, which competed in the 1980 Whitbread Race and won the Sydney to Hobart the same year. Farr's design proved exceedingly fast, and Ceramco would have won the Round the World Race, save for an unfortunate dismasting on the first leg, a trans-Atlantic crossing. The deltas for the rest of the legs would have put Ceramco 30 hours ahead of her next competitor.
Among the most impressive of Farr's design boats was the 90 foot long KZ-1, the Michael Fay sponsored boat brought forth to challenge the San Diego Yacht Club immediately following their gaining the cup in 1987.  The challenge was unusual in that it did not allow the host yacht club the conventional three to four years to prepare for the event, nor did the challenging boat adhere to the 12 metre class design that the America's Cup had been contested in for thirty-five years, nor did it allow time for other international challengers and defenders to participate.  The unconventional challenge was answered with an unconventional defense, and the entire episode serves as an excellent case study on how the process of yacht racing can be mired in the legal system when America's Cup participants radically depart from the spirit of the rules.
Farr's cruising yachts have been sold and sailed the world around. His production designs (mass-produced as opposed to custom) have been produced by a variety of yacht manufacturers including Cookson Boats, Carroll Marine, Beneteau, Concordia, Baltic and Nauta. 
Some of the larger cruising luxury yachts Farr has designed include ''Mirabella'', ''Philanderer'', ''Sojana'' and the two Southern Wind built 100 footers: ''Farewell'' and ''Farandwide''.   
Farr is a native of New Zealand and currently lives near Annapolis, Maryland. His services to yachting were recognized in 1990 when he was awarded the Order of the British Empire.