He received his B.A., in Biblical Studies from Wheaton College in 1957 and an M.A., in Christian Education in 1961 from the same institution. 
Gothard started an organization in 1961 called Campus Teams, which in 1974 changed its name to Institute in Basic Youth Conflicts. Later, in 1989, the organization's name changed again to Institute in Basic Life Principles (IBLP), of which Gothard is currently the president and a board member.
Gothard's primary teaching, his "Basic Seminar," focuses on seven Biblically based "Basic Life Principles."  Some argue that Gothard's teaching legalistic, but he claims that he teaches principles rather than rules, to avoid legalism.  He claims that the seven principles are universal and people will suffer the consequences of violating these principles.  This philosophy is similar to natural law based ethics.  Just as a physicist discovers natural universal laws, the natural law ethicist believes that there are discoverable universal ethical principles.  Gothard's principles are called Design, Authority, Responsibility, Suffering, Ownership, Freedom, and Success.
The design principle is that people should understand their specific purpose for which God created them.  This is a similar principle that launched Rick Warren's best selling book, "The Purpose Driven Life."  Once a person understands his/her purpose and the purpose for other people, objects, and relationships in their life, harmony and self acceptance is the result.
The authority principle is that inward peace results when people respect and honor the authorities (parents, government, etc.) that God had put in their lives.  One controversial aspect of this teaching is that the husband is the authority figure in marriage.  While this principle is clearly Biblical (Ephesians 5, for example), some modern day Christians believe that this view is outdated. 
The responsibility principle is that a clear conscience results when people realize that they are responsible to God for every thought, word, action, and motive.  Part of this principle is asking forgiveness from whoever has been offended.  Personal responsibility begins with a person's thought life.
The suffering principle teaches people to forgive others for the pain that they have caused you.  It further teaches that pain is often a tool that God uses to develop character.
The ownership principle teaches that people are stewards, not owners, of their possessions.   Gothard teaches that when a person yields their rights to God, true security results.
The freedom principle is enjoying the desire and the power to do what is right.  Moral purity is the result of true freedom.  This is probably the most controversial principle because many of the examples of "wrong" like certain types of music and dress are not generally accepted as being "sinful" even by those claiming to be evangelical Christians.  
The success principle is that when people learn to think God's thoughts by meditating on and memorizing scripture, they make wise decisions and fulfill their life purposes.
In addition to the Basic Seminar, Gothard also has an Advanced Seminar, and an Anger Resolution Seminar.  He also has a 49-week "Daily Success" series where he expounds on the "Commands of Christ" found in the Gospels.  
Gothard's "Total Health" training seeks to bring a Biblical view of sickness. He considers that there may be spiritual aspects of illness.  His "Basic CARE Bulletins" and "Total Health Seminars" are offered to those who have attended "Basic" or "Advanced" or "Anger Resolution" seminars.
Gothard encourages homeschooling. IBLP publishes its own Advanced Training Institute (homeschool) materials.
Gothard teaches that dating is morally dangerous and that courtship is the better alternative.  Gothard encourages parents to be involved in their children's courtship.  The father, especially, should be involved in his daughter's relationships.  He should at the very least have the right to say "no" when a man asks to marry his daughter.
Gothard   s teachings discourage dating and rock music, including Christian rock.  Gothard teaches that women working outside the home are putting themselves under another man's authority and conflict will arise.  He has warned that some toys such as Cabbage Patch dolls may cause destructive behavior in children.   Shooter's lessons strict, rule-driven   ,  Nancy Lofholm, The Denver Post , 12/12/2007, 
Gothard teaches that some diseases have spiritual roots and to have suspicion of modern medicine.
"'Taliban Dan's' Teacher: Inside Bill Gothard's Authoritarian Subculture: Critics describe shattered lives, abuse fo spiritual authority" by Sarah Posner Some complain that Gothard's teaching is largely based on his own reaction to the free love-rebellion spirit of the 1960s-1970s, rather than being based on the Bible itself.  Largely a method for helping parents maintain control of teens experimenting with drugs and sexuality, Godthard relied heavily on the philosophy of a patriarchy, going so far as to describe the father as a "hammer" which strikes the mother (chisel), to form the children into proper character   Issues of Concern     Bill Gothard and the Bible: A Report    ,  Ronald B. Allen Th.D.1, Professor of Hebrew Scripture, Western Baptist Seminary, Portland, Oregon, May 30, 1984, . Various books, websites, and communities have been formed on the basis of claims to have been psychologically, emotionally, abused as a direct result of Gothard's teachings "Battered Sheep"  "A Matter of Basic Principles: Bill Gothard & the Christian Life" by Don Veinot, Joy Veinot, & Ron Henzel. 21st Century Press, 2002.  "Independent Spirits" . Ronald B. Allen, now a Senior Professor of Bible Exposition at Dallas Theological Seminary, criticized Gothard as being, "basically anti-woman" . Additionally, after interviewing some former Gothard devotees, Sarah Posner reported that, "his unyielding theology, including 'non-optional' compliance with seven 'biblical' principles (the 'basic' life principles), compliance with 49 'character traits,' and other periodic Gothard revelations, are contrary to the Bible and have wreaked havoc on their emotional and spiritual lives of  families" 