St. John began his professional career under contract at Hanna-Barbera, working with founder Joseph Barbera on writing episodes of Tom & Jerry Kids, ''Droopy and Dripple'', and ''Spyke & Tyke''. He served as story editor/writer on over fifty episodes of the smash Fox Kids series ''Mighty Morphin Power Rangers'' where he injected his signature soap-style arcs to some of the series most well-known episodes, including the famous Green Ranger mini-series. He also penned episodes of other children's shows, including Sabrina, the Animated Series, The Incredible Hulk, Heavy Gear, and VR Troopers. He won a Humanitas Prize for an episode of the animated series The Legend of Prince Valiant.
St. John wrote and produced the award-winning Showtime Original Family Feature Seventeen Again (currently airing on Disney Channel), starring Tia and Tamara Mowry, stars of the hit WB series, ''Sister, Sister''. The movie was later nominated for a Young Artist's Award. He has written animated and live-action pilots for Disney Channel, Fox and ABC, as well as original features for many of the major studios.
In the mid 90s, St. John was the story editor and executive producer of the critically acclaimed web site, ''The Spot'', which he revived in 2004 with an all-new cast for the web, and created a cell phone component with over 1500 mobisodes that aired on Sprint PCS Vision enabled phones, essentially becoming the first American cell phone soap. A huge believer in online entertainment and the community it reaches, St. John created ''California Heaven'' --  as the first scripted TV series produced exclusively for broadband. It launched in August 2005 and is currently viewed in over 21 countries. Its first season was recently licensed to Japan.
Through his St. John-Fisher Post company with Todd Fisher, St. John has re-written and voice directed seven English-dub feature films for The Weinstein Company, including ''King of the Mountain'', ''The Rebel'', the animated musical ''The Great Music Caper'' starring Cheech Marin, Bow Wow and Jo Jo, and the animated musical ''Leo The Lion'' to be released on DVD in 2011. St. John also wrote all the lyrics and directed the singers for Leo The Lion, including "The Shaman Song" and "Vegetarian".
St. John, who previously won a philharmonic award at the age of 15 for a song he composed completely by ear, returned to composing music in 2007.  He was contacted by Jerry and Esther Hicks, the New York Times best-selling authors of ''Law of Attraction'' and ''Ask And It Is Given'', about bringing their children's book series to the big screen as a movie musical. St. John collaborated with Esther Hicks on the project and composed 15 original songs while Esther wrote the lyrics. Esther and Jerry asked to play two small roles in the film. St. John, who combined Sara Book 1 and Sara Book 2 into a final screenplay, will direct the film while his production company produces. It is to be shot on location in Austin, San Antonio and Bourne, Texas.  Stewart also scored 13 CD's of original music and cues for the Sara audio books on which the movie was based. The audio books were released through inspirational self-help publishers Hay House, Inc.
Stewart, a voting member of the Recording Academy (Grammys), composed his first solo album of inspirational music in the spring of 2008. Called ''Cloudwalking'', the album is currently available on iTunes, Amazon and select book stores including the Edgar Cayce bookstore ARE located in Virginia.  In 2010 Stewart released his second CD ''Global Symphony'' composed of 12 instrumental songs for meditation and relaxation. The CD made the entry ballot as "Best New Age Album" for the 2011 GRAMMYS. He has followed up that album with the February 2011 release of ''Love'', featuring 13 brand new tracks of stirring piano melodies.
In 2011, St. John authored a book with Todd Fisher entitled ''Love: A Story''.  The short book is comprised of Todd Fisher's love quotes and St. John's poignant story about a  woman's mystical encounter on a Malibu beach. It is rumored to be the first part in a series of empowering books. 