This '''list of alcohol laws of the United States by State''' provides an overview of alcohol-related laws by state throughout the United States.  This list is '''not''' intended to provide a breakdown of such laws by local jurisdiction within a state; see that state's alcohol laws page for more detailed information.
As of July 1988, all U.S. states have a minimum purchase age of 21.  However, prior to 1988, the minimum purchase age varied from state to state. Unlike the states, the U.S. territories of Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands have a minimum purchase age of 18 (21 in the Northern Mariana Islands and the recently added Guam).
City and County governments can set different sale hours.
3.2 beer: 5 a.m.-midnight
Beer can be purchased at grocery/convenience stores. Spirits and wine can only be purchased at liquor stores.
Supermarkets and other licensed business establishments may sell beer, low-alcohol liquors, and wine. Liquor must be sold in dedicated liquor stores which may be in a separate part of a grocery or a drug store. Beer must be sold in quantities of 32 or fewer ounces or greater than 1 gallon. Forty- and 64-ounce beverages are illegal.
In general, one may not be drunk in public.  Though there is no state law prohibiting drinking in public, most municipal corporations and political subdivisions limit the possession of open containers of alcohol to private property, with one notable exception being Savannah. A charge of public drunkenness is only warranted when one is drunk in public and his acts are either loud or disorderly.  
No sales on Christmas. Minors, including babies, are not allowed to enter a liquor store.  No sales of cold beer in grocery stores or gas stations. 
ID must be presented for all off-premises sales as of July 1, 2010 per IC 7.1-5-10-23.
Alcohol sale restriction and wet/dry (both by drink and package) allowed by both county and city local option.  
Approximately 53 counties in the state (mostly eastern and southern counties) are dry, all alcohol sale and possession prohibited; 16 "moist" counties (with "wet" cities allowing package liquor sales in counties otherwise dry); 21 counties that are otherwise dry but have communities with local option that allow sales of liquor by the drink or under special exemptions allowing sales at wineries.  Majority of wet counties around major metropolitan areas in state (Louisville, Lexington, Covington, Owensboro, Paducah).
Alcohol can be consumed in plastic cups in the streets of New Orleans and taken from club-to-club if the establishment allows it. Otherwise it depends on the locality. Most parishes other than Orleans Parish do not permit alcoholic beverages served at on-premise establishments to be taken from the premises. However, many parishes and municipalities permit consumption of packaged beverages (for example, cans of beer) on the street, as long as the packaging is concealed. Glass bottles on the streets are prohibited. One can enter most bars at 18 years of age but must be 21 years old to purchase or consume alcohol. 
Sales permitted until 3:00 am in those Kansas City and St. Louis bars grandfathered into the ability to double as liquor stores.
 which is beer containing between 0.5% and 3.2% alcohol.  Liquor laws apply to all liquor, and special laws apply to "non-intoxicating beer."
19, 2006, the Omaha city council voted 5-1 to repeal the law.
State law also renders public intoxication legal, and explicitly prohibits any local or state law from making it a public offence.
Though there is not a ban on selling alcoholic beverages at grocery stores,  New Jersey limits each chain to two licenses, so except for a few exceptions, most supermarkets/convenience stores/gas stations/pharmacies do not sell alcoholic beverages. In addition, liquor sales are only permitted in a separate department or attached sister store.
Bars are allowed to off-sale packaged goods.
With the exception of Jersey City and Newark, all municipalities MUST allow off-sales of beer and wine at any time on-sales are permitted. However, since alcoholic beverages are generally only found in package stores, this right is rarely exercised.
Alcoholic beverages by the drink as well as off-sales of beer and wine are permitted 24 hours a day in Atlantic City and Brigantine.
7 a.m.   11 p.m., except Sundays, for restaurants with beer and wine license.
Some counties may retain the Sunday morning beer prohibition which the state discontinued as of July 30, 2006.
Twelve dry towns, mostly in western region of state.
All liquor stores must be owned by a single owner, who owns that store and lives within a certain distance of it     effectually banning chain liquor stores from the state.  
New York City law does not allow open containers of alcohol in public. Thus, having a beer on the stoop of a building may draw a citation. However,  practically, bagged containers of alcohol are consumed in violation of the rule, since opaque bags conceal evidence necessary to prosecute a citation and it is difficult to warrant a search of the bag without other evidence (evidence discovered due to an improper search is inadmissible in court).  
No intoxicating liquor shall be handled by any person under twenty-one years of age, except that a person eighteen years of age or older employed by a permit holder may handle or sell beer or intoxicating liquor in sealed containers in connection with wholesale or retail sales, and any person nineteen years of age or older employed by a permit holder may handle intoxicating liquor in open containers when acting in the capacity of a server in a hotel, restaurant, club, or night club.  .
Alcohol can be sold/given to people under the age of eighteen if given by a physician in the regular line of his practice or given for established religious purposes, or the underage person is accompanied by a parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian.
Private clubs can serve alcohol from 7.00 a.m. till 3.00 a.m. Sales of alcohol have to stop at 3.00 a.m.
Beer can be purchased at beverage outlets (cases only), or restaurants (6-packs/restricted quantities) with Liquor Control Board   issued licenses, but not supermarkets. Non-alcoholic beer is an exception, and may be sold in supermarkets, but persons buying it still must be at least 21 years of age.
Sunday sales were prohibited in LCB stores until 2003 (selected locations) and beverage outlets (owner's option) until 2005.
There are currently seven state liquor stores located within supermarkets.
In 2010, a trial was initiated to test selling wine in grocery stores using vending machines. The buyer must present identification, look into a camera to allow an offsite PLCB employee to verify the identification, and blow into a breathalyzer to authorize the sale. (See )
As of 2007, some convenience stores and grocery stores were trying to fight Pennsylvania's strict laws on the sale of alcohol. (See   and )
Special permits may be purchased for certain organizations for fundraisers once per calendar year, and are valid for a total of six days under the same rules governing restaurants.  Grain alcohol prohibited as a beverage.
Image:Open container map 2006.gif|Prohibition of Open Containers of Alcohol in Motor Vehicles as of January 1, 2010
Image:Sunday ban off prem 2005 3-9-2006.GIF|Bans on Off-Premises Sunday Sales as of January 1, 2010
Image:Underage consumption map 2007.gif|Exceptions to Minimum Age of 21 for Consumption of Alcohol as of January 1, 2010
Image:Acs mnsr map 2006.GIF|Retail Distribution Systems for Spirits as of January 1, 2010
In many states, persons who hold a commercial driver's license are restricted to a blood alcohol content level of 0.08% or face revocation of their specialized license.
38.   http://reports.ncabc.state.nc.us/uploads/resources/17430a04580946f89205e6dd6e62b802.pdf