His wife's maiden name was Elizabeth Walker, the daughter of Augustine Walker of Great Amwell, Hertford; she was baptised 1583 in Baldock, Hertfordshire, England, died October 2, 1673.  She and his first five children, all daughters, came to America in the ship ''Anne'' in 1623. Once in America, they then had two sons before Richard's death in 1628.
Although the details are limited, Richard Warren and wife, Elizabeth, and children were mentioned in official records or books of the time period.
All seven of their children survived and had families, with thousands of descendants, including: President Ulysses S. Grant, President Franklin D. Roosevelt, former Alaska Governor Sarah Palin,
Warren is among the less documented of the ''Mayflower'' pioneers.  Clearly a man of rank, Warren was accorded by Governor William Bradford the prefix "Mr.," pronounced Master, used in those times to distinguish someone because of birth or achievement.  From his widow's subsequent land transactions, we can assume that he was among the wealthier of the original Plymouth settlers.  And yet, Bradford did not mention him in his ''History of the Plimouth Plantation'' except in the List of Passengers.
In ''Mourt's Relation'', published in 1622, we learn that Warren was chosen, when the ''Mayflower'' stopped at Cape Cod before reaching Plymouth, to be a member of the exploring party among 10 passengers (and 8 crew), and he was described as being "of London" among 3 men.  Charles Edward Banks, in ''Ancestry and Homes of the Pilgrim Fathers'' writes: "Richard Warren came from London and was called a merchand of that city (by Mourt)  Extensive research in every available source of information -- registers, chancery, and probate, in the London courts, proved fruitless in an attempt to identify him."
He was not of the Leiden, Holland, Pilgrims, but joined them in Southampton, England to sail on the ''Mayflower''.
Richard Warren received his acres in the Division of Land in 1623. In the 1627 Division of Lands and Cattle, in May of 1627, "RICHARD WARREN of the Mayflower" was given "one of the black heifers, 2 she-goats, and a grant of  of land"  at the Eel River (Plymouth, Massachusetts).  The Warren house built in that year (1627) stood at the same location as the present house; it was re-built about 1700, at the head of Clifford Road, with its back to the sea, and later owned by Charles Strickland (in 1976).
Warren died a year after the division, in 1628, the only record of his death being found as a brief note in Nathaniel Morton's 1669 book ''New England's Memorial'', in which Morton writes:
Research into the life of Richard Warren is still ongoing.
Elizabeth and Richard Warren's seven children, with their spouses, were:
All of Richard Warren's children survived to adulthood, married and had large families.  It is claimed that Warren is the ''Mayflower'' passenger with most descendants, numbering over 14 million.
More information has been published about Richard Warren than any other ''Mayflower'' passenger, probably because he has so many descendants (note that all seven of his children grew up and married). Warren's ancestry is uncertain, although there are some published sources that indicate he was descended from Charlemagne , and the International Society of the Descendants of Charlemagne considers him to be an established descendant. There is also dispute over his wife's maiden surname, but in 2002, Edward Davies located the will of Augustine Walker, who seems likely to have been her father.
Relatively little has been uncovered about Richard Warren's life in America.  He came alone on the ''Mayflower'' in 1620, leaving behind his wife and five daughters.  His family traveled on the ship "Anne" to join him in 1623, and Richard and Elizabeth subsequently had two sons, Nathaniel and Joseph, at Plymouth.