As of the 2008-09 school year, the school had an enrollment of 1,057 students and 70.2 classroom teachers (on a FTE basis), for a student   teacher ratio of 15.1., National Center for Education Statistics. Accessed March 21, 2011.
The school was the 166th-ranked public high school in New Jersey out of 322 schools statewide, in ''New Jersey Monthly'' magazine's September 2010 cover story on the state's "Top Public High Schools", after being ranked 164th in 2008 out of 316 schools. The school was ranked 153rd in the magazine's September 2006 issue, which surveyed 316 schools across the state.
Raritan High School is accredited by the New Jersey Department of Education and the Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools. The school offers to the students of Hazlet, a comprehensive program of education ranging from an academically oriented, college preparatory curriculum to courses in the vocational and career oriented field.
In May 2010, the Hazlet Township Board of Education embarked on a trial of "Going green to save green" by agreeing to enter into a Power Purchase Agreement with Ray Angelini, Inc. and Nautilus Solar Energy, LLC. Under this agreement, solar panels are to be erected on awnings over the student parking lot at Raritan High School and on the rooftop of Hazlet Middle School. The project, while expected to cost in total $7.5 million, will not be paid for by the Hazlet taxpayer: Nautilus Solar Energy, LLC and Angelini, Inc. are to pay the costs of construction and maintenance in their entirety and in return the Hazlet school district has contractually agreed to purchase the electricity at a rate "significantly below market cost." The district expects to save $1.7 million in energy costs over the next 15 years. 
Core members of the school's administration are:
The Raritan High School Rockets compete in the Shore Conference, an athletic conference made up of private and public high schools centered at the Northern Jersey Shore. All schools in this conference are located within Monmouth County and Ocean County. The league operates under the jurisdiction of the New Jersey State Interscholastic Athletic Association (NJSIAA).
The schools wrestling team won the 2006 Shore Conference Class A Central title. With a 19-4 record, the team reached the finals of the NJSIAA Central Jersey
The girls' track and field team won the 2007 Shore Conference A-Central Division title. They beat Red Bank Catholic High School's girls' track and field team for the first time in the school's 45-year history in 2007.