It was created in 1974 following a merger of previous forces under the Local Government Act 1972, along with the non-metropolitan county of Humberside.  It was a successor to the Hull City Police, and part of the areas of the York and North East Yorkshire Police, the old Lincolnshire Constabulary and the West Yorkshire Constabulary.
Since the abolition of Humberside in 1996, the local authority members of the Police Authority are now appointed by a joint committee of the councils of the East Riding of Yorkshire, Kingston upon Hull, North Lincolnshire, and North East Lincolnshire.
Proposals made by the Home Secretary on 21 March 2006 would have seen the force merge with North Yorkshire Police, South Yorkshire Police and West Yorkshire Police to form a strategic police force for the entire region.
Humberside uses a wide variety of vehicles, marked and unmarked. ProViDa is the standard in-car video unit used; the new 1997 Jai/ProViDa is also used too.  Nearly all of the vehicles in the forces fleet are now being changed to the instantly recognisable battenberg livery, with only vehicles such as those used by the Road Crime Unit staying in the traditional livery. All new cars and vans are coming in this livery, with older vehicles being re-liveried as a matter of course. All new vehicles coming into service now use LED lightbar technology, as opposed to the older halogen rotating light bars. The LED lightbars are much clearer to see, and provide a lot more illumination, along with front spots and rear reds. The main vehicles used are:
Proton Cars - These are used for general patrol and by IRT (Incident Response Teams). The majority of the Protons are Impians but there are still some older Wira cars in use plus a few Gen2 models. Humberside Police won the top award in the National Energy Efficiency Awards by running the vast majority of its fleet on Liquified Petroleum Gas. Most Protons are dual fuel, running both LPG and unleaded petrol.
Vauxhall Cars - There are several Vauxhall Astra estates on the fleet, seen mainly in C Division (East Riding of Yorkshire), these vehicles can carry more equpiment than the smaller Protons, as they may be the only unit available to deal with an incident in a rural area, such as a Road Traffic Collision, until a traffic vehicle can attend - this could be anything up to 30   45 minutes.
Volvo Cars - The Roads Policing (Traffic) Section use mainly Volvo cars. These are top of the range Volvo V70 T5 models. Many are fitted with ANPR (Automatic Number Plate Recognition) systems. The newest Volvo cars in the fleet have been marked with new style Battenburg graphics in yellow and blue (as opposed to the familiar orange stripe with blue edges).
Mercedes Sprinter Vans - A batch of new Sprinter vans was purchased in 2006 to replace the previous generation of Sprinter Vans which were almost a decade old. These vans are used for Public Order and crowd situations as well as for transporting prisoners. The latest shape vans are now coming onto divisions to replace the oldest sprinters on the fleet.
Mitsubishi Evolution X - The Roads Crime Section (RCS) has 2 Mitsubishi Evolution X vehicles, which have replaced the Subaru Impreza STi's. These are specially adapted models to enable Humberside Police's elite Roads Crime Section to pursue even the fastest vehicles.
Lexus IS-F - The Roads Crime Section (RCS) also operates this high performance vehicle as its command and control unit. 
Subaru Impreza STi - The Roads Crime Section (RCS) used to operate several Subaru Impreza vehicles, although these have now been replaced.
BMW 3 Series The Roads Crime Section (RCS) also operates a few BMW 3 series cars used to quickly ferry dog handlers and their dogs while accompanying the Mitsubishi Evolution X's.
BMW X5 The force also operates some BMW X5's which are used to ferry specialist firearms officers.
Specialist Vehicles - The fleet also consists of many specialist vehicles which are used for specific purposes. These include an Underwater Search vehicle, a bullet-proof Land Rover Defender, a Leyland Prison Bus, plus marked Police recovery vehicles.
MD Helicopters MD Explorer 902 aircraft     An aerial support section operates a helicopter equipped with video and infra-red surveillance, and the late 20th century NOTAR technology to replace the tail rotor, making the aircraft more quiet than helicopters with tail rotors.
The force under performed for a number of years and in October 2006 was named, jointly (with Northamptonshire Police), as the worst performing police force in the country, based on data released from the Home Office
In 2007 the force moved off the bottom of the unofficial league table thanks to "major improvements" in performance, according to the Home Office.
Since then performance has continued to improve with a 20% reduction in total recorded crime (to March 2009).  This overall reduction has included reductions in recorded vehicle crime (down 39%), domestic burglary (down 12%) and robbery (down 36%).  The force is also now starting to see increases in public confidence.  Figures published by the Home Office in July 2009 showed that between 2007/08 and 2008/09, Humberside Police had the second highest increase of all forces in England and Wales in the percentage of British Crime Survey British Crime Survey respondents who agree that their local police do an excellent/good job.
A report published in October 2009, following inspections by Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Constabulary between April and August, identified Humberside Police as one of the top eight forces in the country.
In April 2009 the force was cited as the poorest performing force for completing Criminal Record Bureaux (CRB) checks. The Home Office requirement is for 95% of requests to be completed within 14 days; Humberside Police managed to complete just 15%. As such checks are a condition of employment in numerous sectors the failure of the force to meet targets has caused delays for those waiting to commence employment in such areas.
Graham Stuart, the Member of Parliament for Beverley and Holderness, said he was disgusted with the failure of Humberside Police to carry out criminal record bureau checks within a reasonable time. He went to say ''   The delay in processing them stops people taking up work and has a crippling impact on voluntary groups who have to get their volunteers approved. The Humberside Police are seriously lagging behind virtually every other constabulary in the country and local people are being let down.   ''
The Police Authority shot to the national headlines in mid 2004 when it refused to sack Chief Constable David Westwood despite instructions from the then Home Secretary, David Blunkett.
It returned to the headlines in 2005 when Colin Inglis, its chairman at the time of the crisis appeared in court charged with indecent assault.
The Humberside Police Traffic Department has also taken part in the separate spin off series billed as ''Traffic Cops Specials'', entitled ''Motorway Cops'' on occasions, which often shows the Central Motorway Police Group, however often includes ''Humberside'' and numerous other forces Motorway Cops as they each deal with Incidents and Emergencies that occur on the motorways.
The series started in February 2011 and consisted of 8 episodes where the cameras rolled 24/7, with offences from wide ranges being seen.