When a page is split into several subarticles, the new articles don't show the edit history of that section. Since cut-and-past moves are a Bad Thing (tm) by the GFDL requirements, what is the correct way to do splits (that are always cut-and-paste)? In the splits I did, I just linked the source article in the edit comment box of the new articles, and the target article in the source article's edit box. Is this enough for the GFDL requirement? I'm asking because I don't really see a ''very'' big difference between this technique and doing a cut-and-paste move that is done with a decent edit summary&mdash;both things make it harder but not impossible to find the original authors. (And if the original page is deleted, the history is lost).
A related question is what to do if I find a cut-and-paste split without a decent edit summary that tells me where the content came from. I came across this situation yesterday: Kurukshetra was split up into Kurukshetra war and Kurukshetra District without an acknowledgment in these articles, and turned into a redirect to  , which I have since moved to the standard title Kurukshetra (disambiguation). I left notes about the edit histories at   and  . Is this enough to satisfy the GFDL or should there be an edit history comment? And is there a policy about splitting somewhere that I didn't find?     00:43, 11 December 2005 (UTC)
The template  automatically adds pages it's on to  . If you take a look at the category, you will see that  ,   and   are all added, but they shouldn't be.
Is there a way to stop these pages from being added to the category? Any solution ideas would be welcome.--  02:56, 11 December 2005 (UTC)
I'm wondering why in my postings here and in similar places there is no link to my user page. That's been the case for a week or so. I notice other users who seem to have the same problem. Halcatalyst 03:53, 11 December 2005 (UTC)
Yup, it was the "Raw signature" setting. Merci bien!   02:20, 12 December 2005 (UTC)
Using a template? I don't know about it. help me!!   11:37, 11 December 2005 (UTC)
Is there a way to spell check edits?  Thanks.
Can someone please advise me on how to create a new biography page
There appears to be lots of information here about how to edit and add to existing pages, but I can't find any instructions on how to add *new* pages.
Any help would be very much appreciated.
K. Saunders
I already have an account. You said: "type in the article title in the search box, and it will let you create it." I did this, but there was no option to create a new article, only additional search options.
I don't want to create an article titled "Russel Grant", that was just an example.
So again - Can someone please tell me how to create a new article (biography)?
Thanks.
Kate.
Click on *what* article title?? I'm trying to *create* an article. Since I haven't been able to create an article yet, there obviously is no article title.
Your other suggestion ("change the page name to what you want") doesn't work. It just gives "Article not found" and goes on to say "you can create it if you log in or create an account" (I *have* an account, and I  ve logged in with it).
Surely there must be simple instructions somewhere on how to create a new article? This is very frustrating.
In Garhwal section there is no link of any reference about uttranchali film    Preceding   comment added by   (       ) 
I added a page on Sts Chrysanthus and Daria, as it was listed as one that was missing, and yet when i put it in the search function, it doesn't appear.  What have i done wrong?--  21:11, 11 December 2005 (UTC)
Thanks.  It was a spacing thing.   I was having a typing lapse.--  23:56, 12 December 2005 (UTC)
A while ago I remember our having a page that listed Wikipedians who had access to the Lexis Nexus system, and who could consequently look up US legal cases. Does that still exist? --   |   22:18, 11 December 2005 (UTC)
Who is the publisher of wikipedia? Also, what is the copyright year?
I have question and I'm not sure where to direct it. From what I understand, Calvin and Hobbes and Peanuts are no longer original comic strips. Watterson retired and Schultz has passed on. Yet, the los angeles times carries both strips and the date in the panel is the current date. I was hoping that the wikipeda article on Calvin and Hobbes would clarify whether other artists are now doing the strip or whether these are re-runs. Where should i direct this question?
I wikified the footnotes in the Rick Warren article using the  and  templates.  For some reason, the footnotes are auto numbered beginning with 2 instead of 1.  I have tried changing the first  to include '''|1''', but that didn't change anything.  Why are they starting with 2 and how can I change the page to start with 1? Here are .   01:49, 12 December 2005 (UTC)
I worked in Dongguan, Guangdong Province during the week and return to Hong Kong in weekends. About two months ago, I noticed that wiki cannot be opend in China but all returns to normal when I come back to Hong Kong. 
Can someone tell me how to log on the wiki in China please?
Hong Kong
Kenneth
I'm sorry, I'm very confused.
If I make a page like ".../User:Nepomuk/Fruit"
That will be saved if I save it.
Now, in that page, should I make my links like
Or (hopefully) can I just write oranges as my link and this test page will be created in my user space only?
Sorry, there seems to be so much user help info I'm a little lost...
Thanks,
Nepomuk
Hi, I clicked on the link "Gambler's Palm" on my page, and on the page that came up typed in a brief description of the Gambler's palm.  In my web browser the URL is http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gambler%27s_Palm, that is, it seems anyone can now look at it.  When I search on Gambler's palm, the page I just entered comes up.  My question is, is there an easy way to have the link Gambler's Palm on the general page I am creating on sleight of hand, and be able to edit the Gambler's Palm page, but to *not* have this page available (yet) to wikipedia users (except me).  IE, I want to be able to make a rough draft of my sleight of hand pages in some sort of sandbox environment and not have general users be able to see it.
When I create a numbered list, all the numbers show up as 1s. The page is below:
LOL, can't find my way back to the page where someone has hopefully posted an answer to my question -- so I'm posting a fake question to bring me back to that page...
As a newbie I have to say this is the most complicated help section on any website I have been to.
Yes, once I learn more about Wikipedia I will help streamline this help process! (ie., I'm not just a complainer...:))
Here I am -- I find my own message :)
User Barry has sent the following e-mail to the Wikipedia Help Desk. I am unable to help him so I am posting my question here.   05:31, 12 December 2005 (UTC)
If you could help Barry, it would be greatly appreciated.   05:31, 12 December 2005 (UTC)
I have several questions about getting a username:
Also, as an added question, why do you need cookies to have a username?  And what exactly are cookies? (I already looked at the cookie link at the "create account" place, so I don't want to read it, again)
Also, if I get a pseudynom username, how long can I keep it? --anon
Okay, thank you! --anon
An editor has left this on my page. Someone with the expertsise may please reply to him directly.   --  07:00, 12 December 2005 (UTC)
There seems to be an awful lot of spelling errors on most talk pages, making me think that perhaps people aren't encouraged to correct them.    Preceding   comment added by   (       ) 
I agree with TenofAllTrades. It ''may'' offend people. Also, since the talk pages are only for the editors, and not for those who look up things in the encyclopaedia, it's a bit of a waste of server space IMHO, since every version is stored in the page history. With an article, we do have to correct little typos, since they undermine the credibility of the encyclopaedia. With talk pages, I'd say leave well enough alone.     16:04, 12 December 2005 (UTC)
Hi, i thought i would be crafty and make my own Australian userbox. The image i want to use is Icons-flag-au. I can successfully make the userbox as i want but the flag picture comes up blurry.  I have tried with other flags and it looks normal, i think it has to do with the quality of the picture. Is there anyway i can get a good Australian Flag picture? Thanks for any help, --  07:26, 12 December 2005 (UTC)
I want to add the article Stapedius to the template "Muscles of the head" (shown on this page: Tensor tympani.) How do I do that, or who do I contact? Thanks.   10:36, 12 December 2005 (UTC)
I am looking for icons/pictures that can be used in userboxes. I am looking for a laptop/notebook and a picture representing Perth, Western Australia. Any ideas?--  13:21, 12 December 2005 (UTC)
Your wikipedia? I'm sorry, this help desk is about this website (English Wikipedia). Perhaps you should try asking the guys at .   15:19, 12 December 2005 (UTC)
This was sent to the mailing list. He says he has encountered IP blocks and that isn't the problem. His account isn't blocked either. I'm not sure what to tell him. I will forward any responses to him via email as he can't edit even talk pages. He has requested that we not send email using the "Email this user" function as that email address is "used as a spam-trap."           15:52, 12 December 2005 (UTC)
Something changed a few months ago (I think there was a major update around then) and now I can't see my entire watchlist.  When I click on "all" in the watchlist page the returned page only shows that last month's worth of changes.  I have tried editing the URL but numbers of days greater than 30 don't seem to make any difference.
Is there some way for me to see the entire list as I used to?
If I find information who's factuality I think is questionable, how can I mark it for review?
Have the blink and marquee tags been disabled in Wikipedia? I wouldn't blame whoever banned them (they are very annoying), but I was considering putting a simple "This is an  example  of blink. Note: Your browser may not display this properly" to the blink tag, but the tags simply appear in the text instead of becoming hidden. I have FireFox and creating a test HTML with blink worked fine. smurrayinchester( ), ( ) 20:43, 12 December 2005 (UTC)
Thank you.
If an image has been taken before 1923 but never published, is it public domain? Or do I have to post it as "Fair Use"? --  ( ) 22:21, 12 December 2005 (UTC)
The pictures are stored in the Loyola University Chicago archives and would be digitized for $5 apiece plus $10 for a CD (a small contribution to Wikipedia for some historical pictures.) BUT the University says that since the pictures were never officially published then even if they give me a digitized picture that I paid for, while I may own that digital representation of the picture I will have to ask for their permission to publish it (which they would consider doing for Wikipedia, but if say Answers.com or some other service wanted to use it I would have to request permission as well. --  ( ) 05:13, 13 December 2005 (UTC)
There are a bunch of images that were originally on Wikipedia, but were copied (manually, it appears) to the Commons, and the originals on Wikipedia are marked with  . I made an improvement to all of them on the Commons, but since they originally resided on Wikipedia, the images I edited were simply copies, and the Wikipedia versions were not updated. I want them to update the way any image that is first posted to the Commons (and then automatically appears on Wikipedia) does. I have a feeling that maybe if I put all of them on   and they are deleted from Wikipedia, then they will just point to their Commons counterparts. Is this so? Is there some other way I should achieve this? Is this even possible? Thanks. --  22:35, 12 December 2005 (UTC)
You know what, I think this would be easier if you all actually saw this:     (This is an example of the situation that I said applies to most in the group; also note that this is completely seperate from my   for  .) --  00:18, 13 December 2005 (UTC)
Please, I want to know wich is the diameter of earth between the poles.
Thanks   Preceding   comment added by   (       ) 23:41, December 12, 2005
Well, the title says it all. I've tryed to use templates that do this, copy the markup code, but it still doesn't work. Can someone guide me through this; I can't find documentation anywhere. Thanks. --  ( ) 01:13, 13 December 2005 (UTC)
The articles (or talk pages) will appear in the category the next time they're edited. You can go and just "edit" them and save them with no changes, that will make them appear in the category. (I just added   using this procedure).     01:32, 13 December 2005 (UTC)
No, perhaps I should rephrase that: the templates go on the talk page; is there any way for the article to be in the category without adding it manualy? --  ( ) 01:42, 13 December 2005 (UTC)
Hi my name is Mike.  I am new to Wikipedia and i would like to learn how to create good articles and also how to edit pages.  There are many other things about Wikipedia that i would like to learn so if there is anyone who is a Wikipedia Administrator who would like to dedicate some of their time to teaching me what there is to know about wikipedia i would really appriciate that.  My account name is Studentmrb
Thank you
Hello, I wrote almost all of Endgame#Books_on_endgames.  At the end of the data for each book I put a comment.  Some of them are "good", "great", "not as good as others", "difficult reading", "elementry", "classic", etc.  These are all my evaluations of the book.  Is this too POV/original research?  If it is too much POV, is there a way I can keep those comments without violating NPOV?  (I'm trying to give some guidance to the reader.)     , 03:12, 13 December 2005 (UTC)
I have Trillian and I can't connect connect to the #wikipedia irc channel. Please help! --  04:45, 13 December 2005 (UTC)
Hi there:
Just uploaded my first picture:
And I've added a slight summary. I was wondering how to add picture information such as camera used, iso etc. in a table format. I'm very new but very interested in this, I'm sure there is a page somewhere, all I need is a prod in the right direction! Thanks.    Preceding   comment added by   (       ) 05:37, 13 December 2005 (UTC)
Thanks for the response, you're very quick here! I've been lurking for over a year and decided to contribute some images. It turns out that file I uploaded doesn't have EXIF b/c I edited it with photoshop (I'm not sure why PS would remove that info?) anyways all the other photos I upload will be originals.
Perhaps I can just type in the camera info, I doubt anyone will read it/care about it anyways. Thanks for the kind words and see you around!   05:48, 13 December 2005 (UTC)
Hi there,
I made a (very minor) edit to a page last week, and enjoyed it so much I've now come back and created an account. Is there any way to claim my edit as a contribution? I'm rather proud that I've now gotten involved with Wikipedia (finally!) and would like my contributions to start from the beginning...
Many thanks,
Mika, a reader, has asked the Wikimedia Help Desk:
I am not aware of how to do that so if you could provide advice, it would be greatly appreciated.   06:48, 13 December 2005 (UTC)
HELP, I CANT UPLOAD PHOTOS! I TYPE IN ALL THE INFO and select the right file location but when I click submit button it goes page cannot be displayed! I've uploaded b4.   06:59, 13 December 2005 (UTC)
Why is it like this?   07:06, 13 December 2005 (UTC)
Thanks, yeah I finally got it to work. There was a problem with the image coming through our home server.
Hello. I'm using the Monobook skin. It looks like yesterday its stylesheet was changed, and now hyperlinks are not underlined unless the mouse cursor is over them. Please tell me if there's a place where changes like this are discussed. (I really hate that look, the hyperlinks are not contrast with other text.)   08:31, 13 December 2005 (UTC)
I've been prettifying  articles and created a series of templates, which can be found in . They work nicely, except that I can't find out the nice way to get the text flow around the tables right all the time. 
See for example the most important . I set up the align="left" as the default alignment, but as result, when editing long texts with several template tables, one has to insert a lot of newlines or &lt;br&gt;'s to get the text flow correctly. See e.g. Simultaneous double squeeze or Simple squeeze. I'm not even sure if the text will turn out correctly on all browsers, screen resolutions and font sizes.
So, the problem is that one would like to "terminate" explanation on the diagram and go on to the next paragraph or diagram, which should be located '''below''' the diagram, without inserting newlines. I'm looking for a suggestion, how to do it properly, either in template or in text. 
As a side question, is it possible to get rid of the borders and white background in corner-squares of the table in ? 
TIA,   11:12, 13 December 2005 (UTC)
Hi,
On Tanga, someone recently added a large section that was obviously copy-pasted from a website. When queried about whether this was copyvio or not, the contributor indicated that the source website contains the statement that, "''Permission to reproduce articles from this publication is granted for the express interest of public information dissemination and promotion of Tanga   s heritage, provided the source is acknowledged''". I presume this is compatible with the GFDL?   12:05, 13 December 2005 (UTC)
It seems that almost every time I edit my own talk page, my user page goes on my watch list against my wish. This has happened three times now. Is this some kind of bug in MediaWiki? Should I file a bug report? &mdash;   |   13:18, 13 December 2005 (UTC)
Ok, I'm in the middle of the creating Templates learning curve, and the documentation is failing me.  I have successfully created 2 page templates, and used them, and now I want to know:
The only examples I can see that do these things are, like the Template:Language, far too complex for me to find my simple answers.
Thanks for your patience,
My Question is....
1.How much data can be tranferred at a same time in a Twisted pair cable & Coaxial cable or what is the total capasity of those cable?
How many daily page views does the english language version of wikipedia get on average?
Cheers
Jim   15:16, 13 December 2005 (UTC)
I would like to use Wikipedia software to create a wiki-style site. However, I want the content of the site not to be in the public domain. So, for example, I would use the wikipedia sofware to create an encyclopedia dedicated to a randomly chosen example of e.g. business cards. The wikipedia software would obviously belong to Wikipedia, but would the content I create, e.g. long scholarly entries on business cards, be in the public domain under the various wikipedia licences?
Cheers
Jim   15:21, 13 December 2005 (UTC)
Do I need a separate login to upload images to Wikimedia Commons?  If so, why?
What's the advantage of Commons over uploading images to Wikipedia?
Thanks.    16:51, 13 December 2005 (UTC)
You might want to try looking at the previous discussions on this topic, such as   - unsurprisingly, you are not the first to suggest such a move ''but there has not been a consensus that this would be the right thing to do''. You are, of course, free to not use or contribute to Wikipedia if you do not agree with its policies; you are also free to discuss those policies with other users, but I'm afraid you will not find consensus easy to reach on this contentious an issue. -   21:05, 13 December 2005 (UTC)
What is the best way to delete User pages that I no longer need or use?
How do I cited Wikipedia webpage
In the Hebrew Wikipedia, for example, the toolbar contains more functions. How can I add more functions to the English toolbar?   21:30, 13 December 2005 (UTC)
Hello again. This time, I ask if it is possible to use an image (specifically,  , which is rendered as ) to link to a page besides the image (i. e.,  ). My plan is to use in in my signature to easily link to the Project, so I can get there easily and also to advertise for it. If it involves Javascript, advanced HTML, or anything complicated, it's not worth it. Thanks. --  ( ) 21:50, 13 December 2005 (UTC)
It is Wikipedia policy to link to Image pages when clicking on the images themselves.  That is where the edit history and copyright information are stored.   |  21:58, 13 December 2005 (UTC)
I like the version of a signature with both a link to the User: page and a link to the User talk: page. There was a method to add a link to my User talk: page to the signature.
On the 'User profiles' tab of the preferences page, there is room to add a nickname to the user name. Instead of adding a nickname, I had added 
That did the trick, my signature would have both a link to my User: page and to my User Talk page.
However, there seems to be a glitch in some character conversion.
You have to check out the source, I tried an escape with the ''nowiki /nowiki'' tags, but to no avail.
Since the characters are not properly there, the string is not parsed as a link.
Is there another way to include a link to my User talk: page in my signature?
I have seen it used here and there... Example:
Revert edits by 193.0.252.16 (talk) to last version by someone
How do I easily create these wikilinks in the Edit summary?
Thanks.
In the specific case you were talking about, this is formed in this way: "Reverted edits by   ( ) to last version by someone" becomes: Reverted edits by   ( ) to last version by someone
Hope that helps.   22:22, 14 December 2005 (UTC)
How to identify adultration in milk ?
Please take your question to the  .  This page is for questions about wikipedia, and someone is probably more likely to answer it there.--  07:56, 14 December 2005 (UTC)
Is it possible to have data in one page such as images or contents of a table and have a dynamic link to it in another page. Such that changes in one place are reflected in the other page having the linked content ? Like MS Excel formulas - more or less....   07:37, 14 December 2005 (UTC)
You could use further nested switches to select between calculated years of population:
I've seen some pages (notably pages on cities) include markup which specifies the latitude and longitude.  I have a collection of GPS coordinates that I think would enhance some existing articles.  Is there a standard format to use for this?  Standard markup text?  Standard significant figures or number of decimal places?  I searched around the help and FAQ and couldn't find anything specific.
I am the oldest child (from his first wife) of JHF.  I notice some inaccuracies and omissions in the article.  How do I set them straight?  In the interest of truth, justice, and the American Way,  Cynthia Tannehill Faulk Ryland.
An article I created, Slope side, has been tagged for cleanup.  I'm trying to see what is so awfull.  Can anyone shed some insight?  Thanks,    15:36, 14 December 2005 (UTC)
Hi,
I created and uploaded the image   over a year ago for the Tournament article, and the image now seems to have been deleted.  It's possible that I didn't have a GFDL tag on it, but I don't remember.  Is there a way to undelete the image?    17:06, 14 December 2005 (UTC)
What is the easiest to insert a chemical formula into an article? E.g. H20--> 1/2 O2+ H+ so that it is pretty? 
The user from the IP :   has repeadetly posted racist comments and vandalism on this page, Jew on December 14, and I and other users cleaned it up, who shouls I ask to ban this user. Thanks
And also how can I ask for a article to be deleted? such as Nightclub shit, which I find has no real reason to exist.
I don't know if this question is for the Help desk, but how do I become a memeber of the Wikipedia groups such as  ?
I have just discovered Wikipedia and found "Ice Fiahing". I did not see any reference to "stunning" fish through the ice. I'm sure this is rare, but as a young boy, when the conditions permitted, (no snow on the ice) used an axe to give a heavy blow on the ice above fish in shallow water. The blow would temporairly stun the fish. I would then chop through an retrieve the fish. I must not be the only one in the world who has done this. Would this be appropriate to include in "Ice Fishing"?
On Wikipedia i am wishing to find what i think is the best userpage.  How would i go about telling people about this.  I already have a point about it on my userpage but how can i let a lot of people know? --  15:07, 15 December 2005 (UTC)
What's the standard etiquette when someone leaves a message on your talk page:
All of these seem pretty awkward - is there a better way? Ta.   15:14, 15 December 2005 (UTC)
How does one edit a page show that it shows up in a "search" with the proper relevance.  For example I want the article "Jamestown Bridge (Old)" to show up under a search for "Jamestown Bridge".  Any suggestions? Thank you
I want to add this: 
Alone aloft I alight 
By the way, using : to indent doesn't look right.   17:10, 15 December 2005 (UTC)
I want it to look like this: http://img410.imageshack.us/img410/9894/peom4ii.jpg. 
But it ends up looking like this:
Alone aloft I alight 
See the difference?
Try the following.     19:40, 15 December 2005 (UTC)
Alone aloft I alight 
Oh dear it really looks like Wikipedia's capability is limited here. It's important in any encyclopedia that you're able to exactly transcribe anything you want to quote. Here I can't indent a line without it looking like a stanza break, which it isn't.   20:15, 15 December 2005 (UTC)
Thanks jnothman, I'll adopt your suggestion. Though I'd still criticise Wikipedia for not being easily capable of the exact transcription of poetry. Perhaps someone should put something about this on one of the tutorial pages (if it isn't already there)?   23:57, 30 December 2005 (UTC)
Here's my question: How do I scratch the inaccessible part of my back?
Just joking of course! :-)
Actually: If I encounter a page that I think is mess from a standpoint of redundancy, relevancy of information and as such *not really an encyclopedic article*, how should I proceed? (I mean apart from mentioning my wish on the talk page and being shredded for it:) The article in question is Ronald Reagan and as you can imagine people there tend to be quite sensitive to changes to their additions. That, IMO, leads to this article being continually added to but hardly ever cleaned up (I'm probably exaggerating here:)
Maybe someone wants to have a look at the article and  . Am I completely wrong or do others too think this article needs work cleaning? Your opinions would be highly appreciated! --  17:14, 15 December 2005 (UTC)
I was afraid of that:) That article mostly '''feels''' like a mess... 
Anyway:
To be honest, I hoped that an experienced Wikipedian could tell me wether I rightfully perceive the article as being in need of cleaning, or wether it adheres to the standards closely enough. --  17:48, 15 December 2005 (UTC)
I'm trying to convert Schizophrenia to using  for references instead of  , as it does now.  I created   to do this, but I'm not happy with .  Under the "History" heading, you'll find the very first reference ("However, a recent study...").  However, it is assigned number 2, not 1!  What's going on here?  
My first theory was that there was an external link (like ) somewhere earlier in the text, because these use the same numbering sequence (right?), but this seems not to be the case. /  17:34, 15 December 2005 (UTC)
Is it acceptable to delete pointless comments from talk pages?  I mean pointless in the sense of lines like "I like rice" or "haha I got me a computer" or something similarly stupid and unrelated to the page. --  21:46, 15 December 2005 (UTC)
I set my skin or version, whatever it is, to amethyst in my user preferences. There is some problems with this version. 22:33, 15 December 2005 (UTC)
I'm editing the occupational therapy page, and down at the bottom, under occupational therapy associations by state, I was able to list all the states in three columns.  Is there a way of changing the column widths so that the columns are closer together?  I think it looks a little silly the way it is now spread out so far out.  The reason I'm doing columns in the first place is because I don't want the list to go so far down. --  23:03, 15 December 2005 (UTC)
Hi I'm writing information about my town Orangeville, Ontario. If you look at it now it's a bit of a mess. Can someone tell me how to put my text into columns?
Oliver D.    Preceding   comment added by   (       ) 23:34, 15 December 2005 (UTC)
The population demographics part. Thanks for the advice though.
Hi,
I am a frequent user of Wikipedia. I think that adding the following two features in Wikipedia will make it more comfortable -
1. Add a Wikipedia search facility from the Internet Explorer taskbar (similar to Google's, but just the search facility, nothing else). You might be able to add this to one of the existing task bars as well since it's just a box.
2. Have a separate address to receive improvement suggestions. Using Helpdesk for such purpose is somewhat confusing.
Thanks,
Saranga
What happened to Kate's edit counter? I have a link on my user page to my edit count, but it doesn't work anymore. Was the site removed, or can anyone tell me if the page was moved to another URL? --  00:51, 16 December 2005 (UTC)
Is there any way to force the "What links here" tool to "update" itself? I recently split the List of Formula One World Champions page into more detailed lists List of Formula One World Constructors' Champions and List of Formula One World Drivers' Champions. I wanted to fix up all the links to the original list so they point to the relevant page (drivers or constructors), and found that most of the pages on the "What links here" list were linked through templates such as  . I fixed this up, but the pages still appeared in the list. Is there any way to force it to adjust itself after changes? Thanks   ( ) 04:03, 16 December 2005 (UTC)
I was reading the article joke and noticed, under the "What's the Difference" subcategory there is a joke with half the punchline missing because it is crude. On some article's history pages, I've seen people restore rude parts, and they had a term for it (aking to weasel words, but different of course). I can't find anything in the style guides/help section to clarify. Could someone tell me what the rule is? I have *not* entered the rest of the joke yet. In its place is the original "..." which seems inappropriate.
I want to start an article/project of different boy scout patches, in particular the many different patches at the 2005 National Jamboree. I was wondering if it would be legally okay for people to scan the patches and post them on the article with the corresponding patch info. --  13:48, 16 December 2005 (UTC)
Check at Alumina or ask at the refernce desk, see the instruction at the top of the page.     15:48, 16 December 2005 (UTC)
Why is this invalid?
Thanks!
Renee Stephenson
Resource Development Supervisor
Educational Programs
The Rotary Foundation of Rotary International
One Rotary Center
1560 Sherman Avenue
Evanston, IL  60201
E-mail:  stephenr@rotaryintl.org
How do I stop somebody from making repeated personal attacks?
Thanks.--  17:53, 16 December 2005 (UTC)
What is the proper procedure for re-nominating articles that have survived a deletion debate to AfD again? Specifically, what title for the sub-subpage should I use? The article in question is Talark. -- ''' ''' 22:02, 16 December 2005 (UTC)
I have several questions:
Thank you! --anon
Actually, I want to know about the sister projects, like Wiki-Quote, Wikitonary, etc.  And I actually have a few more questions I forgot to add:
Thank you, again! --anon
Well, there are about 18 external links on that article and as for the proposal page, should I post it directly there or on a discussion page? --anon
Oh, dear, I'm back here AGAIN after making a move then getting flummoxed by the need to find and fix double redirects.
I just moved Shakespeare characters to List of Shakespearean characters. Then I went , and I see a huge list of things to check out and maybe fix. 
But that's where I get stumped. Take the first sub-sub-headed item, Hamlet. I cannot see a direct link from the Hamlet page to the new page or the old page, except in  , and I've already fixed that.
Of course there are links FROM the new page to all of these places, but surely (I think???) a link FROM a moved page ought not to need any fixing.
Can anyone point me in the right direction?   23:03, 16 December 2005 (UTC)
Obviously, not everything merits a Wikipedia article.  What are the guidelines to determine if topic, particularly a non-person, non-place topic, merits a Wikipedia article?
I apologize if this issue is discussed elsewhere.  I would expect to find it the policy guidelines.  However, I did not.
Hello, I have recently been trying to block persistent vandals with templates such as , ,  , , and . However, the block effects do not seem to take action, as the vandal continuously vandalizes the page even after I added the templates. I removed the '''subst:''' prefix, but there was still no effect. Can somebody please explain to me what is happening? Also, does the '''subst:''' tag cancel out the block effect? Thanks!   02:31, 17 December 2005 (UTC)
I can't get on freenode... is there any other Wikipedia channel available?   04:01, 17 December 2005 (UTC)
Are jews allowed to use wikipedia? Because that would be just wrong.
Hi I just noticed that there were 100s of blanked pages in the special pages-short pages list.  I reverted a few.  But there is no way I can do them all.  Is there any way I can ask for assiatance from the administrators to help me clean this up?  Also, is there a way to stop people from blanking pages, or to have a bot automaticaly unblank them?  Just curious   07:41, 17 December 2005 (UTC)
I moved the article on the Suzuki SV650 and SV650S motorcycle from its old title of Suzuki SV650(S) to a better title of SV650.  Then I realized that a more appropriate title would be Suzuki SV650 and so I moved the article again.  I did the moving by hand because I was unaware of the wikipedia function for moving articles.  In between the moves I was editing/creating a bunch of articles and fixing their redirects, but suddenly I can't save my edits any longer.  It lets me edit and press the Save button, but then when the article reloads nothing has changed.  Did I get banned or something for doing a burst of editing?   08:24, 17 December 2005 (UTC)
I was just roaming on Wiki and i noticed that, it has all been deleted? is there any thing we can do to restore it some how??
What computer language/programming language does Wikipedia use?--   13:31, 17 December 2005 (UTC)
Should the {ref}'s be after the period or before it?--  17:15, 17 December 2005 (UTC)
Is there a way to link a term like emetazoa (which redirects to animal in Wikipedia) to the Wikispecies article on eumetazoa (which contains more useful information on the specific term) without using a "see also" side bar like this one ? TheLimbicOne 19:08, 17 December 2005 (UTC)
Hi, i created a page few days ago but when i perform a search by all or part of its title, i get no results. However, when i used a link to this page in another article, i was directed to this page. what might be missing? Should i add something to the page title?
If I draw a Picture of a Chocobo or Black Mage can I licence it as GFDL or is it fair use? -- ( / ) 20:24, 17 December 2005 (UTC)
When will the ban on anonymous users end?  I know it's a test, but how long will it take? --anon
Perhaps, but I still would like to know when the ban is going to end. --anon
I created an image for an article with my digital camera, and I was wondering what a favorable size is for uploads. The original image size is above 1600X1280 because I wanted it to be high-quality so I'm trying to figure out what would be an agreeable size without wasting too much memory. -   05:20, 18 December 2005 (UTC)
Sorry about that, I tried to keyword search the article first before making the question. It would seem not quite hard enough though. Thanks. -   05:49, 18 December 2005 (UTC)
Hi, I recently figured out how to use images in the commons on articles on wikipedia.  The two things I can't figure out are:
Thanks   07:49, 18 December 2005 (UTC)
Hi.
I want to create a new page of a person where there already is an entry in wikipedia about another person of the same name. How do I do this correctly? 
Best regards, Sven.
What are barnstars and why do Wikipedians award them? Are they administrator gifts or can novice Wikipedians award them? Is there any Wikipedia project pages that give information about barnstars. Thanks!--  19:16, 18 December 2005 (UTC)
I've been keeping an eye on the Jay-Z page (I don't know why), and I am wondering what the policy is on dealing with the anonymous revisions of his net worth which keep reoccuring.  I have referenced his net worth of 286$ mil in  recent version of his page, but the page is often reverted to saying "between 80$ and 100$ mil" uncited.  Can I keep reverting this particular edit until someone brings up a better reference?  I guess I'm just asking if I keep reverting, am I going to run against the 3rr or is this sort of thing ok?  ( ) 03:13, 19 December 2005 (UTC)
I don't know where I should go for this, but I think the standard signature created with ~~~~ should include a link for the talkpage by a method such as
Please help to create such.   '''*'''  05:40, 19 December 2005 (UTC)
Is there anything I can do to stop the policy of not letting anonymous users create articles?  Cause I would like it to end! --anon
Well, I might get a username, but I still don't think it's right that Wikipedia has to force a person to get a usrname just to create articles!  I mean, isn't this the ''free'' encyclopedia?  And if I put many good articles into the WP AFC, does that mean the policy will end (or have a better chance at least)? --anon
What's an IMHO?  And I know that it's easy, but I have a few reasons for not getting it yet.  And I would like to create some articles because I believe they are needed.  And if put many good articles into the WP AFC, does that mean the policy will end or have a better chance at least?  By the way, I'm sorry if I came off a bit too strongly about the policy! --anon
What is the proper way to change the title of a section? 
I would like to rename a section of an article, but it occurs to me that there might be links from other pages to this particular section. I don't want to break those links (but I don't know where they are).
Is there a way to find out what pages link to a ''section'' of an article?
Thanks in advance,
Hi, I have a typo in the title of my contribution... how can I revise it? (preceding unsigned comment by  )
How do I propose a page for protection if there's a full-scale edit-war on that page? --  09:59, 19 December 2005 (UTC)
Someone told me that there exists a tool for easy browsing of Wikipedia category trees (or "graphs", I realize they're not real trees, but I'd like to browse them as such). That person did not know the URL, and I can't find it, so I'm wondering if anyone has an idea of what s/he might have meant. /  12:04, 19 December 2005 (UTC)
Hi, I've just joined Wikipedia and would like to contribute some articles on places in Portugal which I have visited and which have not yet been described.
I would also like to add some photographs I have taken myself.
My problem:
1. Most info sources are not Public Domain (i.e. reference books, Portuguese internet sites); books are almost always copyrighted.
2. Most of the internet sites I have checked for data are not copyrighted as far as I can see, but how can one be sure?
3. Original Research is NOT allowed.
> One of the keys to writing good encyclopedia articles is to understand that they should only refer to facts, assertions ...etc., '''that have already been published by a reputable publisher'''<<.  Surely, anything which has already been published by a reputable publisher is by definition almost always copyright material?
How on earth is one supposed to obtain the facts about a town/place, such as population, historical dates, etc., when the only available sources are probably all protected by copyright?
Or is it OK for me to extract the '''facts''' from these sources, write about them in my own words and quote the sources and provide internet links as confirmation of verifiability?
Also, regarding photographs I have taken myself; can I somehow indicate this fact when inserting them to indicate that they are therefore not subject to any copyright?
I joined Wikipedia because there is very little here in my field of "quilt history". I thought I'd gradually add information as I have time.
I just wrote my first article and it got a  sign saying, "This article needs to be cleaned up to conform to a higher standard of quality."
The article I wrote was
I haven't a clue what I did wrong and am a bit overwhelmed with the long help pages.  If it's just something simple I will fix the page.  If it's too time consuming to write these articles won't be able to contribute.  
Please let me know if the article is easily fixable or if I should just delete it.
Thank You    Preceding   comment added by   (       ) 
Thanks for the help everyone. I understand much better what needs to be done.   06:11, 20 December 2005 (UTC)
BTW I didn't start the page.  I found it linked from applique and it was empty so I decided to put in some information.  It does make more sense to start a page on quilt history then gradually add different quilt history topics there.   06:27, 20 December 2005 (UTC)
I recently created the Category 'Thelemite Wikipedians' under 'Wikipedians by religion' and the Category 'Hermetic Qabalist Wikipedians' under 'Kabbalist Wikipedians.'  I also added both of these Categories to my user page.  When I reloaded my page the links were red and when I followed them they opened the Categories I created, but they were on the 'Edit' page not the Category page.  After a few minutes the 'Thelemite Wikipedians' link on my user page turned blue and opened on the Category page as I would have expected, but after more than thirty minutesthe 'Hermetic Qabalist Wikipedians' link is still red and it still opens on the 'Edit' page.  Are there issues of propagation of which I am unaware?   21:02, 19 December 2005 (UTC)
Can I link to a redirect page without activating the redirect?
For the effect I'm looking for: can I link to a redirect page's edit history?
What computer language does Wikipedia use? If you are going to move this question, tell me.--   22:24, 19 December 2005 (UTC)	 	
Dreadfully simple, I know, but how do we put up a disambiguation page?
Thanks
At the bottom you add
On Guyu, you add at the top: 
And of course you'll have to write an article about the Australian fish. :-)
Hope that helps,     00:56, 20 December 2005 (UTC)
Do the various   get archived? Where?   01:07, 20 December 2005 (UTC)
There's an infobox glitch in Parachutes - the ''Parr Street Studios, Liverpool, '' &c line appears at the top of the article as well as in the infobox. Can't see why & too tired to investigate. --   
Where do I go if I have a proposal? --anon
Well actually, I remembered somebody told me to go somewhere called WikiMedia: Proposals or something like that, but I can't remember where it was!  --anon
Actually, I was looking for  , but I found it nearby at the village pump proposals. Thanks! But actually, I have a question about that place:
At the top of the page, it says "if you are willing to take responsibility for it, post it here. 
Is there any good way to align the Wikipedia:Babel and Wikipedia:Instruments boxes in one's userpage?  Right now in mine they are just aligned to the right on top of each other, but it would be nice to get them next to each other and centered.  I have seen them nicely organized on other user pages, but have not been able to make sense of how.  Thanks! --   03:13, 20 December 2005 (UTC)
Are any ways to incorporate RSS feeds or JavaScript within Wikipedia pages?--  06:04, 20 December 2005 (UTC)
Sir I want to create an account to be able to edit your pages & to contribute to your encyclopedia.But I want to know if I can at anytime unsubscribe or discontinue to use your website.
Who is the composer of Excelsior
How do I contact the user PJM via his talk page?  I am new to Wikipedia and do not know how to do this.   15:26, 20 December 2005 (UTC)