In policy debate, a '''resolution''' or '''topic''' is a normative statement which the affirmative team affirms and the negative team negates. Resolutions are selected annually by affiliated schools.
At the college level, a number of topics are proposed and interested parties write 'topic papers' discussing the pros and cons of that individual topic. Each school then gets one vote on the topic. The single topic area voted on then has a number of proposed topic wordings, one is chosen, and it is debated by affiliated students nationally for the entire season.
The high school policy debate topic is selected annually under the auspices of the National Federation of State High School Association's Speech, Debate, and Theater Association.  The  calls for two rounds of voting, the first narrowing down five initial choices to two, and the second selecting the final resolution.  In each round, each state has a vote, the National Forensic League has a vote, and the National Catholic Forensic League has a vote.  Each state's activities association has its own process for determining the state's vote.
United States.
States citizens over age 65.
United States.
Resolved: That the federal government should establish, finance, and administer programs to control air and/or water pollution in the United States.
Resolved: That Congress should prohibit unilateral United States military intervention in foreign countries.
Resolved: That the United States should establish a system of compulsory service by all citizens.
Resolved: That Congress should establish uniform regulations to control criminal investigation procedures.
Resolved: That the foreign aid program of the United States should be limited to non-military assistance.
Resolved: That the federal government should adopt a program of compulsory arbitration in labor-management disputes in basic industries.
Resolved: That nuclear weapons should be
Resolved: That Social Security benefits should
Resolved: That the United States should
Resolved: That the federal government should equalize educational opportunity by means of grants to the states for public elementary and secondary education.
Resolved: That the United Nations should be significantly strengthened.
Resolved: That the federal government should
Resolved: That the United States should adopt
Resolved: That United States foreign aid
Resolved: That the federal government should
Resolved: That governmental subsidies should
Resolved: That the federal government should
Resolved: That the President of the United
States should be elected by the direct vote of
Resolved: That the Atlantic Pact nations
Resolved: That all American citizens should
Resolved: That the American people should
Resolved: That the president of the United
States should be elected by the direct vote of
Resolved: That the United States now be
Resolved: That the federal government
Resolved: That the federal government
Resolved: That every able-bodied male citizen of the United States should have one year of full-time military training before
Resolved: That the legal voting age should be reduced to eighteen years.
Resolved: That the United States should join in reconstituting the League of Nations.
Resolved: That a federal world government should be established.
Resolved: That every able-bodied male
Resolved: That the power of the federal
Resolved: That the federal government should
Resolved: That the United States should
Resolved: That the several states should adopt a
Resolved: That all electric utilities should be
Resolved: That the several states should enact
Resolved: That the federal government should
Resolved: That the United States should adopt
Resolved: That at least one half of all state and
Resolved: That the several states should enact
Resolved: That chain stores are detrimental to
Resolved: That installment buying of personal
Resolved: That the English cabinet method of
Resolved: That a federal department of
Specific wording and spelling of terms used in the CEDA-NDT resolutions can be found here: http://www.wfu.edu/organizations/NDT/HistoricalLists/topics.html
For more information on NFA-LD history and the event, visit:  http://www.nationalforensics.org and follow the NFA-LD links.