The butte's three quarter mile long trail leads to a panoramic view from the historic fire lookout.  From the lookout panoramic views of the Medicine Lake Volcano, Mount Shasta, Mount McLoughlin, the Clear Lake Hills and the Warner Mountains can be seen. On a really clear day, the south rim of Crater Lake in Oregon is visible.
The lookout has changed over the years, but its general appearance and structure have remained relatively unchanged. Linoleum, not carpet, used to cover the building   s floor, and the furnishings were stained while trim was painted. Early lookouts used a radio phone, and an actual telephone was not installed for several decades. Many original items remain: the Osborne Fire Finder and its stand, the sink, and the insulated stool lookouts crouch on during thunderstorms.
Through the 1980s, rangers staffed the lookout for extended periods. They used gas for light and cooking, but electricity replaced gas in the 1950s when the National Park Service constructed a power line that ascended the cinder cone   s east slope. The National Park Service removed the line in the mid-1980s when electric lines were buried along the Monument   s main road. Currently, solar panels power a repeater, radio, and small lights. 
Maintenance was done piecemeal from the building   s creation through the 1990s. By 1992, the building, placed on the National Register of Historic Places, showed signs of its age. In 1993, the Park Service received about $50,000 to restore the lookout. During June and July 1994, maintenance workers stripped the inside of paint and bad sheet rock. They removed old fixtures and a gas stove from the main level and various junk from the basement. The refrigerator was moved to the basement. Helicopters brought dirt and rock for the trail. Workers drained the cistern in the basement and installed new carpets and light fixtures capable of using electricity generated by solar panels. 
Schonchin Butte is staffed approximately from May to September from about 10 A.M. to 6 P.M., but park rangers stay longer in cases of extreme fire danger, fire activity, or significant lightning activity. Lookouts no longer live in the building since they must carry up all their supplies, including water, on their backs. The lack of electricity and cooking equipment also limit a lookout   s tour of duty.
Schonchin Butte appears as a topic in the American Park Network publication ''Oh, Ranger!''. The chapter "The Lookout Tower", written by former lookout Franklin Clark, describes Schonchin Butte and chronicles two storms atop the lookout.