With three exceptions (William F. Nolan   s    The Party    in Issue # 8, Dennis Etchison   s    Wet Season    in Issue #9, and David Carren's    If She Dies    in issue #10, which was later adapted into an episode of the 1980's revival of ''The Twilight Zone''), all of the stories in the entire run of ''Twisted Tales'' were written by Jones, who had shown a knack for horror a decade before when he was employed as a scripter for Warren Publishing, writing for their ''Creepy'' and ''Eerie'' titles.  Jones, a self-described "child of the 50   s", was heavily influenced by the horror and science fiction movies of that decade.  But as noted in his editorial in Issue #1, his chief inspiration was the bloody and ironically moralistic tales of the EC horror comics.  His work in ''Twisted Tales'', often utilizing twist endings, added huge dollops of graphic violence and sexuality to the EC formula, complete with copious female nudity, making the title a definite    adults only    item; several issues sported a    Recommended For Mature Readers    warning on the cover.  
Front covers for the comic were by, among others, Richard Corben, John Bolton, and Bernie Wrightson.  Contributing interior artists included Corben, Bolton, Wrightson, Mike Ploog, Val Mayerik, Bill Wray, Tim Conrad, Alfredo Alcala, and Rick Geary, as well as one story written and illustrated by editor Jones himself.
In 1985, soon after the cancellation of ''Twisted Tales'', Eclipse began publishing ''The Twisted Tales of Bruce Jones'', featuring science fiction, fantasy and horror stories written and illustrated by Jones.  Although the cover of the initial issue noted that it was to be "Part 1 of 2", the title was expanded to a four-issue run and ceased publication in 1986.
In January 2005, Todd McFarlane announced that he was set to produce a half hour anthology television series for Fox called ''Twisted Tales'', based on the comic book to which McFarlane had purchased the rights. However, according to Bruce Jones, ''Twisted Tales'' was a creator owned property and does not belong to McFarlane.