The route begins in southwest Goshen, at the intersection of the Quickway (US&nbsp;6 and NY&nbsp;17) and NY&nbsp;17M. South of the junction NY&nbsp;17A continues as Pulaski Highway toward Florida and Warwick. It enters Goshen as Greenwich Avenue, becoming Main Street at a five-way intersection at the southwest corner of the village's large triangular central green (Westbound traffic sometimes misses the Greenwich fork and continues on Main as there is no overhead sign, just one at the side of the road). The historic buildings in this area of Goshen have been federally recognized as the Church Park Historic District. At the triangle's northern end, after passing next to Orange County's original courthouse and the Orange Blossoms monument, it is joined by Park Place and passes the Harness Racing Museum & Hall of Fame on the right, then the Orange County Government Center on the left, before leaving the village.
Entering the countryside, it begins to veer more to the east. Six miles (9.6&nbsp;km) later in the Town of Hamptonburgh, Route&nbsp;207 goes into a short tunnel under the Metro North-Norfolk Southern tracks and then immediately bears right, more due east, where NY&nbsp;416 splits off to the left, northward, toward Montgomery. It then passes through what could be called downtown Campbell Hall at a grade crossing with the former Wallkill Valley Railroad, still used today by NS as a freight spur to Walden.
Three miles further down it goes through a slightly staggered intersection with NY&nbsp;208 in the hamlet of Rock Tavern between Maybrook and Washingtonville. Now known as Little Britain Road, it skirts the southern boundary of Stewart State Forest for several miles, passes Little Britain Elementary School and a new medical office park.
The intersection with Drury Lane, long the dividing lane between the airport proper and lands seized in the early 1970s for a massive expansion that was later canceled, has been expanded and rebuilt to support a new exit on Interstate&nbsp;84. A traffic light was installed, and Drury became NY&nbsp;747. A mile and half later 207 reaches an entrance to Stewart International Airport. After that, it passes under (but does not intersect with) the New York State Thruway (Interstate&nbsp;87), immediately west of its junction with NY&nbsp;300.
After a concurrent section of , 207 then splits to the northeast at the Squire Patton House, now the city of Newburgh's police K-9 training facility. It runs past Lake Washington reservoir, the water supply for the city of Newburgh, into the town of Newburgh and then into the city itself and, shortly afterward, its eastern terminus at a junction with NY&nbsp;17K.
NY&nbsp;207 was assigned to its current alignment as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York. When it was widened, the short section concurrent with NY&nbsp;300 was relocated just to the south. The former right of way can still be seen. While much of the countryside surrounding NY&nbsp;207 is rural and picturesque, increasing development within the county has given it the highest growth in traffic volume of any Orange County state highway in the early 2000s, according to New York State Department of Transportation data analyzed by the ''Times Herald-Record''.Also see .