The '''Arizona Wranglers''' were a professional American Football team in the United States Football League in the mid 1980s.  They played at Sun Devil Stadium on the campus of Arizona State University in Tempe, a suburb of Phoenix.
The Wranglers were originally supposed to be in Los Angeles.  However, the franchise's original owner, Alex Spanos, pulled out and bought into the NFL's San Diego Chargers.  The owners of the Oakland Invaders, Bay Area real estate executives Jim Joseph and Tad Taube, flipped a coin to decide who wouland became the new owner of the Los Angeles franchise.  The "loser" got full ownership of the Invaders, while the "winner" got the rights to Southern California.  Joseph won.
A few months later, however, Bill Daniels and Alan Harmon were forced to move to Los Angeles after their initial bid for a team in San Diego fell through. The league forced Joseph to give up his franchise rights to Daniels and Harmon; it felt that Daniels and Harmon's roots in the cable television industry would be better suited for the country's second-largest market. Joseph finally settled on a move to Phoenix, bringing professional football to the city for the first time.
Joseph held fast to the USFL's original blueprint, aggressively marketing the team in Arizona while keeping tight controls on spending (including player salaries).  The result was a young team with some talent at the skill positions, but fewer quality starters in the starting lineup and less depth of talent than their opponents. The Wranglers were quite competitive at first, posting a 4-4 record and moving into a four way tie for first in their division.  However, they lost their last 10 games--the longest losing streak in league history--finishing in a tie for the worst record in the league.
The 1983 Wranglers featured the League's 6th ranked passer in rookie QB (Alan Risher), 12th ranked rusher in 3rd year vet Leon Calvin Murray, and the league's #7, #10, #11 receivers (1983 rookies TE Mark Keel, WR Jackie Flowers, and WR Neil Balholm, respectively). There defense started out good. The Wranglers signed San Francisco 49er ILB Jeff McIntyre and ILB Glen Perkins from the University of Arizona. But during pre-season McIntyre, who had a personal services contract with Joseph, asked to be traded because of contract issues.  Perkins suffered a knee injury that slowed his play and development. 
The Wranglers probably benefited early on from the league's decision not to have a preseason.  When the rest of their opponents reached midseason form, the undermanned Wrangler defense had trouble keeping the games within reach of the offense.  They gave up 442 points, easily the most in the league.  The Wranglers only scored more than 23 points once all season --- in their week 2 upset of George Allen's Chicago Blitz.
In hopes of avoiding Arizona's often-oppressive summer heat, the Wranglers played their first 6 home games by April 23 and only played 3 of their last 9 games at home. 
Joseph lost millions of dollars in the 1983 season.  While he'd anticipated years of losses when he first got his franchise, the team's poor attendance made him unwilling to stick it out, and he decided to sell.
In a stroke of luck for Joseph, Chicago Blitz owner Dr. Ted Diethrich, a Phoenix resident (he founded the Arizona Heart Institute), wanted a chance to move closer to his business interests in the Phoenix area. He was also angered at the Blitz' poor attendance despite fielding a team considered to be an NFL-quality unit.
Diethrich thought he had a solution to both his and Joseph's problems--an unprecedented swap of franchises.  First, Diethrich sold the Blitz to fellow surgeon James Hoffman, and then bought the Wranglers from Joseph. Hoffman and Diethrich then engineered a swap of assets in which virtually the entire Blitz organization   including the entire coaching staff (led by head coach George Allen) and most of the players--moved to Phoenix while the old Wranglers organization moved to Chicago. (The most notable exception was that Wrangler triggerman Alan Risher stayed in Arizona to back up Greg Landry). The deal transformed the Wranglers from a cellar-dweller to a powerhouse almost overnight.  However, trading a team that had been, at worst, the third-best team in the league for a lesser version of the 1983 Wranglers raised questions about the USFL's credibility -- especially in Chicago. 
The 1984 Wranglers finished in a tie for first in the Western Division. In the playoffs, they upset the powerful Houston Gamblers, then defeated the Los Angeles Express for the conference title.  The Wranglers, despite having the worse record of the two participating teams, got to host the 1984 Western Conference championship game because the Los Angeles Express could not use their home field, the Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum, because of preparations for the 1984 Summer Olympics. To accommodate the oppressive summer heat in the state, as well as the ABC Sports television schedule, the game kicked off at 8:30 p.m. local time (10:30 p.m. Eastern time).
The Wranglers' run ended in the championship game with a 23-3 defeat by the Philadelphia Stars. QB Greg Landry retired after the season.
The Wranglers intended to change to Red jerseys for the 1984 season, but the league office had put in a rule that stated any team changing jersey colors (in this case, blue to red) had to wait one season before doing so.  The Wranglers had intended to start wearing the red jerseys starting in the '85 season, but they ended up merging with the Oklahoma Outlaws and became the Arizona Outlaws.
8. PORRAS, Tom QB (IA/18G), 6.02, 193, 26, Washington
28. SCHWARTZ, Don SS (IA/2G), 6.01, 195, 28, Washington State
62. KEHR, Rick G (IA/2G), 6.03, 270, 24, Carthage
65. KIEWEL, Jeff G (IA/18G), 6.04, 254, 23, Arizona
73. STEVENSON, Mark G (IA/3G), 6.03, 276, 28, Western Illinois
80. HILL, Al (IA/8G), 6.03, 205, 24, Arizona
81. WRIGHTMAN, Tim TE (IA/9G), 6.03, 225, 24, UCLA
Quarterbacks Coach: Roman Gabriel
Offensive Line: John Payne
Secondary: Donald "Deek" Pollard
Defensive Line: John Teerlinck
Offensive Backs: Ray Wietecha
Strength & Conditioning: Warren Anderson
Despite making it to the Championship game, Diethrich was bleeding in red ink.  He expected his all-star team's attendance to be much greater than the 25,776 fans per game the no-name Wranglers averaged in 1983.  Despite fielding a winning team, the Wranglers' 1984 attendance figures (25,568 fans per game) were lower than the 1983 numbers, as fans were slow to warm to the new players. Diethrich sold the assets of the Wranglers to Oklahoma Outlaws owner William Tatham.  Tatham was looking for a larger market with an acceptable stadium.  Tatham relocated the Outlaws to Arizona for the 1985 season, merging the rosters into the Arizona Outlaws.