Since October 2006, Savage has also recorded the "Savage Lovecast", a weekly podcast version of the column, featuring telephone advice sessions. Podcasts are released every Tuesday.
The openly gay author uses the column as a forum for his strong opinions that reject conservative views on love, sex, and family. He generally encourages advice-seekers to pursue their fetishes, so long as activities are legal, consensual, safe, and respectful. The tone of the column is humorous, and Savage does not shy away from using profanity. The cornerstone of his sexual ethics is consent; he is thus strongly opposed to bestiality, child molestation, and rape. He speaks out against incest and social inequality, too. Though Savage encourages sexual experimentation, he does not encourage carelessness. He frequently uses his position to promote safer sex and awareness of AIDS. In political matters, Savage occasionally shows a libertarian bent. He does however vote Democratic because he believes that voting for minority parties gives votes to the Republicans.
For the first six years of the column, Savage had his readers address him with "Hey faggot", as a comment on previous efforts to recapture offensive words. He was criticized for this by some gay activists. Savage has also been criticized by bisexual activists for what they perceive as biphobia. Since 2002, he has written the column at Eppie Lederer's desk, which he, a "lifelong fan" of her Ann Landers column, bought at auction after the noted advice columnist died.
During the run of ''Savage Love'', Savage has popularized several neologisms.
With regard to readers who are in relationships with a large age disparity, Savage promotes his "campsite rule": at the end of the relationship, the elder partner should leave the younger in "better shape than they found them". This includes no diseases, no fertilized eggs, no undue emotional trauma, and whatever education that can be provided.
Shortly after a 2009 scandal in Portland, Oregon involving openly gay mayor Sam Adams and Beau Breedlove, who had allegedly turned 18 almost immediately before the two began a sexual relationship, Savage created a companion rule to the "campsite rule", now known as the ''Tea and Sympathy'' rule. The rule is a reference to a line in the play of the same name, in which a much older woman states to a high-school-age boy, right before having sex with him: "Years from now, when you talk about this     and you will     be kind." Savage claimed in an article in ''The Portland Mercury'' that, while Adams followed the "campsite rule"     Breedlove did not claim that Adams had given him any diseases or caused him emotional trauma, and in fact still refers to Adams as a friend     Breedlove violated the ''Tea and Sympathy'' rule by making public statements that he knew could ruin Adams' career.
For years, Savage has told his readers in bad relationships to "DTMFA", or "Dump the Motherfucker Already". In March 2006, Savage launched a new website to popularize "ITMFA", or "Impeach the Motherfucker Already" (a reference to the movement to impeach George W. Bush), which one of his readers suggested that he popularize. The ITMFA site is set up as a blog, with Savage as the main writer, showcasing how people have applied the term to homemade t-shirts, signs, buttons, and license plates. , the domain ITMFA.com is registered with no website, but impeachthemotherfuckeralready.com is still valid (albeit not having been updated since August 2006).
Dan Savage and his readers often use the abbreviation '''GGG'''. In his March 1, 2007 column, Savage summarized: "GGG stands for 'good, giving, and game,' which is what we should all strive to be for our sex partners. Think 'good in bed,' 'giving equal time and equal pleasure,' and 'game for anything   within reason.'"
In the April 30, 2009 column, a reader urged Savage to stop using the word ''retarded'' and its variants. In response, Savage agreed to stop using the words ''retard'' and ''retarded'' and to use in their place ''leotard'' and ''leotarded'', respectively, stating that he would then be insulting the physically fit rather than those with disabilities.
In 2001 Savage challenged readers of his column to coin a name for the sex act in which a woman uses a strap-on dildo to perform anal sex on her male partner. After multiple nominations and a reader vote, the verb "peg" was chosen (despite Savage's aunt bearing the name Peg) with a 43% plurality over runners up "bob" and "punt".
In 2008   2009, as a response to then President-elect Barack Obama's choice of Rick Warren to give the invocation at Obama's inauguration     and in response to Stephen Colbert's comment that ''saddleback'' sounded like a sex act     Savage Love readers were encouraged to vote to define the neologism ''saddlebacking'' in reference to Warren's role as pastor of Saddleback Church. Warren and the church supported the 2008 California constitutional amendment Proposition 8, which required the state to recognize only marriage between a man and a woman. The winning definition for ''saddlebacking'' was "the phenomenon of Christian teens engaging in unprotected anal sex in order to preserve their virginities".
Savage reacted strongly to former United States Senator Rick Santorum's statements about homosexuality in an interview with the Associated Press published April 20, 2003. (See Santorum controversy regarding homosexuality for further details.) In the interview, Santorum describes gay sex as part of a class of deviant sexual behavior, including incest, polygamy, and bestiality, which he said threaten society and the family. Furthermore Santorum stated that he believed consenting adults do not have a constitutional right to privacy with respect to sexual acts.
Savage was outraged by these statements. At the suggestion of a reader, Savage challenged his audience to come up with a sex-related definition for the word ''santorum'' as a form of political protest for the express purpose of "memorializ the Santorum scandal  by attaching his name to a sex act that would make his big, white teeth fall out of his big, empty head".
After Savage published several definitions suggested by readers, a vote was taken among the readers of his column. The winning definition: "the frothy mixture of lube and fecal matter that is sometimes the byproduct of anal sex" was announced in the June 12, 2003 column.
Savage set up a website, ''Spreading Santorum'', with the definition of the term ''santorum'' under a brown, splattered stain on the otherwise-white page.  , the site remains the top Google result for the search term ''santorum''     although this could be a case of googlebombing."Blogger Tim Tagaris used the Web site GooglebombCT to launch a Google-bomb campaign against Sen. Joe Lieberman of Connecticut ... And other bloggers tied the surname of then-Sen. Rick Santorum, R-Pa., to a scurrilous definition that gained the top spot on Google searches on ''Santorum'' weeks before the November election." See 
Following the "rent boy" allegations regarding George Rekers, who has widely promoted aversion therapy, Dan Savage, along with others including Stephen Colbert,
Originally Dan Savage suggested that "lifting my luggage" refer to listening to the speaker expound on the "desirability" of converting one's self from homosexual to heterosexual. Later, after several political humorists started employing "lifting your luggage" as an implicit or explicit reference to various sexual acts, Savage suggested that "Whatever lifts your luggage" supplant "whatever floats your boat" in common parlance.
In following weeks and months many calls and letters directed to Savage Love employed various forms of "lifting one's luggage" to refer to a sexual act performed to the preference of the recipient. Such usage continues among writers and callers to Savage Love.
During February 2009, Dan Savage "dropped by four large universities... University of Lethbridge, State University of New York   Albany, University of Maryland, and University of Alaska-Anchorage   to do "Savage Love Live," the college-speaking-gig version of his sex-advice column."  The students of University of Maryland asked Dan Savage to "Please assign new salacious definitions to the following terms: cornerstone, fear the turtle and diamondbacking."
According to Dan Savage, Cornerstone means when you get high in order to break through a sexual inhibition   like when pot helps you "turn a corner" sexually. An example: "Sue wanted to peg her boyfriend Drew, but he just couldn't do it until he got cornerstoned."
Fear the Turtle is what a woman experiences when she realizes halfway through vaginal intercourse that her bowels are full and her enjoyment of the sex has been superseded by her fear of crapping the bed. An example: "Sue had to ask Drew to stop fucking her because she feared the turtle. She got on the can for a minute, then hopped back in bed, and no longer feared the turtle."
Diamondbacking means consenting to anal sex in the hopes that doing so will inspire a boyfriend to propose. An example: "Sue knew that Drew was totally into anal sex, so she let him diamondback her. Now they're engaged."