In differential geometry, the '''exponential map''' is a generalization of the ordinary exponential function of mathematical analysis to all differentiable manifolds with an affine connection. 
Two important special cases of this are the exponential map for a manifold with a Riemannian metric, and the exponential map from a Lie algebra to a Lie group.
Let ''M'' be a differentiable manifold and ''p'' a point of ''M''.  An affine connection on ''M'' allows one to define the notion of a geodesic through the point ''p''.
Let ''v''     T''p''''M'' be a tangent vector to the manifold at ''p''.  Then there is a unique geodesic   ''v'' satisfying   ''v''(0) = ''p'' with initial tangent vector   &prime;''v''(0) = ''v''.  The corresponding '''exponential map''' is defined by exp''p''(''v'') =   v(1). In general, the exponential map is only ''locally defined'', that is, it only takes a small neighborhood of the origin at T''p''''M'', to a neighborhood of ''p'' in the manifold. This is because it relies on the theorem on existence and uniqueness for ordinary differential equations which is local in nature.  An affine connection is called complete if the exponential map is well-defined at every point of the tangent bundle.
In the theory of Lie groups the '''exponential map''' is a map from the Lie algebra of a Lie group to the group which allows one to  recapture the local group structure from the Lie algebra. The existence of the exponential map is one of the primary justifications for the study of Lie groups at the level of Lie algebras.
The ordinary exponential function of mathematical analysis is a special case of the exponential map when ''G'' is the multiplicative group of non-zero real numbers (whose Lie algebra is the additive group of all real numbers). The  exponential map of a Lie group satisfies many properties analogous to those of the ordinary exponential function, however, it also differs in many important respects.
Let G be a Lie group and \mathfrak g be its Lie algebra (thought of as the tangent space to the identity element of G). The '''exponential map''' is a map
In Riemannian geometry, an '''exponential map''' is a map from a subset of a tangent space T''p''''M'' of a Riemannian manifold (or pseudo-Riemannian manifold) ''M'' to ''M'' itself.  The (pseudo) Riemannian metric determines a canonical affine connection, and the exponential map of the (pseudo) Riemannian manifold is given by the exponential map of this connection.
Intuitively speaking, the exponential map takes a given tangent vector to the manifold, runs along the geodesic starting at that point and going in that direction, for a unit time. Since ''v'' corresponds to the velocity vector of the geodesic, the actual (Riemannian) distance traveled will be dependent on that. We can also reparametrize geodesics to be unit speed, so equivalently we can define exp''p''(''v'') =   (|''v''|) where    is the unit-speed geodesic (geodesic parameterized by arc length) going in the direction of ''v''. As we vary the tangent vector ''v'' we will get, when applying exp''p'', different points on ''M'' which are within some distance from the base point ''p''&mdash;this is perhaps one of the most concrete ways of demonstrating that the tangent space to a manifold is a kind of "linearization" of the manifold.
The Hopf   Rinow theorem asserts that it is possible to define the exponential map on the whole tangent space if and only if
An important property of the exponential map is the following lemma of Gauss (yet another Gauss's lemma): given any tangent vector ''v'' in the domain of definition of exp''p'', and another vector ''w'' based at the tip of ''v'' (hence ''w'' is actually in the double-tangent space T''v''(T''p''''M'')) and orthogonal to ''v'', remains orthogonal to ''v'' when pushed forward via the exponential map. This means, in particular, that the boundary sphere of a small ball about the origin in T''p''''M'' is orthogonal to the geodesics in ''M'' determined by those vectors (i.e., the geodesics are ''radial''). This motivates the definition of geodesic normal coordinates on a Riemannian manifold.
The exponential map is also useful in relating the abstract definition of curvature to the more concrete realization of it originally conceived by Riemann himself&mdash;the sectional curvature is intuitively defined as the Gaussian curvature of some surface (i.e., a slicing of the manifold by a 2-dimensional submanifold) through the point ''p'' in consideration. Via the exponential map, it now can be precisely defined as the Gaussian curvature of a surface through ''p'' determined by the image under exp''p'' of a 2-dimensional subspace of T''p''''M''.
In the case of Lie groups with a '''bi-invariant metric'''   a pseudo-Riemannian metric invariant under both left and right translation   the exponential maps of the pseudo-Riemannian structure are the same as the exponential maps of the Lie group. In general Lie groups do not have a bi-invariant metric, though all connected semisimple (or reductive) Lie groups do. The existence of a bi-invariant ''Riemannian'' metric is stronger than that of a pseudo-Riemannian metric, and implies that the Lie algebra is the Lie algebra of a compact Lie group; conversely, any compact (or abelian) Lie group has such a Riemannian metric. 
Take the example that gives the "honest" exponential map. Consider the positive real numbers '''R'''+, a Lie group under the usual multiplication. Then each tangent space is just '''R'''. On each copy of '''R''' at the point ''y'', we introduce the modified inner product 
Consider the point 1     '''R'''+, and ''x''     '''R''' an element of the tangent space at 1. The usual straight line emanating from 1, namely ''y''(''t'') = 1 + ''xt'' covers the same path as a geodesic, of course, except we have to reparametrize so as to get a curve with constant speed ("constant speed", remember, is not going to be the ordinary constant speed, because we're using this funny metric). To do this we reparametrize by arc length (the integral of the length of the tangent vector in the norm |\cdot|_y induced by the modified metric):
Now using the unit speed definition, we have 
The Riemannian distance defined by this is simply 