Yahoo! announced its acquisition of Webjay on January 9, 2006.  It  at the end of June, 2007.
Web scraping portions of Webjay were incorporated into the Yahoo! products  and .
The Webjay logo was created by Perri Harper:  
Although Webjay did not host any files, it made an effort to avoid potential copyright disputes by removing links upon request of the content or host owner.  The site's copyright policy included this statement:
A July 15, 2004 story in the New York Times titled  described the site this way:
A March 30, 2004 story in Jon Udell's blog titled  described the site this way:
If it's easy to buy music online, I sometimes will. But first it has to be easy to find, listen to, talk about, and share tunes. 
A April 22, 2004 story in the New York Times described the site this way:
The XSPF playlist format evolved from Webjay in the following way.
Playlists on Webjay were played by generating a text file in one of a variety of common playlist formats, including ASX, SMIL, and M3U.  The playlist file contained a list of URLs of multimedia files from different third party sites.  The playlists were downloaded to a client-side media player like Windows Media Player, Real Audio, Quicktime, or Winamp.  The client-side media player would play the URLs one after another, giving the cumulative impression of a single continuous stream.  
After the XSPF playlist format came into existence and before any media players could render an XSPF playlist, Webjay added the ability to generate an XSPF file for any playlists on the site.  It did not provide a player, only playlists, so at first the files could not be played.  An independent developer created an XSPF player known as .  It did not provide playlists.  Webjay and XSPF Musicplayer were independent products that were only useful as a pair.  Another independent developer created a web site to put Webjay and XSPF Musicplayer together.  This site was called .
Because  is written in Flash it can be used in the browser without launching a client-side multimedia player like Windows Media Player.  As a result it was used to embed music in pages on social networking sites such as Myspace, as a Web widget.  This created popular demand for XSPF.
Other XSPF players came into being to compete with XSPF Musicplayer.  When Webjay was closed down by Yahoo!, other XSPF editing and generation tools took its place.  XSPF continued to exist.