In the recent years, the MAUP has become embroiled in controversies because of evident antisemitism in their publications and conferences.
In 2008, the U.S. State Department published its "Contemporary Global Anti-Semitism: A Report Provided to the United States Congress" and singled out MAUP when it stated the Ukrainian-based organization "is one of the most persistent anti-Semitic institutions in Eastern Europe."
The MAUP is the largest non-state higher education institution in Ukraine. It is accredited by and has the license of the Ministry of Education of Ukraine to carry out educational process in ten higher education specialties with the right to give out diplomas of state and international standards.
The MAUP has published in excess of 300 study plans and manuals and 200 books for a variety of educational programs. The ''Personnel'' magazine is registered by The Presidium of the State Accreditation Committee as a supplement on economics, law, psychology, pedagogy, philosophy, social and political sciences. MAUP's editions have been recommended for use by The Ministry of Education of Ukraine. It is an affiliate member of the International Personnel Academy and European University Continuing Education Network (EUCEN).
The MAUP asserts that "Pursuant to the results of Sophiya Kyivska, the Rating of Higher Education Establishments in Ukraine (2000), and International Open Popularity and Quality Rating (1998-2000) IRAPM was recognized as the best non-state higher education establishment in Ukraine."  (However it should be noted that private educational institutions are rare in Ukraine, as almost all educational institutions are owned by the State).
In the recent years, the MAUP became embroiled in controversies because of evident antisemitism in their publications and conferences. The MAUP maintains that their activities can be classified only as anti-Zionism, but its critics point out  (ADL) November 3, 2006 traditional antisemitic propaganda traits that have no connection to Zionism, such as religious antisemitism or solely blaming the Jews for the Russian October Revolution or the Holodomor of 1932-1933. 
During October 6, 2004 hearing of the ''Annual Report on International Religious Freedom 2004 and Designations of Countries of Particular Concern'' before the Committee on International Relations of the United States Congress, the MAUP was called "he most troubling development" in Ukraine and it was asserted that it receives "significant funding from Arab and Muslim states".
On April 14   19, 2005 the MAUP weekly newspaper ''Personnel Plus'' published an open letter to President Yushchenko, Ukrainian Verkhovna Rada Speaker Volodymyr Lytvyn and Supreme Court of Ukraine Chief Justice Malyarenko calling for a parliamentary investigation into the "criminal activities of organized Jewry in Ukraine." The newspaper claimed that the letter was signed by more than a hundred scientific, civic, and political leaders. (NCSJ) December 06, 2005
On June 3, the MAUP sponsored a one-day conference entitled "Zionism As the Biggest Threat to Modern Civilization" attended by the former Ku Klux Klan leader and former Republican Louisiana State Representative David Duke of the United States. The ''Kyiv Post'' newspaper called the gathering "a disgusting orgy of racism and hatred."
In August 2005, the MAUP awarded Duke with a Kandidat Nauk degree in History
After the Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad's threat to "wipe Israel off the map" had evoked international condemnations, on November 4, 2005 the MAUP issued "a decisive protest against large-scale campaign, organized by Zionists, against Islam Republic Iran and its President Mahmud Ahmadi-Nedzhad... where he quoted the words of the Iranian spiritual leader Ayatollah Khomeini about future death of Israel and the USA." 
On December 1, 2005, the MAUP held a conference "The Jewish-Bolshevik Revolution of 1917     the Source of the Red Terrorism and the Starvation of Ukraine". 
In the March 2006 issue of the ''Personnel Plus'', an article revived false blood libel accusations from the infamous 1911 Beilis Trial by mischaracterizing the verdict as the jury recognizing the case as ritual murder by persons unknown even though it found Beilis himself not guilty, when in fact the defense had entirely rested on demolishing the concept of Jewish ritual murder.,,''Blood Accusation: The Strange History of the Beiliss Case'', Samuel, Maurice, Alfred A. Knopf, 1966.''Scapegoat on Trial: The Story of Mendel Beilis - The Autobiography of Mendel Beilis the Defendant in the Notorious 1912 Blood Libel in Kiev'', Beilis, Mendel, Introd. & Ed. By Shari Schwartz, CIS, New York, 1992, ISBN 1-56062-166-4 A week earlier, MAUP leaders had visited the grave of Andrei Yuschinsky, the Christian boy who had been the victim in the case. (JTA) (antisemitism.org.il) February 22, 2006
At a conference held at the MAUP Academy in Kiev, the heads of the MAUP accused "Rothschild's Soldiers" of the genocide of the Ukrainian people.
On August 15, 2006, an article on the MAUP's website denounced the Bnai Brith as "the Jewish Gestapo".
On November 21, 2005, the Simon Wiesenthal Center (SWC) called on Ukrainian authorities to publicly denounce and revoke the accreditation of one of Ukraine   s largest private universities.  The SWC associate dean Rabbi Abraham Cooper charged that "y supporting Ahmadinejad   s threat to Israel, MAUP   s consistent Jew-baiting now culminated in an endorsement of genocide. While such utterances may be free speech in the Ukraine , as a proper it is long overdue for the leadership of the Ukraine  to exercise their democratic rights and obligations to denounce such statements and censure those who use academic cover to target a minority and to endorse potential mass murder."
On December 5, the President of the Ukrainian American Coordinating Council (UACC) Ihor Gawdiak issued a statement "to convey our profound shock and distress concerning the horrific statement made on 4 November by the heads of the International Academy of Manpower Management (MAUP) in support of the Iranian President   s statement that Israel should be wiped off the map." 
On the same day, the office of the President of Ukraine Viktor Yushchenko issued a statement which said in part:
Yushchenko once sat on MAUP's board, and Foreign Minister of Ukraine Borys Tarasyuk was honorary director of one of MAUP's subdivisions until 2005. Yushchenko resigned from MAUP several years ago, following its criticism by Jewish organizations.
On December 6, the Anti-Defamation League (ADL) urged the United States House of Representatives to delay approval of Ukraine   s graduation from the Jackson-Vanik amendment. The ADL National Director Abraham Foxman wrote: "We expect more from democratic states than we do from totalitarian ones. This year alone has seen a steep increase in acts of violence and vandalism against Jews across Ukraine. There have been attempts to ban everything from Jewish organizations to Jewish holy texts.  The university MAUP... actively promotes anti-Semitism of the most vicious kind." (ADL) January 25, 2006
On December 7, the United States-Ukraine Foundation (USUF) condemned "... the November 4, 2005 statements by the Interregional Academy of Personnel Management (MAUP) as hateful, virulent and having no place in the public discourse in Ukraine or anywhere else. MAUP   s anti-Semitic statements supporting the Iranian President's recent call for Israel to be 'wiped off the map' was an affront to decency that provoked the unequivocal international condemnation it deserved." 
Speaking on national television on January 23, 2006, Foreign Minister of Ukraine Borys Tarasyuk "strongly condemned the anti-Semitic actions of MAUP University" and confirmed that "having exhausted all efforts to convince MAUP leaders to drop their unlawful and wrongful actions" he broke off contacts with University a year ago. 
In its press-release, the Ministry of Education and Science of Ukraine accused MAUP of breaking Ukrainian law, noting "persistent incompliance with requirements of state licensing rules for universities, failure to abide with legally binding decisions of the State Accreditation Commission", qualifying it as "a general negligence of law and a desire to pursue activities inconsistent with the status of Higher Education Institute in Ukraine".
This move was welcomed by the UACC, National Conference on Soviet Jewry (NCSJ), the ADL, and other human rights advocates.
The leader of Vaad in Ukraine Joseph Zissels called MAUP "the most influential center of anti-Semitism in the country."
The latest rebuke came from Ukraine's High Court which ruled against MAUP as it sought to sue the Jewish Confederation of Ukraine for publishing articles "about MAUP activities directed against the Jewish community and Zionism".