Every hazard has its own safety measure, and every ailment a particular remedy. A standard precaution for all backcountry activities is carrying the "ten essentials", a collection of tools chosen for their utility in preventing or reacting to various emergencies.
The common practice of traveling in a group improves safety in all regards.  If one person is injured, group members can administer first aid or seek help.  A group can avoid poor decisions that a lone traveler might make.  If an emergency occurs, a group can pool its muscle power, brain power, and body heat.
Another precaution is informing people outside of the hiking group of the itinerary and expected return time.  (Expected hiking time can be estimated using Naismith's Rule.)  A communication device, such as a cell phone or a satellite phone, may help in the case of an emergency. However, with the exception of mountain tops that are in line-of-sight to populated areas, cell phone coverage in wilderness areas is often quite poor. In the wilderness one should always be prepared to hike out for help, if necessary.
Adventurers rarely get themselves hurt if they manage to avoid particularly dangerous situations.
Travelers may become lost either if a party cannot find its way, or if a traveler becomes separated from the party and cannot find it again.  Lost hikers who cannot find their way to their destination on time may run out of food and water, or experience a change in weather, exacerbating the risk of hiking hazards. It's even easier to lose the way if trails do not exist.  
If a group splits up into several subgroups moving at different speeds, one of the subgroups may take a wrong turn at a trail junction.  A common custom to avoid this is for the leaders to stop at junctions and wait for the others. Keeping the group together is important in the wilderness, especially when visibility is blocked due to weather, rocks, or trees.
Carrying a map and compass and knowing how to use them will decrease the risk of getting lost. Likewise, a Global Positioning System may prove invaluable, as it can pinpoint a traveler's location, revealing his exact position on the globe and the direction to roads, services and cities.  Most GPS devices can also be designed to mark their path on a map, making it easy to backtrack. Family Radio Service, General Mobile Radio Service, and amateur radios operating on the "2 meters" band may help maintain communication.  Whistles, signal mirrors, and flashing lights are low-tech emergency signals.
Without a distant focal point such as a mountain top, or the sun or moon, people who are lost tend to wander in circles.
Blizzards, flash floods, fog, sandstorm, tornados, and other meteorological events may or may not be predictable, and may require immediate response for survival. Some may restrict visibility, as does nightfall, which may prevent further travel. Gusts of wind may physically knock a hiker or climber off a ledge or narrow trail. Lightning is a regular and serious threat in many regions.
Backcountry avalanches are generally triggered by the immediate action of the party. Precautions include training, monitoring weather conditions to learn the history of the snow pack, digging hasty pits, modifying the route, passing one-by-one through dangerous areas, wearing avalanche beacons, and carrying avalanche probes and snow shovels. Other non-avalanche snow immersions can be similarly dangerous including tree wells and care should be taken in wooded  backcountry areas following heavy snowfalls.
Other mass movements include icefalls, landslides, and rockfall. When choosing a campsite care must be taken to avoid those along with snags, dead trees, trees with large dead branches, or trees that have previously been through a forest fire. Collectively, these are called "widowmakers" by experienced campers.
Some medical pre-existing conditions may be triggered or worsened by outdoor activity, particularly when it is sudden or strenuous. Examples include heart disease, asthma, diabetes, anemia, and allergies. Vertigo and neurological illnesses may have serious consequences on dangerous terrain.
Metabolic imbalances can affect general functioning and lead to other injuries. 
In many areas, adventurers may encounter large predatory animals such as bears, or cougars.  These animals rarely seek out humans as food, but they will attack under some conditions.  Some hazardous encounters occur when animals raid human property for food.  Additionally, if travelers come upon an unsuspecting animal and surprise it, it may attack.  Regularly making loud noise, such as by clapping or yelling, reduces the risk of surprising an animal.  Some people use bear bells as noisemakers, but these are usually too quiet to be heard from far away. Any mammal infected with rabies may behave unexpectedly, even aggressively, and could infect a human with rabies by biting. 
Venomous animals, including snakes, scorpions, spiders and bees, may cause harm either directly or through anaphylactic shock. Overall, the greatest danger is from insects, such as mosquitoes, ticks and fleas, which carry communicable diseases.
When combined with lack of proper physical conditioning, cumbersome backpacks increase the risk of missteps and falls, particularly on difficult terrain.  Poor judgment due to exhaustion or inattention on steep or slippery slopes can also lead to injury.
Surface water in the wilderness can contain viruses, bacteria or parasites. The latter two can cause dysentery or wilderness diarrhea in untreated water and can be spread person-to-person by poor hygiene in camp. The most common cause of wilderness diarrhea is the parasite Giardia.