TETRA is an European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI) standard, first version published 1995; it is endorsed by the European Radio Communications Committee (ERC) and mandated for use in Europe.
TETRA uses Time Division Multiple Access (TDMA) with four user channels on one radio carrier and 25&nbsp;kHz spacing between carriers. Both point-to-point and point-to-multipoint transfer can be used. Digital data transmission is also included in the standard though at a low data rate.
TETRA Mobile Stations (MS) can communicate direct-mode operation (DMO) or using trunked-mode operation (TMO) using switching and management infrastructure (SwMI) made of TETRA base stations (TBS). As well as allowing direct communications in situations where network coverage is not available, DMO also includes the possibility of using a sequence of one or more TETRA terminals as relays. This functionality is called DMO gateway (from DMO to TMO) or DMO repeater (from DMO to DMO). In emergency situations this feature allows direct communications underground or in areas of bad coverage.
In addition to voice and dispatch services, the TETRA system supports several types of data communication. Status messages and ''short data services'' (SDS) are provided over the system's main control channel, while packet-switched data or circuit-switched data communication uses specifically assigned traffic channels.
TETRA provides for authentication of terminals towards infrastructure and vice versa. For protection against eavesdropping; air interface encryption and end-to-end encryption is available.
The common mode of operation is in a group calling mode in which a single button push will connect the user to the users in a selected call group and/or a dispatcher. It is also possible for the terminal to act as a one-to-one walkie talkie but without the normal range limitation since the call still uses the network. TETRA terminals can act as mobile phones (cell phones), with a full-duplex direct connection to other TETRA Users or the PSTN. Emergency buttons, provided on the terminals, enable the users to transmit emergency signals, to the dispatcher, overriding any other activity taking place at the same time.
The main advantages of TETRA over other technologies (such as GSM) are:
Further information is available from the  (formerly TETRA MoU) and the standards can be downloaded for free from ETSI.
Its main disadvantages are:
The TETRA-system is in use by the public sector in the following countries. Only Tetra Network infrastructure installations are listed. Tetra being an open standard, each of these networks can use any mix of Tetra Mobile terminals from a wide range if suppliers.
To send information TETRA uses a digital modulation scheme known as   /4 DQPSK, this is a form of phase shift keying. The symbol (baud) rate is 18,000 symbols per second, and each symbol maps to 2 bits, thus resulting in 36,000&nbsp;bit/s gross.
As a form of phase shift keying is used to transmit data during each burst, it would seem reasonable to expect the transmit power to be constant. However it is not. This is because the sidebands, which are essentially a repetition of the data in the main carrier's modulation, are filtered off with a sharp filter so that unnecessary spectrum is not used up. This results in an amplitude modulation and is why TETRA requires linear amplifiers. The resulting ratio of peak to mean (RMS) power is 3.65&nbsp;dB. If non-linear (or not-linear enough) amplifiers are used, the sidebands re-appear and cause interference on adjacent channels. Commonly used techniques for achieving the necessary linearity include Cartesian loops, and adaptive predistortion.
The base stations normally transmit continuously and (simultaneously) receive continuously from various mobiles on different carrier frequencies; hence the TETRA system is a Frequency Division Duplex (FDD) system. TETRA also uses FDMA/TDMA (see above) like GSM. The mobiles normally only transmit on 1 slot/4 and receive on 1 slot/4 (instead of 1 slot/8 for GSM).
Speech signals in TETRA are sampled at 8&nbsp;kbit/s and then compressed with a vocoder using a technique called Adaptive Code Excited Linear Prediction (ACELP). This creates a data stream of 4.567&nbsp;kbit/s. This data stream is error-protection encoded before transmission to allow correct decoding even in noisy (erroneous) channels. The data rate after coding is 7.2&nbsp;kbit/s. The capacity of a single traffic slot when used 17/18 frames.
A single slot consists of 255 usable symbols, the remaining time is used up with synchronisation sequences and turning on/off, etc. A single ''frame'' consists of 4 slots, and a ''multiframe'' (whose duration is 1.02 seconds) consists of 18 frames. Hyperframes also exist, but are mostly used for providing synchronisation to encryption algorithms.
The downlink (i.e., the output of the base station) is normally a continuous transmission consisting of either specific communications with mobile(s), synchronisation or other general broadcasts. All slots are usually filled with a burst even if ''idle'' (continuous mode). Although the system uses 18 frames per second only 17 of these are used for traffic channels, with the 18th frame reserved for signalling, Short Data Service messages (like SMS in GSM) or synchronisation. The frame structure in TETRA (17.65 frames per second), consists of 18,000 symbols/s / 255 symbols/slot / 4 slots/frame, and is the cause of the ''perceived'' "amplitude modulation" at 17&nbsp;Hz and is especially apparent in mobiles/portables which only transmit on one slot/4. They use the remaining three slots to switch frequency to receive a burst from the base station two slots later and then return to their transmit frequency (TDMA).
To provide confidentiality the TETRA air interface is encrypted using one of the ''TETRA Encryption Algorithm (TEA)'' ciphers. The encryption provides confidentiality (protect against eavesdropping) as well as protection of signalling.
Currently 4 different ciphers are defined. These TEA ciphers should not be confused with the block cipher Tiny Encryption Algorithm.  The TEA ciphers have different availability due to export and use restrictions.  Few details are published concerning these proprietary ciphers.  Riess
This first representation demonstrates where the slow reselect threshold (SRT) the fast reselect threshold (FRT) and propagation Delay exceed parameters are most likely to be. These are represented in association with the decaying radio carrier as the distance increases from the TETRA Base Station.
From this illustration, these SRT and FRT triggering points are associated to the decaying radio signal strength of the respective cell carriers. The thresholds are situated so that the cell reselection procedures occur on time and assure communication continuity for on-going communication calls.
The next diagram illustrates where a given TETRA radio cell initial selection.  The initial cell selection is performed by procedures located in the MLE and in the MAC. When the cell selection is made, and possible registration is performed, the MS (mobile station) is said to be attached to the cell.  The mobile is allowed to initially select any suitable cell that has a positive C1 value; i.e., the received signal level is greater than the ''minimum receive level for access'' parameter.
The initial cell selection procedure shall ensure that the MS selects a cell in which it can reliably decode downlink data (i.e., on a main control channel/MCCH), and which has a high probability of uplink communication. The minimum conditions that shall have to be met are that C1 > 0. Access to the network shall be conditional on the successful selection of a cell.
At mobile switch on, the mobile makes its initial cell selection of one of the base stations, which indicates the initial exchanges at activation.
The minimum receive access level information element shall indicate the minimum received signal level required at the SwMI in a cell, either the serving cell or a neighbour cell as defined in table 18.24.
The next diagram illustrates where a given TETRA radio cell becomes ''improvable''. The serving cell becomes improvable when the following occurs: the C1 of the serving cell is below the value defined in the radio network parameter cell reselection parameters, slow reselect threshold for a period of 5 seconds, and the C1 or C2 of a neighbour cell exceeds the C1 of the serving cell by the value defined in the radio network parameter cell reselection parameters, slow reselect hysteresis for a period of 5 seconds.
The next diagram illustrates where a given TETRA radio cell becomes Usable.  A neighbour cell becomes radio usable when the cell has a downlink radio connection of sufficient quality.
The following conditions must be met in order to declare a neighbour cell radio usable:  The neighbour cell has a path loss parameter C1 or C2 that is greater than the following: (FAST_RESELECT_THRESHOLD+FAST_RESELECT_HYSTERISIS) for a period of 5 seconds, and the service level provided by the neighbour cell is higher than that of the serving cell. No successful cell reselection shall have taken place within the previous 15 seconds unless MM requests a cell reselection. The MS-MLE shall check the criterion for serving cell relinquishment as often as one neighbour cell is scanned or monitored.
The following conditions will cause the MS to rate the neighbour cell to have higher service level than the current serving cell:
The next diagram illustrates where a given TETRA radio cell becomes ''relinquishable'' (''abandonable''). The serving cell becomes relinquishable when the following occurs:
The C1 of the serving cell is below the value defined in the radio network parameter cell reselection parameters, fast reselect threshold, for a period of 5 seconds, and the C1 or C2 of a neighbour cell exceeds the C1 of the serving cell by the value defined in the radio network parameter cell reselection parameters, fast reselect hysteresis, for a period of 5 seconds.
No successful cell reselection shall have taken place within the previous 15 seconds unless MM (Mobility Management) requests a cell reselection. The MS-MLE shall check the criterion for serving cell relinquishment as often as one neighbour cell is scanned or monitored.
When the FRT threshold is breached, the MS is in a situation where it is essential to relinquish (or abandon) the serving cell and obtain another of at least Usable quality. That is to say, the mobile station is aware that the radio signal is decaying rapidly, and must cell reselect rapidly, before communications are terminated because of radio link failure.  When the mobile station radio-signal breaches the minimum receive level, the radio is no longer in a position to maintain acceptable communications for the user, and the radio link is broken.
Radio link failure: (C1 
This table serves only as a guide.
Any given TETRA radio terminal using Java (Java ME/CLDC) based technology, provides the end user with the communication rights necessary to fulfil his or her work roll on any short duration assignment.
For dexterity, flexibility, and evolution ability, the public transportation radio engineering department, have chosen to use the open sources, Java language specification administered by Sun and the associated work groups in order to produce a ''transport application tool kit''.
Service acquisition admits different authorised agents to establish communication channels between different services by calling the service identity, and without possessing the complete knowledge of the ISSI, GSSI, or any other TETRA related communication establishment numbering plan. Service acquisition is administered through a ''communication rights centralised service''  or ''roll allocation server'', interfaced into the TETRA core network.
In summary, the TETRA MMI aims are to: 
This ''transport application tool-kit'' has been produced successfully and with TETRA communication technology and assures for the public transport application requirements for the future mentioned hereafter.
The ''home'' (''main'') menu presents the end user with three possibilities: 
Status SDS provides the end user with a mechanism for generating a 440&nbsp;Hz repeating tone that signals a fraud occurrence to members within the same (dynamic or static) Group Short Subscriber Identity (GSSI) or to a specific Individual Short Subscriber Identity (ISSI) for the duration of the assignment (an hour, a morning patrol or a given short period allocated to the assignment). The advantage being that each of the end users may attach themselves to any given terminal, and group for short durations without requiring any major reconfiguration by means of radio software programming tools. Similarly, the aggression feature functions, but with a higher tone frequency (880&nbsp;Hz), and with a quicker repetitious nature, so to highlight the urgency of the alert.
The ''parameters'' tab provides an essential means to the terminal end-user allowing them to pre-configure the target (preprogrammed '''ISSI''' or '''GSSI''' ) destination communication number. With this pre-programmed destination number, the end-user shall liaise with the destination radio terminal or ''roll allocation server'', and may communicate, in the group, or into a dedicated server to which the service acquisition requests are received, preprocessed, and ultimately dispatched though the TETRA core network. This simplifies the reconfiguration or recycling configuration process allowing flexibility on short assignments.
The parameters tab also provides a means of choosing between preselected tones to match the work group requirements for the purposes of fraud and aggression alerts. A possibility of selecting any given key available from the keypad to serve as an aggression or fraud quick key is also made possible though the transport application software tool kit. It is recommend to use the Asterisk and the Hash keys for the fraud and aggression quick keys respectively. For the fraud and aggression tones, it is also recommend to use 440&nbsp;Hz slow repeating tone (blank space 500 milli-seconds) and 880&nbsp;Hz fast repeating tone (blank space 250 milliseconds) respectively.  The tone options are as follows: 440&nbsp;Hz 620&nbsp;Hz, 880&nbsp;Hz, and 1060&nbsp;Hz.
The ''parameters'' page provides an ''aid'' or ''help'' menu and the last tab within parameters describes briefly the tool kit the version and the history of the transport application tool kit to date.
Refer also to: