On May 24, 2010, ''Time'' magazine called Warren, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Chairman Sheila Bair, and Securities and Exchange Commission Chairman Mary Schapiro the "New Sheriffs of Wall Street" in a cover story.  On September 17, 2010, she was named a special adviser by President Obama to oversee the development of the new Consumer Financial Protection Bureau.  Her position will include the responsibility of recommending a director for this new entity, although it is unclear whether Warren herself will be considered for the position.
Elizabeth Warren was born Elizabeth Herring, and raised in Oklahoma where she was a state champion debater at age 16. She married Jim Warren at age 19, and transferred from George Washington University to the University of Houston, where she graduated with a B.S. in 1970.  In 1976 she received her J.D. from Rutgers Law   Newark, where she served as an Editor to the Rutgers Law Review and was one of two female summer associates at Cadwalader, Wickersham & Taft's Wall Street office.  After law school, Warren worked from home, writing wills and doing real estate closings for walk in clients.  She divorced Warren in 1978, and later married Bruce Mann.
She joined Harvard Law School in 1992 as the Robert Braucher Visiting Professor of Commercial Law. Prior to Harvard, she was the William A. Schnader Professor of Commercial Law at University of Pennsylvania School of Law and also taught at the University of Texas School of Law, University of Houston Law Center, University of Michigan and Rutgers Law School.
From 2005-2008, Warren and her law students wrote a blog called Warren Reports, part of Josh Marshall's TPMCafe.
Warren appeared in the documentary film ''Maxed Out'' in 2006, has appeared several times on ''Dr. Phil'' to talk about money and families, has been a guest on ''The Daily Show'',
Warren is a member of the FDIC's  and the Executive Council of the National Bankruptcy Conference. She is the former Vice-President of the American Law Institute and a member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. She served as the Chief Adviser to the .
Warren is married to Bruce Mann, a legal historian and law professor also at Harvard Law School.  She has a daughter, Amelia Warren Tyagi, with whom she has coauthored two books and several articles, and a son, Alexander Warren. She is an ex-Sunday School teacher and cites Methodist John Wesley as an inspiration.
In addition to writing more than 100 scholarly articles and six academic books, Warren has written several best-selling books, including ''All Your Worth: The Ultimate Lifetime Money Plan'' (ISBN 978-0-7432-6988-9), coauthored with her daughter, Amelia Tyagi.
In an article in the ''New York Times'', Jeff Madrick said of Warren's book:
In an article in ''Time'' magazine by Maryanna Murray Buechner, "Parent Trap" (subtitled "Want to go bust? Have a kid. Educate same. Why the middle class never had it so bad"), Buechner said of Warren's book:
In 2005, Dr. David Himmelstein and Warren published a study on bankruptcy and medical bills, which claimed that half of all families filing for bankruptcy did so in the aftermath of a serious medical problem.  The finding was particularly noteworthy because 75% of those who fit that description had medical insurance. This study was widely cited in academic studies and policy debates, though some have questioned the study's methods and offered alternative interpretations of the data.  In one critical article funded by an insurance industry group, the authors simply multiplied two numbers found in the Himmelstein and Warren manuscript, and reported that only 17% of bankruptcies resulted from medical bills.   In a rejoinder, Himmelstein and Warren explained the critics' multiple errors.  
On November 14, 2008, Ms. Warren was appointed by United States Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid to chair the five-member Congressional Oversight Panel created to oversee the implementation of the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act.  The Panel releases monthly oversight reports that evaluate the government bailout and related programs.  
The Panel's monthly reports under Warren's leadership covered foreclosure mitigation, consumer and small business lending, commercial real estate, AIG, bank stress tests, the impact of TARP on the financial markets, government guarantees, the automotive industry, and many other topics.  The Panel has also released special reports on financial regulatory reform and farm loans.  For each report, Warren released a video on the Congressional Oversight Panel's website explaining key findings.  All reports and videos are available at .
In her role as Chair of the Panel, Warren testified many times before House and Senate committees on financial issues.
In an interview at Newsweek, December 7, 2009 entitled  Elizabeth Warren was asked: "''Congress is trying to reform financial regulation, and it can get a little abstract. Where should people focus?''"
She responded:
Warren was named one of ''Time Magazine'''s 100 Most Influential People in the World in 2009 and 2010.
In December 2009, the ''Boston Globe'' named Warren the Bostonian of the Year.
The ''National Law Journal'' has repeatedly named Professor Warren as one of the fifty most influential female lawyers, and she has been recognized for her work by ''SmartMoney'' magazine, ''Money magazine'', and Law Dragon.
In 2009, the Women's Bar Association of Massachusetts honored her with the Leila J. Robinson Award.
Warren has been recognized for her dynamic teaching style. In 2009, Warren became the first professor in Harvard's history to win the law school's teaching award twice.  The  was voted on by the graduating class in honor of "her teaching ability, openness to student concerns, and contributions to student life at Harvard." Warren also has won awards from her students at the University of Pennsylvania, the University of Michigan, and the University of Houston Law Center.
On August 13, 2010 a rap video by the Main Street Brigade was put on YouTube in an effort to encourage President Obama to nominate Elizabeth Warren as the first director of the Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection.
On May 27, 2011 Elizabeth Warren delivered the commencement address for the graduating class of 2011 at the Rutgers School of Law - Newark.  She was awarded an Honorary Doctor of Laws degree and was conferred membership into the Order of the Coif.