Liberty works congruently with the University of Washington's "College in the High School" program in Psychology, Spanish, and French, which allows students to earn both high school and college credits through a different means than AP courses.
According to the Evergreen Freedom Foundation, Liberty ranks 20th of 346 ranked public and private high schools in the State of Washington. Rankings are published by the Fraser Institute, which compares test scores, curriculum, and graduation rates.
In the 1998-1999 school year, Liberty received the award of National Blue Ribbon School of Excellence, the highest award an American school can achieve. Liberty was recognized at the national level in Washington DC on April 21, 1999. Representatives Edmonds, Kagi, Dickerson, Wensman, Ballasiotes, Pflug, Kenney, McIntire, Thomas, Hankins, Esser and Fortunato proclaimed,
Liberty's Drama Department received top honors in 2006, as one of the best schools for theater productions in the state.    Liberty   s talented group of student actors   received numerous accolades at the 5th Avenue High School Musical Theatre Awards for their production of "Seussical.". Designed as a high school version of the Tony Awards, the 5th Avenue Awards program honors high school students throughout Washington who put on quality musical theater entertainment. All nominees are invited to the annual awards show at the 5th Avenue Theatre in Seattle. In addition to being asked to perform on stage during the ceremony, the Patriot Players won Best Chorus and Best Costume Design. Teacher Katherine Klekas took home Best Director. Seussical was also nominated in eight other categories: Outstanding Overall Musical Production, Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble Group, Outstanding Choreography, Outstanding Music Direction, Outstanding Orchestra, Outstanding Lighting Design, Outstanding Hair and Makeup Design, and Outstanding Stage Crew. More recently, the Patriot Players received ten nominations and two honorable mentions for their Spring 2010 production of "Into the Woods."..
In 2009, Businessweek and Greatschools.org recognized Liberty as the #1 "parents choice" high school in the state of Washington. Parents write reviews and give ratings for schools on greatschools.org. For this award, a school is chosen with the highest average parent rating that also had at least 10 parent reviews.
Liberty High School is a member of the 3A Kingco Athletic Conference and Washington Interscholastic Activities Association. Liberty's traditional rivals are Bellevue, Issaquah and Skyline. Hazen High School has also been a traditional rival due to its close proximity to Liberty. Liberty's most recent state title came in 2007 when Liberty's 4x400 men's Relay team took first place at the State Track and Field meet in Pasco and set a school record. In 2003 the Patriot's were also state champions when Liberty's baseball team beat West Valley High School of Yakima. Liberty's most recent individual state champion was Kara Bennett in 2005 for triple jump. In all, the Liberty Athletic program holds 6 state titles in Footall, Baseball, Soccer, Track and Softball.
For the better part of the last decade, the Liberty football team has competed in the upper tier of the 3A Division. In 2009 the Liberty football team went 12-2 with a second place finish in the 3A state championship. Additionally, Liberty defeated cross-town rival and defending 4A State Champion Skyline on September 3, 2010. The football team's last 3A state title came on December 3, 1988 where they defeated Cheney 30-0. 
Liberty's Baseball has seen success in recent years with a state title in 2003. The team's most recognized alumni, Tim Lincecum, was the 2008 and 2009 Cy Young Award recipient as the top Major League pitcher in the National League. He currently plays for the San Francisco Giants.
The Liberty softball program has a long storied tradition of attending the state championships. The Softball team holds a record for state championship appearances at 12 years in a row, the most out of any sport of any school in the states history. Liberty holds the 1993 state title in softball where they beat longtime-rival Hazen 13-1.
In 1999, the Liberty mens soccer team was ranked 12th in the nation by CBS Sports. Though the team only came in 2nd in state that year, they have won a state title in 1986 where they defeated Fife 3-2. 
Liberty opened in 1977 with grades 10 through 12 (although without a senior class the first year), transitioning to a four-year high school with grade 9 through 12 in 1984. The school was completely renovated in 1999. The school color's of silver, green and blue, were chosen to replicate those used by the Seattle Seahawks, whose founding was in 1977, the same year Liberty opened. The colors were decided over Red, White and Blue by a vote from the student body. The school is also home to the Ray Reeves Gymnasium.
Beginning in the summer of 2011, a $70 million dollar multi-phase renovation project will begin and will take 3 years to complete. Phase I includes a $20   $25 million dollar addition and modernization project which passed the February 7, 2006 ballot measure for the Issaquah School District. See . The master plan for the campus is designed to have a series of buildings set around four exterior courts. By the fall of 2012, Liberty will have 2 new classroom wings, 2 new science classrooms, an additional auxiliary gym, new weight room, new tennis courts, expansion of the core facilities, new and expanded cafeteria with a kitchen, new administration and counseling wings, a new entry courtyard/lobby and a new 600 seat state of the art performing arts center that includes a 100 seat black box, music, band and orchestra rooms. Most of phase I construction will take place on the southern portion of the campus. As of July 2010, planning for the Liberty remodel has begun with a partial completion of phase I set for fall 2011 and final completion in the fall of 2012. As part of the master campus plan, it is proposed that a $45 Million dollar phase II will demolish most of the northern portion of the campus (includes the library, 500 and 600 wing, art and technology wing) and replace them with two new wings with an open exterior court. See Phase I and II in the current plans  prepared by the architects for the expansion, Bassetti Architects.
In addition to the complete school remodel, the football stadium will have a new home-side facility with 2,000 seats, a covered roof, team meeting rooms, a press box, restrooms and concessions. It is proposed that the existing home-side stands will become the visitor side and the new stands will be built on the hillside to the west. Total seating for the stadium facility will reach 3,100 spectators at a cost of $5 million dollars. See the football 
The Liberty Baseball field will undergo renovations in the summer of 2011. It is planned that turf will replace the current infield sand, as well as upgrades around the stadium. 
As part of the school renovation project, the sports teams will gain a new Auxiliary Gym as well as a state of the art two story training and conditioning facility.
On May 4, 2010, science teacher Mark Buchli introduced Liberty High   s new solar panel to an audience that included state legislators, Puget Sound Energy and Issaquah Schools Foundation officials and school board members. In addition to providing the school clean energy, the solar panel will allow classrooms to conduct hands-on experiments and demonstrations   and perhaps inspire a new generation of scientists to better harness the vast energy potential of the sun. The grants to Liberty will provide an opportunity for students to compare the efficiency of tracking solar arrays, which have the ability to turn and follow the sun. The panel was funded by a grant from Puget Sound Energy with additional funding for the revolving pedestal from the Issaquah Schools Foundation.  See PSE's 
As part of the currently-planned renovation, Liberty's new facilities will include features like reusable water from green/planted roofs, geothermal heating, usable fans in all classrooms, composting, and light shelves on the building's exterior windows.
Within the past 5 years, the Liberty attendance area has seen a tremendous amount of growth, most notably in the Newcastle area. Recently, the Issaquah School Board purchased the Winterbrook Farm site in the May Valley area near Sunset Valley Farms for $3.33 Million. See . With expansive growth, a new middle and elementary school are planned for the site.