Mobile Search is important for the usability of mobile content for the same reasons as internet search engines became important to the usability of internet content. Early internet content was largely provided by portals such as Netscape. As the depth of available content grew, portals were unable to provide total coverage. As a result internet search engines such as Google and AltaVista proved popular as a way of allowing users to find the increasingly specialist content they were looking for. In a international journal article,'Exploring the logic of mobile search', Westlund, Gomez-Barroso, Compano, and Feijoo(2011) outline a through review of research on mobile search usage, and also present an in-depth study of user patterns. They conclude that mobile search has started to change mobile media consumption patters radically. they also emphasize that future developments of mobile search must be sensitive to the mobile logic.
There is a similar situation developing in the mobile content industry. Given early adopter usage of mobile services, there has been a vast increase in the depth of content developed for mobile phones. There are now few large organizations that do not offer a mobile service of some sort. Most of the operators run their own portals that showcase the best available content. However, given the limitations of a mobile phones screen size and general navigability, most of available content that has been written for mobile users is effectively '''invisible''' to users. Research from Qpass suggests that less than 36% of an operator's portal is within 30 seconds navigation distance for the user - this being the expected time users expect to find content in.
Beyond navigation is location-aware technology for mobile search.  Mobile Local Search is 30% of all digital searches with a surge in growth expected world-wide in 2010.  What is Mobile Local Search (MLS)?  Are all searches local?  What are the component technologies of a powerful MLS application?  How can advertisers purchase inventory ad units available within the application structure?  Mobile Local Search is the search and discovery of persons, places, and things within an identifiable space defined by distinct parameters.  These parameters are evolving.  Today they include social networks, individuals, cities, neighborhoods, landmarks, and actions that are relevant to the searcher   s past, current, and future location.  These parameters provide structure to vertically deep and horizontally broad data categories that can stand-alone or are combined to comprise searchable directories.
Thus, MLS can occupy several application categories/directories simultaneously.  This is a double-edge sword for product designers and developers, analytic engines, financial media analysts, and media planners and buyers needing to evaluate one category with another or one directory with another.  The lack of clean comparative analysis based upon application occupancy of an individual category creates a challenge for marketers looking to maximize the value of applications to the supply chain including brand marketers looking to embed advertising within an application.
The early deals are taking place as cell phone operators recognize that mobile Internet search is an inherently different business than its desktop counterpart. Whereas people might use a Web-connected personal computer to search for information about an 18th-century British author, they are more likely to use cell phones to find targeted information like news, weather and sports. Cell phones also offer much less space to enter in search terms and smaller screens to display results. Searcher behaviour on mobiles is markedly different than on desktop machines. Searches can be seen to fall into two categories 1, on the move/commuting where there the context of local and immediate is inherent in the searcher's need and 2, on the couch where mobiles are being used to surf for information in between watching TV and engaging in other mobile communication such as sms or using social networks.
Some of the advancements by the major portals in Internet search, such as Google's famous page-ranking scheme, don't apply in the mobile world since people aren't searching for Web sites as much as answers to specific questions. Alltel's group president of operations, Kevin Beebe, says the Internet search giants aren't yet delivering the kind of results the mobile content industry wants. "What they're trying to do is take that core search capability and just jam it onto the phone," Mr. Beebe said. "That's probably not the right approach."
Within the broad umbrella of mobile search (the ability to browse for mobile specific content), there are a range of services. Given the relative immaturity of the market, not all of these can be expected to become the industry standards.