 but his family moved to Winchester when he was young. His father, Geoffrey, was a printer and his mother, Rosemary, was the daughter of two unsuccessful repertory actors, Henry Lionel Pope "Lionel" Stamper (1906   1985) & Edna May Howard Innes (1904   1969) (and the great-niece of Charles William Stamper, motor engineer to King Edward VII).
Dee was educated at both independent and state schools. His first school was The Pilgrims' School, a junior independent school in Winchester, followed by the state Montgomery of Alamein School for his secondary education, for some time he attended Frensham Heights School. He took his A-levels at Peter Symonds' College, and left with a D and an F grade. Following this, he planned to attend drama college, but his plans were scuppered when his mother persuaded him to get a vocation, and so he entered the catering industry and became a waiter.
In his twenties, Dee worked at the Ritz and started drinking heavily. He attended church and attempted to become a priest. After he realised that wasn't for him he gave that up, he quit drinking, although he would later describe his condition as "alcohol abuse" rather than alcoholism, which it was reported as at the time. Since then he has advertised John Smith's Bitter.
Dee's first public act was an open-mic gig in 1986 at the Comedy Store, which he went to one evening after work. He was encouraged to write additional material and to tour the circuit. Since the 1990s he has performed sell-out acts at many high-profile venues (including the London Palladium and the Hammersmith Apollo). After he scooped the British Comedy Award for Best Stage Newcomer in 1991, Dee was offered his own show; ''The Jack Dee Show'' first went out on Channel 4 in February 1992, bringing him to a wider audience. His combination of stand-up routines on television continued with ''Jack Dee's Saturday Night'' on ITV, ''Jack Dee's Happy Hour'' in 1997 and later ''Jack Dee Live at the Apollo'' in 2004 on BBC One.
Aside from his successful stand-up career, Dee has played starring roles and guest appearances in television series. He played the part of Doug Digby in the ''Grimleys'' pilot (1997) before the role was recast for the series, and made guest appearances on such programmes as ''Silent Witness'', ''Dalziel and Pascoe'' and ''Jonathan Creek''.
In 2001, he won ''Celebrity Big Brother'' (then linked to fundraising for Comic Relief). During evictions, he dressed up in a tweed jacket and cap and held his packed suitcase, hoping to be voted out. During the eviction of another housemate he briefly absconded to sneak a quick kiss with his wife. He also escaped for several hours at night-time. He has subsequently said that he dislikes the treatment of the housemates by the show and its producers, and has refused all permission for any of the clips to be shown again.
In 2004 he played the role of Steven Sharples MP the self-styled 'Deputy Home Secretary' alongside Warren Clarke and Dervla Kirwan in ''The Deputy''. Dee's performance was praised, though the film itself received a lukewarm response. Later that year he starred in another one-off drama, ''Tunnel of Love''. He was the celebrity advocate in ''Britain's Best Sitcom'' for ''Fawlty Towers'' and presented an hour-long documentary about the series.
In 2005 he co-hosted ''Comic Aid'', a one-off gathering of comedians that aimed to raise money for the Asian Tsunami Appeal. In May of the same year he appeared on the "Star in a Reasonably-Priced Car" segment of the BBC Two series ''Top Gear'', achieving a lap time of 1:53.5 (52nd on the Suzuki Liana leader board). His most recent series ''Lead Balloon'', which he also co-wrote, began on BBC Four on 4 October 2006. Described as "Britain's answer to ''Curb Your Enthusiasm''", ''Lead Balloon'' sees Dee play the semi-biographical role of Rick Spleen. A second series of eight episodes was commissioned and was broadcast on BBC Two in 2007, with a third series debuting on Thursday 13 November 2008. A fourth series will be shown in 2011. He also starred as Harry in the 2005 film ''Short Order''.
Dee makes frequent appearances on the panel shows ''I'm Sorry I Haven't a Clue'', ''QI'' and ''Have I Got News for You'', which he has guest-presented nine times, and he hosts segments of the BBC's biennial Comic Relief telethon. He starred in advertisements for John Smith's Bitter in the 1990s, becoming known as "the midget with the widget".
He made his stage debut in 1998, playing Yvan in Yasmina Reza's Olivier award-winning '''Art'''. He later returned as Serge for a 13-week run at the request of the director.
In 2008, Dee took part in the 15th anniversary special of ''Shooting Stars'' where he replaced Will Self as captain of Team A. The show aired on 30 December 2008 on BBC2.
Dee returned as team captain in series 6 of Shooting Stars on 26 August 2009, and again for the 7th series.
In February 2009, it was announced that Dee would be one of a trio of hosts to replace Humphrey Lyttelton for the summer series of ''I'm Sorry I Haven't a Clue'' (the others being Stephen Fry and Rob Brydon).  Dee subsequently became the permanent host for the 2009 and 2010 series of the programme.
Over Christmas 2009, Dee played the role of John Tweedledum in ''The News at Bedtime''.
In 2010, Dee took part in ''Channel 4's Comedy Gala'', a benefit show held in aid of Great Ormond Street Children's Hospital, filmed live at the O2 Arena in London on 30 March.
Dee met Susan Jane "Jane" Hetherington, in 1986 when he was working as a waiter in Fulham and she was a receptionist at a nearby hotel. They married in Winchester, Hampshire, in 1989. Together they have four children: Hattie Jane Innes (born 1992, Wandsworth, London), , Phoebe Jane Innes (born late 1994/early 1995, Westminster, London) and twins, Miles Lionel Innes and Charles Lionel Innes 'Charlie' (born 1998, Westminster) and live in Wandsworth. They decided to send their children to independent schools.
Dee suffers from depression, and he has claimed that his work is the best therapy for his condition, saying "if you have the impulse to be creative, you ignore it at your peril".
He abused alcohol heavily in the 1980s. Following his appearance on ''Celebrity Big Brother'' he had a relapse, though did not attend AA meetings because he did not want paparazzi photographing him leaving the meetings.
In 2007, the ''Daily Express'' reported that he was in negotiations with publishers to release his autobiography. He signed with Doubleday in 2008 and the book, ''Thanks For Nothing: The Jack Dee Memoirs'', was released in October 2009, along with an audiobook of the same title which he narrates. According to Dee, "it's really the story of how I got into comedy... It's kind of an autobiography but isn't, as it stops about 25 years ago. It goes right up to the first time I do stand up."
In February 2009 Dee and several other entertainers wrote an open letter to ''The Times'' supporting Baha'i leaders then on trial in Iran.