Stewart came to stardom as part of the British folk revival in the 1960s and 1970s, and developed his own unique style of combining folk-rock songs with delicately woven tales of the great characters and events from history.
He is best known for his hit 1976 single "Year of the Cat" from the platinum album ''Year of the Cat''.
Though ''Year of the Cat'' and its 1978 platinum follow-up ''Time Passages'' brought Stewart his biggest worldwide commercial successes, earlier albums such as ''Past, Present and Future'' from 1973 are often seen as better examples of his intimate brand of historical folk-rock - a style to which he has returned in recent albums.
Stewart was a key figure in a fertile era in British music and he appears throughout the musical folklore of the age. He played at the first ever Glastonbury Festival in 1970, knew Yoko Ono before she met John Lennon, shared a London apartment with a young Paul Simon, and hosted at the legendary Les Cousins folk club in London in the 1960s.
Stewart has released nineteen studio/live albums and a limited edition album of B-sides and rarities since his debut album ''Bedsitter Images'' in 1967, and continues to tour extensively around the US and Canada, Europe and the UK. His latest release, is ''Uncorked'', which was released on his independent label, Wallaby Trails Recordings.
He has worked with Alan Parsons, Jimmy Page, Rick Wakeman, Tori Amos and Tim Renwick and currently plays with Dave Nachmanoff and former Wings lead-guitarist Laurence Juber.
Though born in Glasgow, Al Stewart grew up in the town of Wimborne Minster, Dorset, England after moving from Scotland with his mother. He attended Wycliffe College school in Stonehouse, Gloucestershire,  as a boarder. After that, as he sings in the song "Post World War II Blues" (from ''Past, Present and Future''): ''"I came up to London when I was 19 with a corduroy jacket and a head full of dreams."''
Having bought his first guitar from future Police guitarist Andy Summers, Stewart traded in his electric guitar for an acoustic guitar when he was offered a weekly slot at Bunjies Coffee House in London's Soho in 1965. From there, he went on to compete at the Les Cousins folk club on Greek Street, where he played alongside Cat Stevens, Bert Jansch, Van Morrison, Roy Harper and Ralph McTell.
It was at this time that Stewart also met Yoko Ono, who persuaded him to part with the only   100 he had in the world to put towards her film entitled ''No 4'', a compilation of naked bottoms.
Stewart's first record was the single "The Elf" (backed with a version of the Yardbirds' "Turn into Earth"), which was released in 1966 on Decca Records, and included guitar work from Jimmy Page (later of the Yardbirds and Led Zeppelin), the first of many leading guitarists Stewart worked with, including Richard Thompson, Tim Renwick and Peter White. Stewart then signed to Columbia Records (CBS in the UK), for whom he released six albums. Though the first four of these attracted relatively little commercial interest, Stewart's popularity and cult-following grew steadily through albums that contain some of Stewart's most incisive and introspective songwriting.
Stewart's debut album ''Bed-Sitter Images'' was released on LP in 1967; a revised version appeared in 1970 as ''The First Album (Bed-Sitter Images)'' with a few tracks changed, and the album was reissued on CD in 2007 by Collectors' Choice Music with all the songs from both versions.
It was voted "Folk Album of the Year" by the UK music magazine ''Melody Maker'', and also features Jimmy Page on guitar. 
His third album, ''Zero She Flies'' followed in 1970 and included a number of shorter songs which ranged from acoustic ballads and instrumentals to songs that featured electric lead guitar. These first three albums (including ''The Elf'') were later released as the two CD set ''To Whom it May Concern: 1966   70''.
In 1970, Stewart jumped into a car with fellow musician Ian Anderson and headed to the small town of Pilton, Somerset. There, at Michael Eavis's Worthy Farm, Stewart performed at the first ever Glastonbury festival to a field of 1,000 hippies who had paid just   1 each to be there.
On the back of his growing success, Stewart released ''Orange'' in 1972. It was written after a tumultuous break-up with his girlfriend and muse, Mandi, and was very much a transitional album, combining songs in Stewart's confessional style with more intimations of the historical themes that he would increasingly adopt (e.g. "The News from Spain", with its prog-rock overtones, including dramatic piano by Rick Wakeman). 
Such airplay helped the album to reach #133 on the ''Billboard'' album chart in the US. Other songs on ''Past, Present and Future'' characterized by Stewart's 'history genre' mentioned American President Warren Harding, World War II, Ernst Rohm, Christine Keeler, Louis Mountbatten, and Joseph Stalin's purges.
Stewart followed ''Past, Present and Future'' with ''Modern Times'' (1975), in which the songs were lighter on historical references and more of a return to the theme of short stories set to music. Significantly, though, it was the first of his albums to be produced by Alan Parsons, and Allmusic regards it as his best. It produced his first hit single, "Carol", and  received substantial airplay on album oriented stations and reached #30 in the US, some 30 years before Bob Dylan would release an album of the same name.
Stewart's contract with CBS Records expired at this point and he signed to RCA Records for the world outside North America. His first two albums for RCA, ''Year of the Cat'' (released on Janus in the U.S., then reissued by Arista Records after Janus folded) and ''Time Passages'' (released in the U.S. on Arista), set the style for his later work, and have certainly been his biggest-selling recordings.
Both albums reached the top ten in the US, with "Year of the Cat" peaking at #5 and "Time Passages" at #10, and both albums produced hit singles in the US ("Year of the Cat" #8, and "On the Border", #42; "Time Passages" #7 and "Song On the Radio", #29). Meanwhile "Year of the Cat" became Stewart's first chart single in Britain, where it peaked at #31. The overwhelming success of these songs, both of which still receive substantial radio airplay on classic-rock/pop format radio stations, has perhaps later overshadowed the depth and range of Stewart's body of songwriting. Stewart himself has frequently expressed disappointment with the quality of his recordings during this era, commercial success notwithstanding.
Stewart then released ''24 Carrots'' (#37 US 1980) and his first live album ''Live/Indian Summer'' (#110 US 1981), with both featuring backing by Peter White's band Shot in the Dark (who released their own unsuccessful album in 1981). While "24 Carrots" did produce a #24 single with "Midnight Rocks," the album sold less well than its two immediate predecessors.
After those releases, Stewart was dropped by Arista and his popularity declined. Despite his lower profile and waning commercial success, he continued to tour the world, record albums, and maintain a loyal fanbase. There was a four-year gap between his next two albums, the highly political ''Russians and Americans'' (1984) and the upbeat pop-oriented ''Last Days of the Century'' (1988), which appeared on smaller labels and had lower sales than his previous works.
Stewart followed these up with a concept album, with ''Between the Wars'' (1995), covering major historical and cultural events from 1918 to 1939, such as the Versailles Treaty, Prohibition, the Spanish Civil War, and the Great Depression.
In 1995, Stewart was invited to play at the 25th anniversary Glastonbury festival, taking to the same stage he had graced in 1970 at the first ever festival.
In 2000, Stewart released ''Down in the Cellar'', a concept album themed on wine. Stewart had begun a love-affair with wine in the 1970s when, he admitted, he had more money than he knew how to spend, and so turned to fine wines.
In 2005 he released ''A Beach Full of Shells'', which was set in exotic places from First World War England to the 1950s rock'n'roll scene that influenced him.
In 2008, he released ''Sparks of Ancient Light'' produced, like his previous album, by Laurence Juber. Here he weaves tales of William McKinley, Lord Salisbury and Hanno the Navigator.
Stewart and guitarist Dave Nachmanoff released a live album, ''Uncorked (Live with Dave Nachmanoff)'' on Stewart's label, Wallaby Trails Recordings, in 2009.
Stewart and Nachmanoff played the Glastonbury Festival 40th anniversary in June 2010 on the Acoustic stage.
Stewart sang a duet with Albert Hammond of Hammond's "It Never Rains in Southern California" on Hammond's 2010 album "Legend."
Born in Scotland, raised in Dorset and gaining fame in London, Stewart moved to Los Angeles in the late 1970s.  He married in the mid-1990s, and he, his wife and their two daughters moved to Marin County, California.
Stewart's historical work includes such subjects as:
On occasion, Stewart has set poems to music, such as "My Enemies Have Sweet Voices" (lyrics by the poet Pete Morgan) on the 1970 album ''Zero She Flies''. During his 1999 UK tour, Stewart invited Morgan to read the lyrics as he performed this song in the Leeds City Varieties Theatre show of 7 November 1999.
Stewart has also released many compilations, which mainly feature his radio hits and some of his more unknown songs.