He maintains a popular weblog focused on Yahoo! initiatives, which is listed in CNET News.com's index of the 100 best technology-related blogs.  According to CNET, Zawodny has "helped put MySQL and other open-source technologies to use".
He was considered internally and externally to be Yahoo!'s resident MySQL guru.  Upon joining the company in 1999, he replaced the existing data-management system for the Yahoo! Finance news feed with MySQL.
He has also worked as an evangelist on the "influencer marketing" team in Yahoo! Search and helped to launch the Yahoo! Search blog.  He was part of Yahoo! Search   s Technology Development team.
On June 12, 2008, Jeremy announced on his blog that he would be leaving Yahoo!.
Prior to joining Yahoo!, Zawodny worked for three years at the Marathon Oil Company in Findlay, Ohio in their Information Technology Services.
Jeremy Zawodny also writes a monthly column for Linux Magazine and speaks at numerous conferences about MySQL, Yahoo!, and open source
He is also the author of ''High Performance MySQL'' (ISBN 0-596-00306-4) and holds a B.S. in Computer Science from Bowling Green State University.
Zawodny maintains a blog, which he started in 2002.  It focuses on Yahoo! initiatives and has been praised as a "bridge blog", one that has helped build relationships for Yahoo! and attract potential employees to the company.
Several of Zawodny's more controversial articles have attracted particular attention. On May 24, 2003, he declared that Google's  PageRank algorithm is no longer viable, due to bloggers and SEOs learning to game the system.  This claim is seemingly at odds with Google's continued use of PageRank, and Zawodny's article "inspired many interesting rebuttals".
Zawodny predicted on January 9, 2006 that "2006 will be the year in which once great Slashdot dies", its method of using an editorial staff losing out to increasingly popular community-driven competitors such as Digg and reddit.  In response, ''The Guardian'' noted that Slashdot was apparently not losing traffic, suggesting that while a new breed of users were attracted to the younger sites, Slashdot readers were remaining loyal.
Although Zawodny is known for his enthusiasm for Yahoo!, his posts critical of the company have often been noted by the media.  Such posts include his condemnation of Yahoo! software installations that alter user preferences as "insulting and disrepectful",
Zawodny was also an early advocate of RSS feeds at Yahoo! and predicted in 2003 that the technology would someday be ubiquitous.