Sappi is a producer of coated fine paper and chemical cellulose. The company conducts its business through three business units: Sappi Fine Paper, Sappi Forest Products and Sappi Trading.
Sappi Fine Paper is managed through three regional business units: Sappi Fine Paper North America, Sappi Fine Paper Europe and Sappi Fine Paper South Africa. Sappi Fine Paper has manufacturing and marketing facilities in North America, Europe, Southern Africa and Asia. It also manufactures uncoated graphic and business paper, coated and uncoated specialty paper, and casting release paper used in the manufacture of artificial leather and textured polyurethane applications.
Sappi Forest Products, based in Southern Africa, produces commodity paper products, pulp, chemical cellulose and forest and timber products for Southern Africa and export markets.
Founded in 1936 and headquartered in Johannesburg (South Africa), the company sells its products to merchants, converters, printers, publishers and other direct customers.
Paper production of 5.1 million tpa - 2.8 million tpa of paper pulp production - Chemical cellulose production of 600,000tpa - Manufacturing operations in nine countries on four continents - Sales in over 100 countries - 15,100 employees worldwide.
On the 29 September 2008, Sappi purchased two paper mills in Finland, 1 in Switzerland and 1 in Germany from the M-real company.  
Sappi aims to decrease its impact on the environment and aid conservation programmes through several measures. To reduce its carbon footprint, Sappi is increasingly using alternative energy sources, such as powering operations at several South African mills using biomass recovered from wood and bark waste instead of coal. Other carbon reduction schemes include a link with Volvo Car South Africa, whereby Sappi will create incentives for buyers of Volvo vehicles by planting sufficient indigenous trees to neutralise the carbon emissions that the vehicle would produce over 100 000 km.
Sappi is also involved in wildlife conservation measures, such as its involvement in the Sappi WWF TreeRoutes Partnership which has set up community based ecotourism venues such as the new Karkloof Conservation Center which helps protect all three of South Africa's crane species.