The college has been accredited by the Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools since 1975 and was most recently reaccredited in 2007., Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools. Accessed April 8, 2008.
In November of 1968, New Jersey approved a $202.5 million capital construction bond issue with an earmarked $15 million dollars designated for the construction of a new state college in Southern New Jersey. In 1969, a  tract in the heart of the Pine Barrens within Galloway Township was selected for this site. Trustees originally voted to name the school South Jersey State College but later opted to name it Stockton State College, as not to confuse it with Rutgers College of South Jersey. Immediately, construction began to run behind schedule and in 1970, when it became clear that the first class in 1971 would not have a campus, Trustees selected the historic Mayflower Hotel in Atlantic City as the temporary campus.
Classes began on schedule with the commencement of the first academic year in September of 1971. The College officially took shape as 1,000 students, 50 of whom were Educational Opportunity Fund students, 97 staff and 60 full-time faculty took over the former resort hotel. By December, occupancy of the first phase of the new campus construction took place, with the transfer of classes and offices to Galloway Township during the winter holiday period.
Accreditation of Stockton State College by the Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools was first granted in December of 1975.
Over the next few years, Stockton continued to grow exponentially as additional buildings and wings were added for the rising college demand in admissions. Around the same time that enrollment climbed past 5,000 students, Housing II opened in November of 1981. With the opening of the N-Wing College Center & Housing III in February 1983, Stockton State College became one of the most residential of NJ state colleges. Amidst this growth, Vera King Farris was named third President of the College on May 25, 1983.
In July of 1991, Stockton State College was re-accredited unconditionally for another 10 years by the Middle States Association Commission on Higher Education, with a special commendation for achieving social and intellectual diversity. Two years later, the College name was explicated to The Richard Stockton College of New Jersey.
The college has plans for facility growth that includes new residential housing, a new Campus Center, and new academic space. Stockton completed the new residential halls and is implementing a Master Plan focusing on academic programs and facilities as part of its ongoing strategy for sustained growth. 
In August of 2010, Stockton announced plans to purchase The Seaview Resort & Golf Course. If acquired, they have announced plans to convert a small portion of the hotel rooms into student housing while still maintaining a functioning hotel and golf course. On September 1 2010, Stockton finalized the deal for $20 million.
Notable facilities include:
Stockton's academic programs provide opportunities for study in fields including Criminal Justice, Psychology, Environmental Science, Biology, Business, and Literature. Additionally, courses are offered in emerging fields such as Computational Science, Tourism and Hospitality Management, and Homeland Security. Stockton also offers a Doctor of Physical Therapy program.  The Division of Continuing Studies in the School of Graduate and Continuing Studies provides credit-bearing and non-credit certificate programs, CE approved continuing professional education for health sciences, human services and business professionals, and a growing number and variety of community education offerings.
Stockton's academic programs and faculty have been recognized by such nationally recognized organizations as the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching and Learning, the National Science Foundation, the American Association of State Colleges and Universities, the John Simon Guggenheim Memorial Foundation, the Pulitzer Prize committee, the United States Air Force Academy, and ''The New York Times''.
Stockton has five housing units on campus. Housing II and III are traditional residence halls while Housing I, IV and V are all various apartment style complexes.
Rooms in all residences are completely furnished and contain trash cans, lamps, telephones, air conditioning, carpeting, and curtains. Cable TV and telephone service are also provided. Single rooms are generally available for new students. 
Stockton has four Living Learning Communities (LLCs) that are designed to connect students, faculty and staff around curricular and co-curricular themes and interests.  Themes include diversity, global citizenship, sustainability, and positive living. The LLCs are housed in Housing I, IV, and V.
As an alternative, it is not unusual for students to room together in nearby apartment communities. Many are located 5 minutes away in Galloway, NJ.
The Richard Stockton College of New Jersey has been ranked in tier 1 among the nation   s top public colleges and universities in the 2010 survey of ''America's Best Colleges''. In the annual survey, most recently released by ''U.S. News & World Report'' in August 2010, Stockton College is ranked among the Best Universities/Master   s in the North. Stockton, which was ranked in this category six years in a row, is in the top tier and among the top public institutions. In the past, Stockton had been classified as a national liberal arts college, but because U.S. News and World Report revised the categories early in 2007, it resulted in placements in a different category for a number of institutions, including Stockton. Currently Stockton is officially ranked 51st with a score of 44.
In 2002, The Richard Stockton College of New Jersey installed a 200 kW fuel cell at an initial cost of $1.3 million dollars. The New Jersey Board of Public Utilities provided a grant to cover most of the cost of the unit, with the college paying only $ 305,000. South Jersey Industries (SJI) also provided a rebate of $710,000 for the unit. The fuel cell provides just under 10% of the total energy for the campus, maintaining Stockton   s status as the college with the lowest energy cost per student in New Jersey.
Stockton achieved LEED certification for its new sustainable design. In 2006, the F-Wing expansion, including classrooms, offices and an atrium received the prestigious LEED (Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design) Certification from the U.S. Green Building Council. Stockton   s commitment to environmentally responsible design is echoed in the many green initiatives that have both saved energy and decreased greenhouse gas emissions. These include the installation of solar panels on its buildings and the development on campus of one of the largest geothermal heating and cooling systems in the world.
A new aquifer thermal energy storage system ATES, the first of its kind in the United States, began operation in 2008. The technology of the ATES system reduces the amount of energy used to cool Stockton   s buildings by storing cold water in an underground aquifer in the winter and drawing it back out in the summer to help cool campus buildings.
In 2008, Stockton approved an agreement with Marina Energy LLC for the installation of solar panels on ''The Big Blue'' athletic center roof to provide electricity to the college. Marina Energy is a subsidiary of South Jersey Industries. The college will pay nothing for the equipment but will sign a 10-year agreement to buy the generated power. In 2009 the job was completed. 
Later in the year, Housing V was built to accommodate the rising demand for student housing. It incorporates geothermal heating and cooling using closed loop technology for a total of 450 tons cooling capacity. To eliminate the possibility of groundwater contamination in the event of a leak, freeze protection is provided in the circulating fluid. The design accommodates future solar thermal heating systems. Upper story deciduous trees were planted along the south facing facades of the residence halls to provide shade during the summer months, but allow the warmth of the sun to wash the buildings during the winter. This design received the "Green Project of Distinction" award from Education Design Showcase.
Currently Stockton has the largest outdoor solar carport in the nation.
Stockton College   s next green project will be the largest single building project in Stockton   s history and shall be built in keeping with the U.S. Green Building Council   s LEED Gold Standard in sustainable design. The new Campus Center will provide  of space for dining, bookstore, pool, theater, lounges and offices but will use 25% less energy than standard construction, 40% less water usage and low emitting adhesives, sealants, paints and coatings. Additional "green" features of the building include a storm water collection system to irrigate an on-site "rain garden" of indigenous and adapted plant species, and a sophisticated energy management system for heating, cooling, ventilation and lighting.
Team mascot is the Osprey
For more information, contact the Office of Athletics and Recreation at (609) 652-4217.