Some  s have formed a   to better organize information in articles related to '''poker'''.  This page and its subpages contain their suggestions; it is hoped that this project will help to focus the efforts of other Wikipedians.  If you would like to help, please inquire on the   and see the   there.
For more information on WikiProjects, please see   and  .
To provide a place for editors interested in editing poker articles to discuss issues related to those articles, to encourage editors to improve poker articles and to organise collaboration on poker articles.
This is where you tell people *precisely* what is is you are doing and why.
This is where BOLDNESS is proven. -->
Participate in the   of poker articles.
For purposes of notability, Wikiproject Poker does not consider the Additional Criteria for Athletes to be valid for poker players.  The project considers a poker player '''generally notable''' only by:
Other poker players must be able to establish their notability via secondary sources and the normal guidelines as defined by  .  Winning other major tournaments  (including but not limited to Aussie Millions, USPO, Legends of Poker, LA Poker Classic, Foxwoods, National Titles (including the US)) is not in and of itself sufficient notability to warrant an article, but can help establish a player's notability.  As most poker tournaments are open events, participating in or "making the money" rarely adds to (let alone establishes) the notability of a poker player. On-line poker players must be able to establish notability independent of the poker sites they play on and sites that simply track online results.
These are tasks/requests for Wikiproject Poker.  If you wish to add a task/request please do so at the top of this list.  Please sign your request with 5 tildes, e.g. ~~~~~ this will capture the date of the request but not your name.
Adopting an article indicates that you are willing to monitor and nurture an article.  It would involve doing the research, writing, and picture-taking (if possible) for either a non-existent article or a stub.  It would also mean being available to answer any questions/concerns others might have about the article.  It does not, however, grant you ownership over the article. Everyone can still edit an adopted article, and you can work on other things too. The idea is to find a focus for a while, to try and build up the number of quality articles the Project has produced.
If you wish to adopt an article, please watch the page and add the following to the article's talk page:
This template will let others know that you are a subject matter expert on the page and are available to help resolve any concerns/questions.
We invite you to visit our page for participants to tell us where you are located and a little bit about your poker background.
You can also add yourself to a list of participants  .
To add yourself to the category list add the following to your userpage.
If you find a   that has not yet been marked as a stub, please add the following to the bottom of the article;