A number of '''symbols of Europe''' have emerged throughout history. Depending on the symbol, they can apply to Europe as a whole, European unity or merely to the European Union (EU). Most well known symbols were created by the Council of Europe (CoE) in the 1950s and 1960s, and while these symbols were intended to represent Europe as a whole, many people mistakenly see them as referring to the EU exclusively after their adoption by that organisation. In addition to those of Pan-European identity, the EU has created additional symbols for itself through its integration.
The empire of Charlemagne (; King of the Franks from 768 and Holy Roman Emperor; possibly 74228 January 814) united most of Western Europe for the first time since the Roman Empire, and the Carolingian Renaissance is considered to have encouraged the formation of a common European identity, while marking the end of the Dark Ages.Riche, Preface xviii, Pierre Riche reflects: "e enjoyed an exceptional destiny, and by the length of his reign, by his conquests, legislation and legendary stature, he also profoundly marked the history of Western Europe." Regarded as the founding father of both the French and German monarchies, Charlemagne's persona became a legendary symbol of conquest and greatness in both of the courts as well as the areas influenced by the two houses. The perceived significance of Charlemagne was further accentuated by an illustrious genealogy (translatio imperii) that was attached to him by the French Renaissance author Jean Lemaire de Belges in ''Les Illustrations de Gaule et Singularites de Troie'', where the founding of Celtic Gaul is linked to the arrival of the Trojan "Francus" (i.e. Astyanax), the son of Hector; and where Celtic Germany is linked to the arrival of "Bavo", the cousin of Priam, the mythical king of Troy during the Trojan War. With the intention of associating later reigns with the carolingian legacy, the crowns of both the Holy Roman Empire and Napoleon Bonaparte have for instance been named "the crown of Charlemagne", and the coronation sword of the French kings has since the 11th century been ''Joyeuse'', the sword of Charlemagne.http://www.louvre.fr/llv/oeuvres/detail_notice.jsp?CONTENT%3C%3Ecnt_id=10134198673226044&CURRENT_LLV_NOTICE%3C%3Ecnt_id=10134198673226044&FOLDER%3C%3Efolder_id=9852723696500909&bmLocale=en
Significantly, Charlemagne's reign has been considered to embody the Franco-Germanic unity which was absent during the long-lasting enmity which culminated in the two world wars, but later became indispensable for the construction of the European Union. By the length of his reign, by his conquests, legislation, contribution to the revival of the arts, and legendary stature, Charlemagne profoundly marked the history of Western Europe, and has thus been regarded a Pater Europae (''father of Europe'').
In the selection process for the design of the Council of Europe's flag (later adapted by the European Union) in 1952, several of the unsuccessful proposals brought forward were reminiscent of the ''Oriflamme'', the standard given to Charlemagne by Pope Leo III at his coronation in the Saint Peter's Basilica of Rome in the year 800. The suggestion that European integration was redolent of Charlemagne's empire was also early on made by Professor Hans von Hentig in a 1952 newspaper article expressing some sceptical views concerning the Schuman Plan. By having a central building of the European Commission in Brussels named after him, Charlemagne is also officially being alluded to in the modern European integration. The city of Aachen has since 1949 annually awarded the ''Charlemagne Prize'' to "personages of merit who have promoted the idea of western unity by their political, economic and literary endeavours." Winners of the prize include champions of European integration such as Alcide De Gasperi, Jean Monnet, and in 2002, the euro itself. Each weekly edition of the international affairs newspaper ''The Economist'' features a column titled "Charlemagne's notebook", focusing on European Union affairs. In his speech at the award ceremony for the Charlemagne Youth Prize 2010, European Parliament President Jerzy Buzek said the following:
Later monarchs who also have carried sobriquets as "relatives" of Europe include Queen Victoria of the United Kingdom (''grandmother of Europe''), Christian IX of Denmark and Nicholas I of Montenegro (both respectively ''father-in-law of Europe''). These late 19th and early 20th century nicknames are however purely on account of their children's marriages to foreign princes and princesses, and involve no wider symbolism.
 Introduced and made popular during the mannerist period, Europe is shown standing upright with the Iberian Peninsula forming her crowned head, and Bohemia her heart.Bennholdt-Thomsen (1999), p. 22
During the European Middle Ages, maps typically adhered to the Jerusalem-centered T-O scheme, depicting Europe, Asia and Africa.Borgolte (2001), p. 16 Separate maps of Europe were extremely rare; the only known examples are a map from Lambert of Saint-Omer's Liber Floridus, published in 1112, and a 14th-century Byzantine map. The next Europe-focussed map was published by cartographer Johannes Putsch in 1537, at the beginning of the Early Modern Age.
The Putsch-map was the first to depict Europe as an ''Europa regina'',Schmale (2004), p. 244 with the European regions forming a female human shape with crown, sceptre and globus cruciger. The map was first printed by Calvinist Christian Wechel.Wendehorst & Westphal (2006), p. 63 Though much about the origination and initial perception of this map is uncertain, it is known that Putsch (whose name was Latinized as Johannes Bucius Aenicola, 1516   1542) maintained close relations with Holy Roman Emperor Ferdinand I of Habsburg, and that the map's popularity increased significantly during the second half of the 16th century. The modern term ''Europa regina'' was not yet used by Putsch's contemporaries, who instead used the Latin phrase ''Europa in forma virginis'' ("Europe in the shape of a maiden").
In 1587, Jan Bussemaker published a copper engraving by Matthias Quad, showing an adaptation of Putsch's ''Europa regina'', as "''Europae descriptio''". Since 1588, another adaption was included in all subsequent editions of Sebastian Munster's "''Cosmographia''", earlier editions had it only sometimes included. Heinrich Bunting's "''Itenerarium sacrae scripturae''", which had a map of Europe with female features included in its 1582 edition, switched to ''Europa regina'' in its 1589 edition. Based on these and other examples, the year 1587 marks the point when many publications began adopting the imagery of ''Europa regina''.
In 1537, when the ''Europa regina'' was introduced, Holy Roman Emperor Charles V of Habsburg had united the lands of the Habsburg's in his hands, including his country of origin, Spain. Thus, the map is oriented westwards to have Spain as the crowned head, pointing at the Habsburgs' claim to be universal emperors of Europe. The most obvious connections to the Holy Roman Emperor are the Carolingian crown and the imperial ''insignia'' - sceptre and orb. Another connection to Charles V is the gown, which resembles the contemporary dress code at the Habsburg court, and the face of the queen, which some say resembles Charles V's wife Isabella.Werner (2009), p. 245 As in contemporary portraits of couples, ''Europa regina'' has her head turned to her right and also holds the orb with her right hand, which has been interpreted as facing and offering power to her imaginary husband, the emperor.
More general, Europe is shown as the ''res publica christiana'', the united Christendom in medieval tradition, and great or even dominant power in the world.
A third allegory is the attribution of Europe as the paradise by special placement of the water bodies. As contemporary iconography depicted the paradise as a closed form, ''Europa regina'' is enclosed by seas and rivers. The Danube river is depicted in a way that it resembles the course of the biblical river flowing through the paradise, with its estuary formed by four arms.
That ''Europa regina'' is surrounded by water is also an allusion to the antique mythological Europe, who was abducted by Zeus and carried over the water.
The art of shaping a map in a human form can also be found in a map drawn by Opicino de Canistris, showing the Mediterranean Sea. This map, published in 1340 and thus predating the Putsch map, showed Europe as a man and Northern Africa as a woman.
While in ''Europa regina'' maps actual geography is subordinate to the female shape, the opposite approach is seen in a map drawn by Hendrik Kloekhoff and published by Francois Bohn in 1709. In this map, titled "''Europa. Volgens de nieuwste Verdeeling''" ("''Europe, according to the newest classification''"), a female is superimposed on a map showing a fairly accurate geography of Europe, and although the map is oriented westward with Spain forming the head as in the ''Europa regina'' imagery, this is resulting in a ducked woman, corresponding with the ''Europa deplorans'' rather than the ''Europa triumphans'' allegory.Bennholdt-Thomsen (1999), pp. 22-24
In the eighth century, the name of the Greek mythological character Europa was ecclesiastically used for Charlemagne's Carolingian Empire. The name was used as a geographical term also by Ancient Greek cartograpers such as Strabo, but it was the eighth century usage which ultimately lead to it being adopted as the geographical name of the entire continent.
According to legend, Zeus was enamored of the Phoenician noble-woman Europa and decided to seduce her. He transformed himself into a tame white bull and mixed with her father's herds. While Europa and her female attendants were gathering flowers, she saw the bull, and got onto his back. Zeus took that opportunity and ran to the sea and swam, with her on his back, to the island of Crete. There he revealed his true identity, and Europa became the first queen of Crete. Zeus gave her a necklace made by Hephaestus and three additional gifts: Talos, Laelaps and a javelin that never missed. Zeus later re-created the shape of the white bull in the stars, which is now known as the constellation Taurus.
In addition to generally being a frequent motif in European art since Greco-Roman times, the founding myth of Europa and the bull has frequently been alluded to in relation to the continent and by the modern European Union, and can thus be considered not only a piece of toponymy, but also as a symbol, or national personification, of Europe. For instance, statues of Europa and the bull are located outside several of the European Union's institutions, as well as on the Greek    2 coin. Europa's name appeared on postage stamps commemorating the Council of Europe, which were first issued in 1956. Furthermore, the dome of the European Parliament's Paul-Henri Spaak building contains a large mosaic by Aligi Sassu portraying the abduction of Europa with other elements of Greek mythology.
The Roman Catholic Church canonised in 1997 Poland's 14th century monarch Jadwiga as Saint Hedwig, the patron saint of European unification. From the time of her death, Jadwiga was venerated in Poland as a saint, having been buried in the Wawel Cathedral. She has been considered a model of piety, constancy and faithfulness. Numerous stories and legends were told of her charity and devotion to God.
The Flag of Europe is used to represent both the European Union and the Council of Europe. It consists of a circle of 12 golden (yellow) stars on a blue background. The blue represents the west, the number of stars represents completeness while their position in a circle represents unity. The stars do not vary according to the members of either organisation as they are intended to represent all the peoples of Europe, even those outside European integration.
The flag was designed by Arsene Heitz and Paul Levy in 1955 for the CoE as its symbol, and the CoE urged it to be adopted by other organisations. In 1985 the EU, which was then the European Economic Community (EEC), adopted it as its own flag (having had no flag of its own before) at the initiative of the European Parliament. The flag is not mentioned in the EU's treaties, its incorporation being dropped along with the European Constitution, but it is formally adopted in law.
Despite it being the flag of two separate organisations, it is often more associated with the EU, due to the EU's higher profile and heavy usage of the emblem. The flag has also been used to represent Europe in sporting events and as a pro-democracy banner outside the Union. It has partly inspired other flags, such as those of other European organisations and those of states where the EU has been heavily involved (such as Bosnia and Herzegovina and Kosovo).
The European anthem is based on the prelude to "The Ode to Joy", 4th movement of Ludwig van Beethoven's Symphony No. 9. Due to the large number of languages in Europe, it is an instrumental version only, with the original German lyrics having no official status. The anthem was announced on 19 January 1972 by the Council of Europe, after being arranged by conductor Herbert von Karajan. The anthem was launched via a major information campaign on Europe Day, 5 May 1972.
It was adopted by European Community leaders in 1985. It does not replace national anthems, but is intended to celebrate their shared values. It is played on official occasions by both the Council of Europe and the European Union.
Other scores identified with pan-Europeanism include the prelude of Marc-Antoine Charpentier's ''Te Deum'', which is the hymn of the European Broadcasting Union (EBU) (played e.g. before and after every Eurovision Song Contest). The UEFA Champions League Anthem (an arrangement of Georg Frideric Handel's ''Zadok the Priest'' from the ''Coronation Anthems'') has since 1992 been played before each UEFA Champions League match and television broadcast.
The symbols of the Council are also the symbols of the European Union (except for a slight difference in the date of Europe Day, see above). The following are further symbols created by the EU but, unlike the above, are not related to the Council of Europe.
The euro was not one of the original symbols created by the CoE and is specific to the EU, but it has become a symbol since it replaced 12 national currencies in 2002. It is now used by most EU Member States and hence it (along with its currency symbol) has become one of the most tangible symbols of European unity for citizens of the European Union (though this of course is not intended to apply to wider Europe as the others do).
The ill-fated European Constitution would have legally enshrined the flag, motto, anthem and euro as being official to the EU. However, the Treaty of Lisbon does not mention the symbols, apart from the euro being made the official currency of the union. Despite being dropped from the new treaty, the EU symbols will continue to be used as before. In comparison, some countries such as the United Kingdom have not formally adopted their national flag in any form, but are used nonetheless in a ''de facto'' manner.
Although the symbols are not mentioned in the body of the Treaty of Lisbon itself, a declaration by sixteen Member States on the symbols, including the flag, was included in the final act of the Treaty of Lisbon stating that the flag, the anthem, the motto and the currency and Europe Day "will for them continue as symbols to express the sense of community of the people in the European Union and their allegiance to it."
The European Parliament, objecting to the absence of the symbols from the Treaty of Lisbon, backed a proposal to use the symbols such as the flag more often in the Parliament with Jo Leinen MEP suggesting that the Parliament should again take the ''avant-garde'' in their use. Later, in September 2008, Parliament's Committee on Constitutional Affairs proposed a formal change in the institution's rules of procedure to make better use of the symbols: the flag would be present in all meeting rooms (not just the hemicycle) and at all official events; the anthem would be played at the start of a new Parliament following elections and at formal sittings; the motto would be printed on all Parliamentary documents; and "Europe Day" would be formally recognised by Parliament. The proposal was passed on 8 October 2008 by 503 votes to 96 (15 abstentions).
There have been other pan-European organisations which have not adopted the same symbols as the Council of Europe or the European Union, or have symbols derived from these. The Flag of the European Coal and Steel Community (the first of the three European Communities) was developed around the same time as the Flag of Europe and shares the use of stars and the colour blue, but uses completely different arrangement and symbolism.
The Flag of the Western European Union (the European defence organisation) is derived from the Flag of Europe, altered for its own usage. The Central Commission for Navigation on the Rhine predates them all, but its flag also uses the colour blue and a circle of stars, though with different symbolism.