The WSU campus is located across the street from California State University, Fullerton, but it is not affiliated with the State University.
Western State University College of Law was founded in 1966 as the first law school established in Orange County, California.  It is owned by Education Management Corporation, a provider of private post-secondary education in North America. Western State's two buildings, the primary building and library, house classrooms and faculty offices, a mock trial courtroom, the admissions office, a student lounge, a student organizations room, the financial aid office, and the career services department. The library contains computer labs in addition to legal materials.
It is not a member of the Association of American Law Schools (AALS), but has paid a fee to receive AALS services.
Western State offers both full-time and part-time programs. Currently, the full-time program is only offered as daytime study, and the part-time program is only offered through evening study. However, part-time students can apply for spring admission, while full-time students can only do so for fall.
WSU alumni comprise almost one-third of over 250 deputy district attorneys and almost one-fourth of the deputy public defenders in Orange County, California. Also, a number of alumni are engaged in the private practice of criminal law in Southern California. Because of the influence the law school has on the practice of criminal law in Southern California, the Criminal Law Practice Center was established to provide additional educational and practical opportunities for its students and alumni.  The Practice Center offers a program that expands the teaching of criminal law beyond the traditional law school curriculum, bringing together legal scholars, judges, practicing criminal defense attorneys, prosecutors, legislators, law enforcement officers, and community leaders who contribute experience and diversity to the educational experience of students.
The Business Law Center at WSU offers students academic and practical preparation for legal careers advising corporate entities, small businesses and entrepreneurs in business law. Students develop legal knowledge and the skills, practical experience and networking contacts needed to represent business clients. As part of the Business Law Center, WSU offers a Certificated Course of Study Program with courses relevant to business law.
The American Bar Association accredited WSU in 2005.
Western State was listed with a "B+" in the March 2011 "Diversity Honor Roll" by ''The National Jurist: The Magazine for Law Students''.
Based on 2001-2007 1 year data (2007 only), 26.4% of Western State University Law graduates passed the California State Bar.
Based on a 2004-2007 2 year average (2007 and 2004), 75.3% of Western State University Law graduates were employed 9 months after graduation.