Located in Oslo, the force has responsibility for the whole country, including oil installations in the North Sea. Beredskapstroppen took part in the dramatic hostage situation at Sandefjord Airport on September 29, 1994. Delta is similar to FBI Hostage Rescue Team in the United States. They have a wider variety of weapons than the ordinary police force, including Sig Sauer P226 pistols, MP5 and Diemaco submachine guns.
Beredskapstroppen spend 50 % of their time training and preparing for missions, and the rest of the time they normally work like ordinary law enforcement in Oslo. For training in close quarters combat they often use a specially built city inside Rena military camp close to Rena which originally was built for training the Telemark Battalion and other military special forces.
According to Beredskapstroppen's web site, they conduct in average almost one armed operation every day. In 2004, for instance, they conducted 422 armed missions and only fired their weapons twice.
One of Beredskapstroppen's most dramatic missions was the Torp hostage crisis, where an elderly couple and two police officers were taken hostages by two criminals.In the end of the two day drama, Beredskapstroppen executed a rescue operation rescuing all of the hostages and killing one hostage taker and arresting the other. 
In the aftermath of the fatal NOKAS robbery, Beredskapstroppen arrested many suspects involved with the robbery.
Since October 2006, Delta has focused their operations against gang crime in the capital of Oslo and arrested many criminals and seized many weapons used by the gangs.
Members of Beredskapstroppen has also been deployed in Special Team Six. (See below)
Members of the unit have been deployed in the multinational police unit, Special Team Six many times. Team Six has most notably served in Kosovo. One of the unit's most important task was to arrest war criminals. According to one of the Delta operators, during a rescue mission, grenades and bullets flew over their heads while Team Six rescued 50-60 persons from furious Albanians. This incident was a rescue of UN personnel trapped in a building. Team Six was commanded by a Norwegian operator from Beredskapstroppen during this mission and during the period January-July 2004. Beredskapstroppen has had personnel deployed in Team Six ever since its foundation.
The unit frequently drove unmarked Mercedes Gelandewagen, marked and unmarked Chevrolet Suburbans, Unmarked BMW X5s and marked and unmarked Volvo V70s.
Beredskapstroppen has recently started utilizing new 2009 Mercedes MLs as a replacement for the older Volvo V70 and Chevrolet Suburban.
Beredskapstroppen has two Rigid-hulled inflatable boats. The type has three engines with a total of 675 HP.
For air transport Beredskapstroppen uses military Bell 412 SP from the RNoAF.
The operators use a special type of visor on their helmets which can withstand 9mm bullets. The French GIGN also reportedly use this visor.
The unit uses a gas mask with a closed system (rebreather).
They use advanced equipment to determine the type of chemicals they are up against.
Their uniforms differ slightly from those normally worn by the men and women of the Norwegian Police Service; instead of the normal black pants and blue shirts they wear black jumpsuits.