In addition to the main cardroom, the Commerce Casino complex includes a full service 200 room Crowne Plaza Hotel, which houses dining establishments, a day spa, beauty salon, pool and sundeck, banquet rooms, shops and entertainment.  The Commerce is also home to several restaurants and host to live boxing and MMA events.
The Commerce Casino offers a wide variety of limit, pot limit and no limit poker games, including:
The casino spreads more Texas Hold 'em games than any other casino in the world. Games with limits of 1-2 and 2-4 are upstairs in the ballroom, while 3-6, 4-8, and 9-18 exist on the main floor, with larger limit games in the Hotel section. The casino is also spreading 8-16 and 12-24 Hold'em. No Limit Hold 'em games have buy-ins as low as $40 and go much higher. There is a new $5/10 $500/$1500 spread No Limit Hold'em game which was first created in 2008.
The Casino's bad beat jackpots sometimes grow into six figures. The jackpot amounts are doubled at regular times during the week. Between 11am-12pm, 2pm-3pm, 5pm-6pm, 7pm-8pm & 10pm-11pm Daily, Commerce Casino offers a $100,000 Super Jackpot for Hold 'em.
Players can bring members of a home game to the Casino and they will provide game instruction, dealers, a pit boss, cards, chips and poker snacks. The "home" games act as live cash games and are eligible for jackpots.
The casino is offering Free Poker Lessons on Tuesdays and Wednesdays at the Crowne Plaza Hotel. Beginner classes are Tuesdays from 8pm to 10pm and Intermediate classes are held on Thursdays from 8pm to 10 pm. Registration is available at their website. The instructor is Roger Rodd "Poker Comedian and Poker Instructor to the Stars."
The Commerce Casino is home to several poker tournament series, including: 
Commerce also offers Pan, No Bust Blackjack, 3 Card Poker, Let It Ride, Caribbean Stud Poker, 21st Century Baccarat, EZ Baccarat, Pai Gow Poker, Super Pan Nine and 13 Card (Chinese poker).
Games besides poker, such as the ones listed above, are called "California Games" and have been modified to conform to California state gambling laws. The primary difference between California Games and normal casino table games is that the player does not play against the house. All non-poker games at the Commerce Casino are player-banked, meaning players play only against one another, and never against the house. The Commerce serves as a host for these games, providing a venue for their play.
The Racebook at Commerce Casino opened in July 2009, featuring mini satellite wagering from California and Eastern U.S. race tracks. There is no admission fee.