Current software applications for the HIP platform from Lagotek and its partners include:
Applications that provide integration and automation are:
HIP 100 Control Panel: Simplicity Rather Than Complexity
The HIP100 touch screen panels from which the users control the functionality of their homes are elegant, but unobtrusive, easily blending with the walls when not used. Due to the wireless nature of the product there is no need to run new wires since the panels fit into the standard 2-gang box replacing the    so 20th century    dumb    dimmers and switches.   
Lagotek HIP is the distributed system (no single point of failure) that runs on HIP100 touch screen panels, PDAs, PC, UMPC, and Windows Vista MCE. Multiple instances of Lagotek HIP running on various devices throughout the house are fully synchronized and provide unique level of reliability compare to any other Home Automation system where there is only one central controlling device.
Through the support of SideShow technology Lagotek Modes can be controlled from any SideShow device, so no matter where you are and what device you have in your hands you will be able to monitor and control your home.
From the cell phone:
Lagotek cell phone application (powered by Crayon Interface   s Moshi server) provides both information about the current state of the home and control of the home through Modes. It is possible to see live real time video from the cameras installed in the house, know how many lights are on and where and what is the temperature in the house. Every system in the house can send Alerts to the cell phone.
From the Web browser:
The same functionality that is accessible on the phone is available through the Web interface due to the integration between Lagotek HIP and Microsoft Windows Home Server.
The target markets for Lagotek are new home construction and aftermarket remodeling. A network of Certified Installer/Dealers, who install the systems and provide aftermarket service both on an as-needed and post-installation service agreement basis, serves these markets. As a member of CEDIA (Custom Electronic Design & Installation Association), Lagotek is currently adding to its network of Certified Installer/Dealers, and is interviewing and training Certified Installers from the over 6,000 CEDIA installer/dealers
Lagotek touts its technology as an open platform, on top of which other vendors can provide extensions and customizations.