The company's global management is based in Hammersmith, London, and it has research and development teams in Lund, Tokyo, Mexico City, Beijing, and Redwood Shores in the US. By 2009, it was the fourth-largest mobile phone manufacturer in the world after Nokia, Samsung and LG. The sales of products largely increased due to the launch of the adaptation of Sony's popular Walkman and Cyber-shot series. In 2010, its market share had dropped to sixth place behind Research In Motion and Apple.
Sony Ericsson has been enjoying strong growth recently, its South Korean rival LG Electronics overtook it in Q1 2008 due to the company's profits falling significantly by 43% to    133 million (approx. US$ 179.6697 million), sales falling by 8% and market share dropping from 9.4% to 7.9%, despite favourable conditions that the handset market was expected to grow by 10% in 2008. Sony Ericsson announced another profit warning in June 2008 and saw net profit crash by 97% in Q2 2008, announcing that it would cut 2,000 jobs, leading to wide fear that Sony Ericsson is on the verge of decline along with its struggling rival, Motorola. In Q3 the profits were much on the same level, however November and December saw increased profits along with new models being released such as the C905 being one of the top sellers across the United Kingdom.
Sony Ericsson has, as of July 18, 2008, approximately 9,400 employees and 2,500 contractors worldwide. Bert Nordberg is the president of the company since October, 2009. Sir Howard Stringer, CEO and President, Sony Corporation, is chairman of the board.
In the United States, Ericsson partnered with General Electric in the early nineties, primarily to establish a US presence and brand recognition.
Ericsson had decided to obtain chips for its phones from a single source   a Philips facility in New Mexico. In March 2000, a fire at the Philips factory contaminated the sterile facility. Philips assured Ericsson and Nokia (their other major customer) that production would be delayed for no more than a week. When it became clear that production would actually be compromised for months, Ericsson was faced with a serious shortage. Nokia had already begun to obtain parts from alternative sources, but Ericsson's position was much worse as production of current models and the launch of new ones was held up.
Ericsson, which had been in the cellular phone market for decades, and was the world's no. 3 cellular telephone handset maker, was struggling with huge losses. This was mainly due to this fire and its inability to produce cheaper phones like Nokia. To curtail the losses, it considered outsourcing production to Asian companies that could produce the handsets for lower costs. 
Speculation began about a possible sale by Ericsson of its mobile phone division, but the company's president said they had no plans to do so. "Mobile phones are really a core business for Ericsson. We wouldn't be as successful (in networks) if we didn't have phones", he said.
Sony was a marginal player in the worldwide cell phone market with a share of less than 1 percent in 2000.
By August 2001, the two companies had finalized the terms of the merger announced in April. The company was to have an initial workforce of 3,500 employees.
Ericsson's market share actually fell and in August 2002, Ericsson said it would stop making mobile phones and end its partnership with Sony if the business continued to disappoint. However, in January 2003, both companies said they would inject more money into the joint venture in a bid to stem the losses.
Sony Ericsson's strategy was to release new models capable of digital photography as well as other multimedia capabilities such as downloading and viewing video clips and personal information management capabilities. To this end, it released several new models which had built-in digital camera and color screen which were novelties at that time. The joint venture, however, continued to make bigger losses in spite of booming sales. The target date for making a profit from its first year to 2002 was postponed to 2003 to second half of 2003. It failed in its mission of becoming the top seller of multimedia handsets and was in fifth-place and struggling in 2005.
In June 2002, Sony Ericsson announced it would stop making Code division multiple access (CDMA) cellphones for the US market and would focus on GSM as the dominant technology. It also cut jobs in research and development in the USA and in Germany. In October 2003, it posted its first quarterly profit but warned that falling prices on phones and competition would make it difficult to stay in the black. Sony Ericsson's recovery is credited to the success of the T610 model. Although Sony Ericsson no longer makes CDMA cellphones for the global market, they still manufacture CDMA cellphones for Japanese market, mainly for au by KDDI. In 2011, they launched Xperia PLAY with CDMA network for Verizon Wireless in US.
Following the success of its P800 phone, Sony Ericsson introduced the P900 at simultaneous events in Las Vegas and Beijing in October 2003. It was pegged as smaller, faster, simpler and more flexible than its predecessor.
In March 2004, Ericsson said it would try to block its rival Nokia from gaining control of Symbian, an industry consortium that made operating software for smart phones.
In 2004, Sony Ericsson's market share increased from 5.6 percent in the first quarter to 7 percent in the second quarter . In July 2004, Sony Ericsson unveiled the P910 communicator with its integrated thumbboard, broad e-mail support, quadruple memory and improved screen.
In February 2005, Sony Ericsson president Miles Flint announced at the 3GSM World Congress that Sony Ericsson would unveil a mobile phone/digital music player in the next month. It would be called the Walkman phone and would play music file formats such as MP3 and AAC.
On March 1, 2005, Sony Ericsson introduced the K750i with a 2 megapixel camera, as well as its platform mate, the W800i, the first of the Walkman phones capable of 30 hours of music playback, and two low-end phones.
In 2007 their first 5-Megapixel camera phone, the Sony Ericsson K850i, was announced followed in 2008 by the Sony Ericsson C905, the world's first 8-Megapixel phone. At Mobile World Congress 2009, Sony Ericsson unveiled the first 12-Megapixel phone, named Satio, on May 28, 2009.
On May 1, 2005, Sony Ericsson agreed to become the global title sponsor for the WTA Tour in a deal worth 88 million US dollars over 6 years. The women's pro tennis circuit was renamed the Sony Ericsson WTA Tour. Just over a month later on June 7, it announced sponsorship of West Indian batsmen Chris Gayle and Ramnaresh Sarwan.
In October 2005, Sony Ericsson presented the first mobile phone based on UIQ 3, the P990.
On January 2, 2007, Sony Ericsson announced in Stockholm that it will be having some of its mobile phones produced in India. It announced that its two outsourcing partners, FLextronics and Foxconn will be producing 10 million cellphones per year by 2009. CEO Miles Flint announced at a press conference held with India's communications minister Dayanidhi Maran in Chennai that India was one of the fastest growing markets in the world and a priority market for Sony Ericsson with 105 million users of GSM mobile telephones.
On February 2, 2007, Sony Ericsson acquired UIQ Technology, a Swedish software company from Symbian Ltd.. UIQ will remain an independent company, Miles Flint announced.
On October 15, 2007, Sony Ericsson announced on Symbian Smartphone Show that they will be selling half of its UIQ share to Motorola thus making UIQ technology owned by two large mobile phone companies.
In June 2008, Sony Ericsson had about 12,000 employees, it then launched a cost-cutting program and by the end of 2009 it had slashed its global workforce by around 5,000 people.  It planned to cut another 1,500 jobs in 2010.  It has also closed R&D (research and development) centres globally, such as, , Birchwood (Warrington) in the UK; Miami, Seattle, San Diego and RTP (Raleigh, NC) in the USA; The Chennai Unit (Tamil Nadu) in India; Hassleholm and Kista in Sweden and operations in the Netherlands.  The UIQ centres in London and Budapest were also closed, UIQ was a joint venture with Motorola which began life in the 1990s.
Sony Ericsson currently concentrates on the categories of: music, camera, business (web and email), design, all-rounder, eco-friendly, and budget focused phones. Its six largest categories are:
After the 2008 Mobile World Congress, Sony Ericsson announced their new naming system comprising four characters, each character denoting the "Series", the "Range/Class", the "Version" and the "Form Factor" respectively.
Some older Sony Ericsson handsets and some older that are still on the market (i.e. Sony Ericsson W890i) use suffixes for the market it is sold in, or stripped down features. The suffixes used were:
All new devices created by Sony Ericsson will not use suffixes but just the model (i.e. instead of '''A000a''' there will be '''A000''' in every market, to avoid confusion, they will also have names replaced instead of a model to avoid even more confusion (i.e. instead of Sony Ericsson U10i they named it Sony Ericsson Aino)
Sony Ericsson has used three methods in the past of naming their mobile products:
Another peculiar naming format was the one used in naming the Z1010; this format has not been used since the Z1010.
Furthermore, Sony Ericsson always give their phones codenames when developing. Mainly to keep the information secret and to prevent leaks. All codenames are female names, and some have been taken from the female players of the Sony Ericsson-sponsored tennis tournament, WTA...
Sony Ericsson posted its first profit in the second half of 2003. Since then, the sales figures from phones have been:
According to the Swedish Magazine ''M3''s issue 7/2006 Sony Ericsson is the best-selling phone brand in the Nordic countries, followed by Nokia.
In the third quarter of 2009, Sony Ericsson became the world's fourth largest mobile phone manufacturer with 4.9% of market share after Nokia (37.8%), Samsung (21%) and LG (11%).
During E3 2007 Media and Business Summit, Phil Harrison, Sony CEO showcased a Sony Ericsson phone using the PlayStation's XMB. A select group of phones are also said to integrate into PlayStation Home ''(final product)''
During the announcement of Sony Ericsson K850, W960 and W910 some review sites have shown that those mentioned phones and future mid-range or better phones will have Media to replace the standard File Manager which will be moved to the Organiser of the phone. The Media manager possesses a UI that resembles the XMB interface found on Sony TV, PS3, and PSP products. The mobile developer site confirmed from their spec sheets and white papers that the XMB media manager is standard to the phones running Java Platform 8 also known as A200 Platform and Symbian devices like Sony Ericsson Satio and Sony Ericsson Vivaz.
 Stacy Doster, a spokesperson of Sony Ericsson, said that the proximity to Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport's flights to Latin America and the operations of AT&T Mobility influenced the decision to move the USA headquarters. Sony Ericsson will close the Research Triangle site.
Sony Ericsson ranks 2nd behind Nokia out of 18 leading electronics makers in Greenpeace   s Guide to Greener Electronics that assesses companies' policies on toxic chemicals, recycling and climate change. It is the first company to score full marks on all chemicals criteria in the ranking.
Greenpeace criticises Sony Ericsson's limited take-back and recycling programme, as well as its limited use of recycled plastic in its products.
Sony Ericsson's sales figures for Q2 2010 showed a significant decline. The Sony Ericsson phone sales volume grew over the first quarter a modest 4.8 percent. However, it was well up to the 2009 quarter volumes varied between 13.8 and 14.6 million units.
Sony Ericsson went from 300,000 Facebook fans to 3.9 million in 11 months during 2010 to become the 40th-largest brand on the social networking site. The company aims to capitalise on this fanbase and increase engagement by profiling these fans and matching them to dedicated content. It will also analyse the top commentators on the Facebook page and ensure engagement through special content and offering these fans the chance to visit Sony Ericsson offices.
Sony Ericsson currently sponsors the UEFA Champions League and the Sony Ericsson Open tennis tournament in Miami. According to the Head of global marketing partnerships, Stephan Croix,    our sport sponsorships allow us to promote our phones in a subtle and authentic way to our fanbase. Our promise to fans is to enrich their experience during the game but also before and after.   