In the episode, Michael takes it upon himself to teach Ryan about business, but soon everyone is forced to evacuate the office due to a fire. While outside, Michael continues to show an interest in Ryan, causing Dwight to be jealous. Meanwhile, Jim organizes games to play outside.
Pam Beesly learns that Jim Halpert and Katy have started dating. Michael Scott gives Ryan Howard a glowing checkpoint review. When Ryan expresses his interest in starting his own business someday, Michael takes it upon himself to teach Ryan the "ten rules of business". The fire alarm sounds, and while Dwight Schrute and Angela Martin both attempt to take charge of the evacuation, Michael pushes others out of the way in his escape out of the building.
The employees play games to pass the time, including "Desert Island Picks" and "Who Would You Do?" When Ryan reveals that he is attending business school at night, Michael becomes enamored of his newfound protege. Dwight becomes noticeably jealous of Ryan's newfound favor with Michael, and he is seen sulking in his car to the tune "Everybody Hurts" by R.E.M. When Michael mentions that he left his cell phone in the office, Dwight rushes back into the building to fetch it.
Michael asks Ryan to call his cell phone to help Dwight find it. The phone rings. It is in Michael's pocket. Dwight emerges, coughing, from the building and reveals that the fire was started by Ryan, who left a cheese pita in the toaster-oven set to "oven" instead of "toaster". Dwight and Michael mock Ryan and dub him "The Fire Guy" by doing a song parody of the classic Billy Joel song "We Didn't Start the Fire".
The episode was filmed in 100-degree weather, but according to cast member B. J. Novak, they "couldn't look hot". The area outside the building was shot in Van Nuys, California in what Novak called a "bad area". The firemen in the scene were played by actual firemen. The crew of ''The Office'' had someone in Scranton take photographs of the firefighter costumes, so they would be accurate. However, in an interview with the ''Pittsburgh Post-Gazette'', Scranton firefighter Art Franklin pointed out that the uniform is actually tan, instead of the black ones seen on the show.