Devin Hester was born to Juanita Brown and Lenorris Hester, Sr. in Riviera Beach, Florida. His parents separated when he was a toddler. Before he became a teenager, his mother was severely injured in a car accident, while his father died of cancer two years later.  His step-father, Derrick Brown, and brother, Lenorris, Jr., helped Hester escape his depression and rebuild his life by introducing him to football. He soon returned to his normal life and began to excel in sports and academics.Chicago Tribune,  Retrieved on December 18, 2006
 His success prompted his teammates to nickname him "Sugar Foot."Sports Illustrated, December 3, 2007 issue.
During his youth, Hester enjoyed following the Dallas Cowboys. He especially idolized Deion Sanders, Emmitt Smith and Michael Irvin. He was also a fan of the Chicago Bulls during the Michael Jordan and Phil Jackson era.Chicago Tribune,  Retrieved on December 18, 2006 Fred Taylor of the University of Florida was Hester's favorite athlete. In addition to football, he also enjoyed playing soccer and following baseball.Chicago Tribune, Retrieved on December 18, 2006
After completing high school, Hester enrolled at the University of Miami. As a  , he earned national recognition after being named onto the "Walter Camp All-America Team" and    ''The Sporting News''' All-America team.    Hester   s recognition was influenced by his prodigious success as a kick returner. His ability to thrust laterally and break away from pursuers made him one of the nation   s most dangerous return specialists. During his freshman year, Hester returned an opening kick for a 98-yard touchdown against the University of Florida. In a game against Duke University in 2005, Hester broke six tackles while returning an 81-yard punt. Ultimately, Hester completed his college career with a total of six touchdowns from kick returns, including one blocked field goal return. He also scored one rushing and receiving touchdown and recorded five interceptions as a defensive back.
Hester became the first football player in Miami Hurricanes' recent history to play as member of the special, offensive, and defensive teams. He was known as "Hurricane Hester" by his fans and teammates. During his productive tenure at the University of Miami, Hester befriended Deion Sanders through Ed Reed, one of Sanders    teammates who was an alumnus of the University of Miami. Deion Sanders counseled, advised, and encouraged Hester. Hester was also known as    Anytime    in college, which is a tribute to Sanders    nickname,    Prime Time   . He also adopted Sanders    signature touchdown dance, and showboating maneuvers, which he carried to his future NFL career.
 The team's decision to draft Hester was initially criticized by fans and sports analysts, who believed the Bears should have spent their early picks on offensive prospects.
In thirteen weeks as a professional football player, Hester recorded six return touchdowns, including a punt return in his NFL debut, and a then-record tying 108-yard touchdown from a missed field goal against the New York Giants. He also returned a punt for a clutch 83-yard game-winning touchdown against the Arizona Cardinals, and two kickoff returns in one game against the St. Louis Rams. Following his record-breaking game during Week 14, opposing teams exercised additional caution when allowing Hester to return kicks.SuperBowl.com,  Retrieved on February 28, 2007TBO.com,  Retrieved on February 24, 2007 During the postseason Hester ran back a punt at a critical moment against the Seattle Seahawks, but it was called back on a blocking penalty. Regardless, the Bears won both NFC playoffs rounds, and advanced to Super Bowl XLI to play the Indianapolis Colts. He started the game on a high note for the Bears by returning the game   s opening kick for a touchdown.UsaToday.com,  Retrieved on March 20, 2007 The feat was the first touchdown return of an opening kickoff in Super Bowl history. It also marked the quickest lead ever taken by any team.  Following the kick, the Colts did not kick the ball directly to Hester, significantly limiting the Bears    return efforts.Yahoo! Sports,  Retrieved on February 5, 2007
Hester's feats in 2006 earned him three NFC Special Teams Player of the Week AwardsChicagoBears.com,  Retrieved on December 18, 2006
Many fans speculated that Hester   s speed and prior experience as a wide receiver would earn him a spot on the Bears' offense, similar to teammate Rashied Davis. While Lovie Smith dismissed the speculation, he played Hester as a wide receiver for one play against the Tampa Bay Buccaneers on December 17, 2006.
Hester attributes his talent to his mentor, Deion Sanders, who Hester claims helped him perfect his return game. Sanders, a former cornerback and kick returner, compliments Hester after every productive performance. However, Sanders also berated Hester for taunting another player en route to his second touchdown return against the St. Louis Rams. His teammates and coaches have also praised Hester. After the 2006 season, he was voted to receive the team's Brian Piccolo Award, which is given to a player who possesses a good character and work ethic.
Shortly after losing Super Bowl XLI, Hester and special teams coach Dave Toub spent a significant amount of time working on new return strategies and formations. Ultimately, Lovie Smith converted Hester into a wide receiver in order to increase the number of opportunities he would receive during a game.  Hester, who originally played as a wide receiver at the University of Miami, was initially hesitant about making the switch to offense, as he wished to follow in the footsteps of Deion Sanders. However, the Bears    coaching staff eventually persuaded Hester to make the transition over the summer. During the 2007 off-season, Hester won the Best Breakthrough Athlete ESPY Award.
 He nearly recorded a second touchdown return, but the play was negated by a holding penalty. Hester established himself as a threat on offense, when he caught an 81-yard touchdown pass from Brian Griese against the Minnesota Vikings. He also returned a punt for an 89-yard touchdown, though the Bears lost the game. In the weeks to come, many opposing special teams began to kick the ball away from Hester, contributing to, according to Mike Pereira, a 132% increase in kickoffs that went out-of-bounds. Rod Marinelli, the head coach of the Detroit Lions, placed a strong emphasis on kicking the ball away from Hester, saying,    kick the ball into Lake Michigan and make sure it (sinks) to the bottom.   
Before the Bears    Week 12 matchup against the Denver Broncos, Todd Sauerbrun infamously stated that he would kick the ball to Hester. Hester, who had not returned a kick for a touchdown in almost a month, responded by returning a punt and kickoff for touchdowns.Yahoo! Sports, , Retrieved on December 24, 2007. Keith Olbermann, a commentator for ''NBC Sunday Night Football'', awarded Sauerbrun with the dubious    Worst Person in the NFL Award    for kicking the ball to Hester and failing to tackle him.Rocky Mountain News, , Retrieved on December 24, 2007. The two touchdowns gave Hester the most kick returns for touchdowns in the Bears    franchise history. Hester concluded the season with a 64-yard punt return for a touchdown and a 55-yard touchdown reception against the New Orleans Saints.Yahoo! Sports, , Retrieved on January 8, 2008.  He was even given the opportunity to throw a pass on a variation of a wide receiver reverse, but he was sacked while motioning to Bernard Berrian.ChicagoBears.com, , Retrieved on January 7, 2008.
Hester finished the season with six kicks returned for touchdowns, which set a league record.  He finished the season ranking fourth on the League   s all-time combined kick return list, behind Brian Mitchell (13), Eric Metcalf (12), and Dante Hall (12). Additionally, he amassed 299 yards on twenty receptions as a receiver, though he was often used as a decoy. His play on offense received mixed commentary. While the Bears    coaching staff believed Hester showed enough progress to become one of the team's top receivers in 2008, Hester was prone to making small errors, including running routes incorrectly or dropping catches. He drew a fifteen-yard facemask penalty while attempting to fend off a would-be tackler in a game against the Saints, and received a $5,000 fine. Nevertheless, Hester concluded the season with four Player of the Week Awards, giving him a franchise-high total of seven in his career, and an invitation to the 2008 Pro Bowl.
Prior to the beginning of the 2008 season, Hester stated that he would not attend the Bears' summer camp unless the team offered him a new contract. He further voiced his displeasure with his current contract in a phone interview with the ''Chicago Tribune'', commenting, "I can   t go out and play this year making $445,000. Come on, man." Adam Schefter believes that the Bears are puzzled over how Hester should be classified (as a wide receiver or a return specialist of such a star caliber), and be offered a contract accordingly. After receiving a $30,000 fine for not attending two days of training, Hester returned to the team's camp. The team later offered him a new four-year contract extension, worth over $40 million.
Hester missed the third game of the season after tearing cartilage in his ribs during the previous week. He returned to the field in the team's Week 4 contest against the Philadelphia Eagles, where he caught his first touchdown of the season. Lovie Smith gave Hester his first starting job as a wide receiver the next week, in place of the injured Brandon Lloyd. Hester went on to catch five passes for 66 yards and one touchdown. In the following week, Hester totaled 87 yards on six receptions.
After a Week 8 bye, Hester caught four passes for 42 yards and had an 11-yard run against the Detroit Lions. He eventually lost his kick return duties to Danieal Manning, but began receiving more playing time as a wide receiver. Between Week 12 and 15, Hester caught 17 passes for 250 yards and one touchdown.Yahoo! Sports, , Retrieved on December 15, 2008.  David Haugh of the ''Chicago Tribune'' regarded Hester as the team's    biggest threat in the passing game.   Chicago Tribune, , Retrieved on December 15, 2008. He concluded the season by catching 51 passes for a team high 665 yards.Pro-Football-Reference.com, , Retrieved on January 7, 2009. Unlike his previous two seasons in the NFL, Hester did not record a single touchdown return and only averaged 6.2 yards per punt return.NFL.com, , Retrieved on January 7, 2009. Lovie Smith commented on Hester at the end of the season by saying, "I know his returns dropped off a little bit this year, but his plate was full there for a while. We think we have a happy medium now for him as a punt returner and continuing to develop as a receiver.    Hester was also selected to play in the 2009 Pro Bowl as a third alternate.ChicagoBears.com, , Retrieved on January 7, 2009.
After the acquisition of Jay Cutler, Hester took on the role as the de facto number one wide receiver. In the first game of the season, Hester caught seven passes from Cutler for 90 yards, including a 36-yard touchdown reception. In the following weeks Hester began to develop a rapport with Cutler and amassed 634 receiving yards and three touchdowns though the first ten weeks of the season. He played the best game of the season on October 25, 2009 against the Cincinnati Bengals, catching eight passes for 101 yards and a touchdown.  In a game against the St. Louis Rams during the thirteenth week of the season, Hester injured his calf and missed three starts. Hester returned to play in the Bears season finale against the Detroit Lions, catching three passes for 75 yards. Despite missing the three starts, Hester lead the team with 757 receiving yards, and finished behind Greg Olsen in receptions. Hester built his reputation around his kick returning abilities, but his kickoff-returning duties decreased significantly following the 2007 season finale.ESPN.com, , Retrieved on 2009-11-15. He told the ''Chicago Tribune'' that he plans on spending the offseason honing his receiving and returning skills by strengthening in his legs, especially to fully recover from the calf injury he sustained earlier.
On September 27, against the Green Bay Packers, Hester returned a punt 62 yards for a touchdown.  This was Hester's first kickoff or punt return for a TD since the 2007 season.
On October 17, Devin Hester returned a punt for a touchdown in a 23   20 Bears loss against the Seattle Seahawks. The touchdown tied the record for most combined kick and punt return touchdowns in a career with  Brian Mitchell (13).
On November 14 in a divisional match against the Minnesota Vikings, Hester was given back his kickoff return duties and ran back two kicks for 32 yards and 68 yards, respectively. The 68-yard runback would lead to a Robbie Gould field goal. Later in the game, Hester would run back a punt for 42 yards. Hester also caught a 19-yard touchdown pass.
On December 20, 2010, in a game against the Minnesota Vikings, Devin Hester returned a Chris Kluwe punt 64 yards for a touchdown, which set the all-time NFL record for combined kickoff and punt returns for touchdown with 14, passing Brian Mitchell. It was the tenth punt return for touchdown of his career, tying Eric Metcalf.
Hester was in a relationship with Tamara James, a women's basketball player he met at the University of Miami. James currently plays professionally for the Washington Mystics. In an interview with the Black Sports Network in 2005, Hester revealed that he was engaged to James. A later article by the ''Chicago Tribune'' confirmed that he had proposed to James on June 6, 2005 at a Miami Heat basketball game. Hester   s family resides in Florida and was struck by Hurricane Wilma in 2005. Hester has assisted his family financially in helping them rebuild their home. His brother Lenorris Jr., resides with Hester during the regular season in their Chicago area home. Raised in a Christian household, Hester brings a Bible to every game he plays.
Hester   s successful rookie year drew him much publicity and popularity. Ever since his record-breaking performance against the Rams, Hester has been offered marketing opportunities from Nike, soft drink, and cell phone companies.
There has also been a surge in the demand for Hester   s jerseys within the Chicago area sporting stores. Also, Hester was invited to throw the ceremonial opening pitch and sing ''Take Me Out to the Ball Game'' at the Chicago Cubs' 2007 home opener. Along with teammates Rex Grossman and Tommie Harris, Hester appeared on the February 2007 issue of ''Sports Illustrated for Kids''. His reputation has also been bolstered by EA Sports' ''Madden NFL 08'', where Hester's perfect 100 speed rating made him the fastest player in the game's history. Hester also appeared in a promotional video for the game. He appeared in commercials for Under Armour in 2008 and 2009.