Environmental health is defined by the World Health Organization as: 
Environmental health services are defined by the World Health Organization as:
Environmental health practitioners may be known as sanitarians, public health inspectors, environmental health specialists or environmental health officers. In many European countries physicians and veterinarians are involved in environmental health. Many states in the United States require that individuals have professional licenses in order to practice environmental health.  California state law defines the scope of practice of environmental health as follows:
The environmental health profession had its modern-day roots in the sanitary and public health movement of the United Kingdom. This was epitomized by Sir Edwin Chadwick, who was instrumental in the repeal of the poor laws and was the founding president of the Association of Public Sanitary Inspectors in 1884, which today is the Chartered Institute of Environmental Health.
Environmental medicine may be seen as the medical branch of the broader field of environmental health. Terminology is not fully established, and in many European countries they are used interchangeably.
Environmental health addresses all human-health-related aspects of both the natural environment and the built environment. Environmental health concerns include:
According to recent estimates, about 5 to 10 % of disability adjusted life years (DALY) lost are due to environmental causes in Europe. By far the most important factor is fine particulate matter pollution in urban air.  Similarly, environmental exposures have been estimated to contribute to 4.9 million (8.7%) deaths and 86 million (5.7%) DALYs globally.
The Toxicology and Environmental Health Information Program (TEHIP) at the United States National Library of Medicine (NLM) maintains a comprehensive toxicology and environmental health web site that includes access to resources produced by TEHIP and by other government agencies and organizations. This web site includes links to databases, bibliographies, tutorials, and other scientific and consumer-oriented resources. TEHIP also is responsible for the Toxicology Data Network (TOXNET), an integrated system of toxicology and environmental health databases that are available free of charge on the web.
There are many environmental health mapping tools. TOXMAP is a Geographic Information System (GIS) from the Division of Specialized Information Services of the United States National Library of Medicine (NLM) that uses maps of the United States to help users visually explore data from the United States Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA)  Toxics Release Inventory and Superfund Basic Research Programs. TOXMAP is a resource funded by the US Federal Government. TOXMAP's chemical and environmental health information is taken from NLM's Toxicology Data Network (TOXNET) and PubMed, and from other authoritative sources.