Housing between 1.2 million - 1.9 million residents (Although the city of Cape Town estimates its about 1.8 million), it comprises a number of sub-sections which reflect the diverse class backgrounds of the population. Roughly speaking, the western half of the mega-township (Westridge, Rocklands, Portlands) is wealthier than the eastern half (Tafelsig, Beacon Valley, Eastridge, Lentegeur). Lentegeur is one of the poorest suburbs of the mega-township. Once a major stronghold of the United Democratic Front, the broad-based ANC-sponsored anti-apartheid body, it is now known more for gangsterism and ''tik'' addiction among the youth. Although it has all these negative affects it also has one of Cape Towns biggest shopping centres, called the Liberty Promenade. This shopping centre is just bigger than the famous Victoria and Alfred Waterfront Shopping centre.
Mitchell's Plain was created by the apartheid government in the early 1970s as a coloured township for middle class income families. However as the years went by, major areas of Mitchell's Plain have deteriorated into urban ghettos. Gangsterism and drug use also increased. A few informal settlements also started to develop.
Mitchells Plain today consists of beautiful suburbs like Rocklands, to other areas like Lentegeur where gangs and drug use is rife. Mitchells Plain also consists of a few major informal settlements. Today Mitchells Plain is said to be Cape Towns biggest township and South Africas 3rd biggest with a population of about 1 500 000 people.
Like the townships of Soweto, Khayelitsha and Delft, Mitchells Plain, South Africas 3rd largest township, is split into a number of sub-sections. The western half of the township is home to the more wealthier population while the eastern half to the poorer communities. The western half includes Westridge, Rocklands, Strandfontein, Portland, Westgate, Woodlands, Colorado Park, and Weltevreden. The eastern half includes Tafelsig, Eastridge, Beacon Valley, and Lentegeur.
The most active social movements and activist organisations in Mitchells Plain are the Western Cape Anti-Eviction Campaign, the Treatment Action Campaign and the Mitchell   s Plain Concerned Hawkers and Traders Association.
Mitchell's Plain became the seat of the United Democratic Front, a movement where all politcal parties and NGO's fighting against the Apartheid Government met as the umbrella body. It was organized in August 1983 with such leaders of the people as the Dr. Allen Boesak, Albertina Sisulu, Helen Josephs, Joe Marks, Trevor Manuel, Terror Lekota and many others. It is the single most important body helping towards the unbanning of the ANC and Dr. Nelson Mandela in the eightoes and early nineties - Rev Clive J. Pillay founder member of ICY (Inter-church Youth)an affiliate of the UDF