  It is a $20,000 "buy-in" invitation-only tournament organized as a series of one-on-one games of no limit Texas hold 'em matches.  The participants include many of the world's most successful poker players, as well as celebrities.
The championship was the first poker event to be televised on and produced by a major U.S. television network.
The single-elimination tournament is modeled after college basketball tournaments. Players who win a match advance to the next round; the player who wins six matches is crowned champion. 
The first round is seeded randomly the night before the tournament begins. Players are divided into four brackets     Clubs, Diamonds, Hearts, and Spades. A participant advances by winning a heads-up match against his or her randomly drawn opponent. The structure of the brackets then determines every match thereafter. The semifinals consist of one player from each bracket, with the winner of the Spades bracket playing the winner of the Clubs bracket, and the winner of the Hearts bracket matched up against the winner of the Diamonds bracket. A best-of-three final match then determines which of the two finalists is crowned champion.
The idea for the tournament was spawned from the success of the World Heads-Up Poker Championship, held annually at various locations in Europe, although only one World Heads-Up Champion ("Miami" John Cernuto) has competed in the National Heads-Up Poker Championship to date. The National Heads-Up Poker Championship is an invitation-only event. In contrast, the World Heads-Up Poker Championship is an open event with a maximum participation of 128 players.
The program's debut was conceived as NBC's NHL Lockout replacement programming in 2005 after the network had lost an entire season because of the lockout, and was looking for replacement programming on weekends to fill up time, and to take advantage of the trend in poker programming. 
The 2005 event took place at the Golden Nugget Las Vegas between March 4 and March 6. It aired weekly on NBC from May 1 to May 22 with commentary from Gabe Kaplan and Matt Vasgersian.
The 2006 edition took place from March 4 to 6 at Caesars Palace in Las Vegas. NBC began its coverage by broadcasting one part of the opening round on April 16. The semi-final and championship matches aired May 21. Kaplan and Vasgersian returned as commentators.
The 2007 edition was broadcast from April 8 to May 20. Ali Nejad took Gabe Kaplan's spot as commentator due to Kaplan competing in the tournament.
In additional to the poker professionals, several poker-playing celebrities from other fields were invited:  Gabe Kaplan, Don Cheadle, Jennifer Tilly, Shannon Elizabeth, Jason Alexander and Orel Hershiser. from the NBC Sports website  Also invited was Alisha Kunze of Greensburg, Indiana, who won her seat via a "special online qualifier."