In electronics, '''impedance matching''' is the practice of designing the input impedance of an electrical load or the output impedance of its corresponding signal source  in order to maximize the power transfer and/or minimize reflections from the load.
In the case of a complex source impedance ''Z''S and load impedance ''Z''L, matching for maximum power transfer is obtained when
Matching for minimum reflection is obtained when
The concept of impedance matching was originally developed for electrical power, but can be applied to any other field where a form of energy (not necessarily electrical) is transferred between a source and a load.
An alternative to impedance matching is impedance bridging, where the load impedance is chosen to be much larger than the source impedance and maximizing voltage transfer, rather than power, is the goal.
The term impedance is used for the opposition of a system to the flow of energy from an energy source. For constant signals, this impedance can also be constant. For varying signals, it usually changes with frequency. The energy involved can be electrical, mechanical, magnetic or even thermal. The concept of electrical impedance is perhaps the most commonly known. Electrical impedance, like electrical resistance, is measured in ohms. In general, impedance has a complex value, which means that loads generally have a resistance to the source that is in phase with a sinusoidal source signal '''and''' reactance that is out of phase with a sinusoidal source signal. The total impedance (symbol: ''Z'') is the vector sum of the resistance (symbol: ''R''; a real number) and the reactance (symbol: ''X''; an imaginary number).
In simple cases, such as low-frequency or direct-current power transmission, the reactance is negligible or zero and the impedance can be considered a pure resistance, expressed as a real number. In the following summary, we will consider the general case when the resistance and reactance are both significant, and also the special case in which the reactance is negligible.
Impedance matching to minimize reflections and maximize power transfer over a (relatively) large bandwidth (also called '''reflectionless matching''' or '''broadband matching''') is the most commonly used. To prevent all reflections of the signal back into the source, the load (which must be totally resistive) must be matched exactly to the source impedance (which again must be totally resistive). In this case, if a transmission line is used to connect the source and load together, it must also be the same impedance: ''Z''load = ''Z''line = ''Z''source, where ''Z''line is the characteristic impedance of the transmission line.  Although source and load should each be totally resistive for this form of matching to work, the more general term 'impedance' is still used to describe the source and load characteristics. Any and all reactance actually present in the source or the load will affect the 'match'.
This is used in cases in which the source and load are reactive. This form of impedance matching can only maximize the power transfer between a reactive source and a reactive load at a ''single'' frequency. In this case,
If the signals are kept within the narrow frequency range for which the matching network was designed, reflections (in this narrow frequency band only) are also minimized. For the case of purely resistive source and load impedances, all reactance terms are zero and the formula above reduces to
Whenever a source of power ''with a fixed output impedance'', such as an electric signal source, a radio transmitter, or even mechanical sound (e.g., a loudspeaker) operates into a load, the maximum possible power is delivered to the load when the impedance of the load (load impedance or input impedance) is equal to the ''complex conjugate'' of the impedance of the source (that is, its internal impedance or output impedance).  For two impedances to be complex conjugates, their resistances must be equal, and their reactances must be equal in magnitude but of opposite sign.
In low-frequency or DC systems, or in systems with purely resistive sources and loads, the reactances are zero, or small enough to be ignored.  In this case, maximum power transfer occurs when the resistance of the load is equal to the resistance of the source (see maximum power theorem for a proof).
Impedance matching is not always desirable.  For example, if a source with a low impedance is connected to a load with a high impedance, then the power that can pass through the connection is limited by the higher impedance, but the electrical voltage transfer is higher and less prone to corruption than if the impedances had been matched.  This maximum voltage connection is a common configuration called '''impedance bridging''' or '''voltage bridging''' and is widely used in signal processing. In such applications, delivering a high voltage (to minimize signal degradation during transmission and/or to consume less power by reducing currents) is often more important than maximum power transfer.
In older audio systems, reliant on transformers and passive filter networks, and based on the telephone system, the source and load resistances were matched at 600 ohms. One reason for this was to maximize power transfer, as there were no amplifiers available that could restore lost signal. Another reason was to ensure correct operation of the hybrid transformers used at central exchange equipment to separate outgoing from incoming speech so that these could be amplified or fed to a four-wire circuit. Most modern audio circuits, on the other hand, use active amplification and filtering, and they can use voltage bridging connections for best accuracy.
Strictly speaking, impedance matching only applies when both source and load devices are linear, however useful matching may be obtained between nonlinear devices with certain operating ranges.
Adjusting the source impedance or the load impedance, in general, is called "impedance matching".
There are three possible ways to improve an impedance mismatch, all of which are called "impedance matching":
There are a variety of devices that are used between some source of energy and some load that perform "impedance matching".
To match electrical impedances, engineers use combinations of transformers, resistors, inductors, capacitors and transmission lines.
These passive and active impedance matching devices are optimized for different applications, and are called baluns, antenna tuners (sometimes called ATUs or roller coasters because of their appearance), acoustic horns, matching networks, and terminators.
Transformers are sometimes used to match the impedances of circuits with different impedances. A transformer converts alternating current at one voltage to the same waveform at another voltage. The power input to the transformer and output from the transformer is the same (except for conversion losses). The side with the lower voltage is at low impedance, because this has the lower number of turns, and the side with the higher voltage is at a higher impedance as it has more turns in its coil.
Resistive impedance matches are easiest to design and can be achieved with a simple L pad consisting of only two resistors. Power loss is an unavoidable consequence of using resistive networks and they are consequently only usually used to transfer line level signals.
Most lumped element devices can match a specific range of load impedance.  For example, in order to match an inductive load into a real impedance, a capacitor needs be used.  And if the load impedance becomes capacitive for some reason, the matching element must be replaced by an inductor.  In many practical cases however, there is a need to use the same circuit to match a broad range of load impedance, thus simplify the circuit design.  This issue was addressed by the  where multiple serially placed quarter wave dielectric slugs are used to vary transmission line's characteristic impedance.  By controlling the position of each individual element, a broad range of load impedance can be matched without having to reconnect the circuit.
Some special situations - such as radio tuners and transmitters - use tuned filters such as stubs to match impedances at specific frequencies. These can distribute different frequencies to different places in the circuit.
In addition, there is the closely related idea of
For example, a maximum power point tracker is used to extract the maximum power from a solar panel, and efficiently transfer it to batteries, the power grid, or other loads.
The maximum power theorem applies to its "upstream" connection to the solar panel, so it emulates a load resistance equal to the solar panel source resistance.  However, the maximum power theorem does not apply to its "downstream" connection, so that connection is an impedance bridging connection   it emulates a high-voltage, low-resistance source, to maximize efficiency.
One simple electrical impedance matching network requires one capacitor and one inductor. One reactance is in parallel with the source (or load) and the other is in series with the load (or source). If a reactance is in parallel ''with the source'', the effective network matches from high impedance to low impedance. The L-section is inherently a narrowband matching network.
The analysis is as follows. Consider a real source impedance of R_1 and real load impedance of R_2. If a reactance X_1 is in parallel with the source impedance, the combined impedance can be written as:
If the imaginary part of the above impedance is completely canceled by the series reactance, the real part is
R_2 = \frac{R_1 X_1^2}{R_1^2 + X_1^2}
Solving for X_1
If R_1 \gg R_2 the above equation can be approximated as
X_1 \approx \sqrt{R_1 R_2} \,
The inverse connection, impedance step up, is simply the reverse, e.g. reactance in series with the source. The magnitude of the impedance ratio is limited by reactance losses such as the Q of the inductor. Multiple L-sections can be wired in cascade to achieve higher impedance ratios or greater bandwidth. Transmission line matching networks can be modeled as infinitely many L-sections wired in cascade. Optimal matching circuits can be designed for a particular system with the use of the Smith chart.
Impedance bridging is unsuitable for RF connections because it causes power to be reflected back to the source from the boundary between the high impedance and the low impedance. The reflection creates a standing wave if there is a reflection at both ends of the transmission line, which leads to further power waste and may cause frequency dependent loss. In these systems, impedance matching is desirable.
In electrical systems involving transmission lines, such as radio and fiber optics, where the length of the line is long compared to the wavelength of the signal (the signal changes rapidly compared to the time it takes to travel from source to load), the impedances at each end of the line must be matched to the transmission line's characteristic impedance, Z_c to prevent reflections of the signal at the ends of the line. (When the length of the line is short compared to the wavelength, impedance mismatch is the basis of transmission line impedance transformers, a topic that is addressed in the previous section.)  In radio-frequency (RF) systems, a common value for source and load impedances is 50 ohms. A typical RF load is a quarter-wave ground plane antenna (37 ohms with an ideal ground plane but can be matched to 50 ohms by using a modified ground plane or a coaxial matching section, i.e. part or all the feeder being of higher impedance).
The general form of the voltage reflection coefficient for a wave moving from medium 1 to medium 2 is given by
There is also a current reflection coefficient.  It is the same as the voltage coefficient except that it has opposite sign.  Thus if the wave encounters an open at the load end, a positive voltage pulse and a negative current pulse are transmitted back toward the source.  Negative current means the current is going the opposite direction.
Thus, at each boundary there are four reflection coefficients (voltage and current on one side and voltage and current on the other side).  All four are the same except that two are positive and two are negative.  Voltage reflection coefficient and current reflection coefficient on the same side have opposite signs.  Voltage reflection coefficients on opposite sides of the boundary have opposite signs.
Because they are all the same except for sign, it is traditional to take reflection coefficient to mean voltage reflection coefficient unless otherwise indicated.  Either or both ends of a transmission line can be a source or load or both, so there is no inherent preference for which side of the boundary is medium 1 and which side is medium 2.  In the case where there is only one transmission line, it is customary to define the voltage reflection coefficient for a wave incident on the boundary from the transmission line side without regard to whether a source or load is connected on the other side.
In a transmission line, a wave travels from the source along the line. Suppose the wave hits a boundary (an abrupt change in impedance).  Some of the wave is reflected back, while some keeps moving onwards.  (Assume there is only one boundary and it is at the load.)
Let:
On the line side of the boundary  V_i = Z_c I_i \,  and  V_r = -Z_c I_r \,   and on the load side  V_t = Z_L I_t \,  where  V_i \, ,  V_r \, ,  V_t \, ,   I_i \, ,  I_r \, ,  I_t \, , and  Z_c \,  are phasors.
At a boundary, voltage and current must be continuous, therefore
All these conditions are satisfied by
See Kraus page 407, Sadiku pages 505-507 or Hayt pages 398-401.
The purpose of a transmission line is to get the maximum amount of energy to the other end of the line, or to transmit information with minimal error, so the reflection should be as small as possible. This is achieved by matching the impedances Z_L and Z_c so that they are equal (\Gamma = 0).
At the source end of the transmission line, there may be waves incident both from the source and from the line and one can compute a reflection coefficient for each direction with  - \Gamma_{ST} =  \Gamma_{TS}  = {Z_s - Z_c \over Z_s + Z_c} =  \Gamma_S   \, , where '''Zs''' is the source impedance.  The source of waves that are incident from the line are the reflections from the load end.  If the source impedance matches the line, then reflections from the load end will be absorbed at the source end.  If the transmission line is not matched at both ends then reflections from the load will be re-reflected at the source and re-re-reflected at the load etc. losing energy on each transit of the transmission line.  This can cause a resonance condition that can cause strong frequency dependent behavior.  In a narrow band system this can be desirable for matching, but it is generally undesirable in a wide band system.
Note that if there is a perfect match at both ends  \Gamma_L = 0 \,  and  \Gamma_S = 0 \,  and then  V_L = V_S     \frac {T} {2}\, 
Telephone systems also use matched impedances to minimise echoes on long distance lines. This is related to transmission lines theory. Matching also enables the telephone ''hybrid coil'' (2 to 4 wire conversion) to operate correctly. As the signals are sent and received on the same two-wire circuit to the central office (or exchange), cancellation is necessary at the telephone earpiece so that excessive sidetone is not heard.  All devices used in telephone signal paths are generally dependent on using matched cable, source and load impedances. In the local loop, the impedance chosen is 600 ohm (nominal). Terminating networks are installed at the exchange to try to offer the best match to their subscriber lines. Each country has its own standard for these networks but they are all designed to approximate to about 600 ohms over the voice frequency band.
Many modern solid state audio amplifiers do not use matched impedances, because semiconductor based amplifiers do not have output transformers. The driver amplifier has a low output impedance, such as 
The misconception arises from tube audio amplifiers, which required impedance matching for proper, reliable operation. Most of these had output transformer taps to approximately match the amplifier output to typical loudspeaker impedances.
The output transformer in the vacuum tube based amplifiers has two basic functions:
The impedance of the loudspeaker on the secondary coil of the transformer will be transformed to a higher impedance on the primary coil in the circuit of the power pentodes by the square of the turns ratio, which forms the ''impedance scaling factor''.
The secondary impedance of the loudspeaker is frequently moved (or "referred") to the primary side after multiplying the components by the impedance scaling factor \left(\!\tfrac{N_P}{N_S}\!\right)^2\!\!.
The output stage in semiconductor based endstages with MOSFETs  or power transistors, do have a very low internal resistances. If they are properly balanced, then there is no need for a device as a transformer or a (big) electrolytic capacitor to separate AC current from DC current. In class D amplifiers, based on pulse conversion, is only a integrator necessary to generate the audio signal and to block the sample frequencies .
Similar to electrical transmission lines, the impedance matching problem exists when transferring sound energy from one medium to another. If the acoustic impedance of the two media are very different, then most of the sound energy will be reflected or absorbed, rather than transferred across the border.
The gel used in medical ultrasonography helps transfer acoustic energy from the transducer to the body and back again.
Without the gel, the "impedance mismatch" in the transducer-to-air and the air-to-body discontinuity reflects almost all the energy, leaving very little to go into the body.
Horns are used like transformers, matching the impedance of the transducer to the impedance of the air.  This principle is used in both horn loudspeakers and musical instruments.
Most loudspeaker systems themselves contain impedance matching mechanisms, especially for low frequencies. Because most driver impedances are poorly matched to the impedance of free air at low frequencies, and because of out-of-phase cancellations between output from the front of a speaker cone and from the rear, loudspeaker enclosures serve both to match impedances and prevent the interference. Sound coupling into air from a loudspeaker is related to the ratio of the diameter of the speaker to the wavelength of the sound being reproduced. That is, larger speakers can produce lower frequencies at higher levels than smaller speakers for this reason. Elliptical speakers are a complex case, acting like large speakers lengthwise, and like small speakers crosswise.
Acoustic impedance matching (or the lack of it) affects the operation of a megaphone, an echo, and soundproofing.
A similar effect occurs when light (or any electromagnetic wave) hits the interface between two media with different refractive indices. For non-magnetic materials, refractive index is inversely proportional to the material's characteristic impedance.  An ''optical'' or ''wave impedance'' that depends on the propagation direction can be calculated for each medium, and may be used in the usual transmission line reflection equation
If a body of mass ''m'' collides elastically with a second body, the maximum energy transferred to the second body will occur when the second body has the same mass ''m''. For a head-on collision, with equal masses, the energy of the first body will be completely transferred to the second body. In this case, the masses act as "mechanical impedances" which must be matched. If m_1 and m_2 are the masses of the moving and the stationary body respectively, and ''P'' is the momentum of the system, which remains constant throughout the collision, then the energy of the second body after the collision will be ''E''2:
These principles are useful in the application of highly energetic materials (explosives). If an explosive charge is placed upon a target, the sudden release of energy causes compression waves to propagate through the target radially from the point charge contact. When the compression waves reach areas of high acoustic impedance mismatch (like the other side of the target), tension waves reflect back and create spalling. The greater the mismatch, the greater the effect of creasing and spalling will be. A charge initiated against a wall with air behind it will do more damage to the wall than a charge initiated against a wall with soil behind it.