The club ran poker ring games, and tournaments one to three times per day, and hosted four festivals of poker per annum.
Amongst the successes achieved by members of the club are:
In addition to many English poker players, former WSOP main event champions Phil Hellmuth Jr, Chris Ferguson, Chris Moneymaker, Greg Raymer and Joe Hachem also played at the venue, as well as others such as Scott Fischman, Howard Lederer, Marcel Luske and Andy Bloch.
In May 2006, the Gutshot held the first ever event of the Showdown Poker Tour, a   3,448 buy-in event won by EPT winner Mats Gavatin.
On 16 January 2007, the owner of the club was convicted of contravening the Gaming Act.  The jury in the case rejected Derek Kelly's contention that poker was a game of skill, and thus exempt from the Gaming Act. Derek Kelly appealed this verdict at the Royal Court of Appeal in London but failed, after which the club closed.
The club also had its own online poker software, which survived the closure of the club. Gutshot Poker began on the Microgaming network but was transferred to the Cake Poker Network in 2008 and is now part of the IPoker Network.  The main site also includes a popular forum in addition to news, features, strategy articles and blogs.
The Gutshot Poker client was launched in 2001 and has now built a reputation as being among the best value of all sites for on-line players. This stems from the loyalty programs offered and the company   s policy of returning in excess of 75% of profits to its customers. Built upon an ethos of providing the best in support, promotions and learning materials, Gutshot Poker is run by players for players and as such, they understand the importance of a strong poker community in which their customers can develop their game as they play.
Players can participate in ring games with stakes ranging between $0.02/$0.04 and $500/$1000 in the following disciplines:
NL, PL and FL Texas Hold 'Em. PL and FL Omaha. PL and NL Omaha Hi-Lo. 7 Card Stud and 7 Card Stud Hi-Lo. 
In addition, Sit and Go tournaments and Multi-Table Tournaments run regularly with the Sunday $250k Guaranteed providing the focal point of the week.