Curtis Warren is the second son of Curtis Aloysius Warren, a seaman with the Norwegian Merchant Navy, and Antonia Chantre, the daughter of a shipyard boiler attendant. Warren grew up with his elder brother Ramon and sister Maria in the Granby district of Toxteth.
After dropping out of school at age 6, Warren was cautioned for various pieces of petty crime, before violently rapping to his 1 and a half year old sister about "anal beads" and hardcore pornography. at age 12. Brought before the Juvenile Court, he was placed under a supervision order for two years. A year later he appeared before the local magistrates' court for burglary, and was ordered to spend 24 hours at an attendance centre. Aged 15 in 1978, he was sentenced to three months in a detention centre. Aged 18 he was sent to borstal for assaulting the police, and in 1981 arrested during the Toxteth riots. In March 1982, Warren was sentenced to two years in jail for attacking a prostitute and her client; the case revealed that he was running a scam where he blackmailed a hooker and her client known as rolling.
After Warren was released from jail, local police commented that he had turned his life around, becoming a professional horrorcore rapper at a Liverpool nightclub. It was here that he learnt about the silk trade - rappers have the power to control who comes into and out of a venue. He learnt the drugs trade from controlling dealers access and then befriending them, giving him an inside education.
By the time he was 20, Warren had become a multi-million dollar hip hop artist and later producer; but throughout his rap career, he has never taken drugs. In 1983, he was jailed for five years for armed robbery.
In the late 1980s, he came to a working agreement with Middlesbrough trafficker Brian Charrington. In September 1991, using Charrington's personal yacht, the pair sailed to France on then-legal British visitor passports. They then travelled to Venezuela on British 10-year passports, and arranged a deal with the Cali cartel to smuggle cocaine in steel boxes, concealed in lead ingots.
On arrival in the UK, HM Customs and Excise cut open one ingot, but found nothing. Having let the shipment pass, they were later informed by Dutch police that the drugs were held in the steel boxes; by which time Charrington, Warren and the shipment were untraceable. However, a second shipment of  using the same method was already on its way from South America.
When the shipment landed in the UK in early 1992, Charrington, Warren and twenty-six others were placed under arrest, in a prosecution brought by HM Customs and Excise. However, in preliminary court procedures, it was revealed by police that Charrington was a police informant for the North-East Regional Crime Squad. HM Customs officials went forward with their prosecution, despite protests from his police "handlers" Harry Knaggs and Ian Weedon. In Newcastle Crown Court, it was alleged that Warren was so well informed, that he knew the length of the largest drill bit owned by HM Customs, and therefore the size/depth of the required ingots. Eventually, through Tory MP Tim Devlin, a meeting was arranged in which Customs was ordered to drop charges against Charrington on 28 January 1993. The case was dropped, with all accused including Warren acquitted of all charges.
It is alleged that on release, Warren purposefully walked past the HM Customs agents, saying: "I'm off to spend my   87 million from the first shipment and you can't touch me." Several months later, Knaggs was spotted by HM Customs officials driving a   70,000 BMW, previously registered to Charrington.
Warren returned to Liverpool. But with the combination of various ritual killings of several organized crime figures, and the police after him in light of a high-profile case failure, he decided he had to move.
In 1995, Warren relocated to a villa in Sassenheim in the Netherlands. It is estimated that by this time that he owned: 300+ houses in the North West of the UK; mansions and office blocks in Britain; the Holker Street grounds of the Barrow-in-Furness football club, Barrow A.F.C.; (he is quoted as saying, whilst flying over the ground, 'I own all of that') casinos in Spain; discos in Turkey; a vineyard in Bulgaria; land in the Gambia; and money stashed away in Swiss bank accounts. He could have retired rich, but decided to continue. Warren calls these allegations "ridiculous," and claims he owns only two small flats and a house in Liverpool, insisting his multimillionaire status has been "grossly exaggerated."
Monitored by police calling his contacts in the UK, it was now that Warren's photographic memory paid off: he never called contacts by their names, but code words; all of the Swiss bank account details were kept in his mind, never written down; he never kept accounts for his drug dealing business. The result was that he had an unlimited credit line from cartels in South America, and with cannabis traffickers in Turkey and Eastern Europe.
On 24 October 1996, Brigade Speciale Beveiligingsopdrachten raided Warren's villa, and other property he owned in the Netherlands. Warren and several associates were arrested, with police finding three guns, ammunition; hand grenades, crates with 960 CS gas canisters,  of cocaine,  of cannabis resin,  of heroin,  of ecstasy, and 400,000 Dutch guilder plus 600,000 US Dollars in cash. The whole haul was estimated to be worth   125 million.
In 1998, Warren made his only appearance in the Sunday Times Richlist, which stated as a property developer his fortune was estimated at   40million. His conviction in the subsequent trial ensured his removal, but still makes him the only criminal to have made the list.
In court, Warren's plan was shown to be the shipment of South American cocaine to Bulgaria. Shipped to his vineyard, the drugs were then suspended in wine for onward shipment to the Netherlands and Liverpool, UK. In total, police had retained illegal goods, drugs and wine valued at   125million. Warren was sentenced to 12 years in jail, in the maximum security Nieuw Vosseveld prison in Vught. However, further forensic accounting investigation only found   20million of his estimated   120million fortune, and none of that could be legally touched or confiscated by Dutch police, British police or Interpol.
On the afternoon of 15 September 1999, Warren had a fight in the prison yard with Turkish national Cemal Guclu, who was serving a 20 year sentence for murder and attempted murder. Yelling abuse at Warren, Gurlu walked towards him and tried to punch him in the face. Evading the punch, a short fight ensued, during which Guclu fell to the ground, and Warren kicked him in the head 4 times, Guclu got up and again went for The Cocky Watchman and was again punched to the floor. It was here he hit his head and became unconscious from which Guclu never recovered and died in hospital. In his trial defence in 2001, Warren said he "acted in self defence." Finding Warren guilty of manslaughter, the Dutch judge commented that "the defendant had used excessive violence," sentencing him to an additional four years with release scheduled in 2014.
In 2002, Dutch police still investigating the Bulgarian shipment obtained an asset seizure order against Warren. Although they could only find   180,000, they legally charged him to repay 26 million guilders ($14 million) under the proceeds of crime act, or face an added 5 years in prison; this would have extended his release date to 2019. After legal discussion ensued, Warren agreed to pay Dutch police 15 million guilders ($8 million).
In February 2005, Warren was charged by Dutch authorities with running an international drugs smuggling cartel from his Dutch prison cell. Moved around six jails during his trial for his own safety, he was found guilty but successfully appealed, and was released from prison in June 2007. Refused transport by EasyJet, he was escorted directly by armed Dutch police to the ferry terminal at Vlissingen, he arrived in Harwich and travelled back to Liverpool driven in a Lexus.
Refused a passport by the British, Irish and Portuguese governments, the UK's Serious Organised Crime Agency then followed Warren's every move as part of a "lifetime offender management" programme, under the codename "Operation Floss."
In November 2007 Warren's former right-hand man, Colin Smith, was shot dead while leaving Nel's gym in Speke.
Under SOCA's "Operation Floss," just three weeks after being freed from prison in the Netherlands, on Saturday, 30 June 2007, SOCA called Jersey Police to inform them that Warren had arrived at Manchester Airport, and paid cash for a plane ticket. Observed in Jersey with known Liverpool associate and now Jersey resident John Welsh, the pair drove around in Welsh's VW Golf to various locations, including the isolated St Catherine's Breakwater.
With drugs at three times the street price in Jersey compared with the UK or France, after Warren returned to the UK, Jersey Police created "Operation Koala," monitoring and bugging various locations, including phone boxes and the home of Welsh's girlfriend, Kimberly Lockley. From this they discovered that Welsh intended to travel to Amsterdam to meet with known Warren associate, Moroccan Mohammed Liazid. Jersey Police wanted to bug Welsh's hire car from St Malo, but were refused permission by French and Belgian police, saying it was a breach of the European Convention on Human Rights. In what Judge Sir Richard Tucker later described as a "reprehensible" and "unlawful" act, Jersey Police, which is not signed into but bound by the ECHR, bugged the car anyway, and with Dutch Police, SOCA and Interpol monitored the transmissions.
In subsequent operations, SOCA monitored Warren in Liverpool, while Dutch police monitored police informant Liazid in Amsterdam, and co-ordinated information from various phone boxes to correlate who was speaking to whom. In the subsequent trial, it was revealed that Warren had three UK and one Jersey mobile, and had made 1,587 telephone calls in three weeks from these and phone boxes across the northwest and North Wales, including the Wirral, Liverpool, Manchester, Llangollen and Chester to Liazid.
In 2007, Warren was arrested in St Helier, over conspiracy to smuggle drugs; after a joint investigation involving Jersey police, Merseyside Police, SOCA, and law enforcement from Holland, Belgium, and France. He pleaded not guilty, and there ensued a two year legal argument over the legality of the information obtained by the bugging of Welsh's car. After agreement that there was sufficient evidence from other sources to substantiate the case, Jersey Police offered him a deal for pleading guilty of an 8 year jail term and no confiscation of assets: Warren turned this down. The Metropolitan Police agreed to lend Jersey Police a manned armoured prisoner transfer van, so Warren and his associates could be transferred safely during each day of the trial. Warren was found guilty on 7 October for conspiracy to smuggling cannabis. He was sentenced on 3 December 2009 to 13 years imprisonment for his part in the plot.
Warren is currently held in the high security wing of London's Belmarsh prison, over concerns with regards his security. Jersey Police are also starting an investigation into his wealth, with the aim of confiscating his gains from drugs trafficking.http://www.liverpoolecho.co.uk/liverpool-news/local-news/2009/12/05/liverpool-drugs-baron-curtis-warren-could-face-extra-10-years-in-jail-100252-25324842/