The '''Uralic languages''' ()  (sometimes referred to as ''Uralian languages'') constitute a language family of some three dozen languages spoken by approximately 25 million people. The healthiest Uralic languages in terms of the number of native speakers are Hungarian, Finnish, Estonian, Mari and Udmurt. Countries that are home to a significant number of speakers of Uralic languages include Estonia, Finland, Hungary, Romania, Russia, Serbia, and Slovakia.
The name "Uralic" refers to the suggested Urheimat (original homeland) of the Uralic family, which was often located in the vicinity of the Ural Mountains, as the modern languages are spoken on both sides of this mountain range. However, there is no reliable indication of any specific homeland. In recent times, linguists often place the Urheimat further to the west and south and in the vicinity of the Volga River, close to the Urheimat of the Indo-European languages, or to the east and southeast of the Urals.
The older term Finno-Ugric is sometimes used as a synonym for Uralic, as commonly happens when a language family is expanded, though more typically Finno-Ugric is understood to exclude the Samoyedic languages.
There are three main theories on the ''Urheimat''   the 'original homeland'   of the people who spoke the Proto-Uralic language. Gy. Laszlo places its origin in the forest zone between the Oka River and central Poland. E.N. Setala and M. Zsirai place it between the Volga and Kama Rivers. According to E. Itkonen, the ancestral area extended to the Baltic Sea. P. Hajdu has suggested that the Uralic homeland was in western and northwestern Siberia.
The first mention of a Uralic people is in Tacitus's ''Germania'', mentioning the ''Fenni'' (usually interpreted as referring to the Sami) and two other possibly Uralic tribes living in the farthest reaches of Scandinavia. In the late 15th century, European scholars noted the resemblance of the names ''Hungaria'' and ''Yugria'', the names of settlements east of the Ural. They assumed a connection, but did not seek linguistic evidence.
In 1671, Swedish scholar Georg Stiernhielm commented on the similarities of Lapp, Estonian and Finnish, and also on a few similar words between Finnish and Hungarian, while the German scholar Martin Vogel tried to establish a relationship between Finnish, Lapp and Hungarian. These two authors were thus the first to outline what was to become the classification of the Finno-Ugric (and later Uralic) family. This proposal received some of its initial impetus from the fact that these languages, unlike most of the other languages spoken in Europe, are not part of the Indo-European family.
In 1717, Swedish professor Olof Rudbeck proposed about 100 etymologies connecting Finnish and Hungarian, of which about 40 are still considered valid (Collinder, 1965). In the same year, the German scholar Johann Georg von Eckhart, in an essay published in Leibniz's ''Collectanea Etymologica'', proposed for the first time a relation to the Samoyedic languages.
By 1770, all the languages belonging to the Finno-Ugric languages had been identified, almost 20 years before the traditional starting-point of Indo-European studies.  Nonetheless, these relationships were not widely accepted. Hungarian intellectuals especially were not interested in the theory and preferred to assume connections with Turkic tribes, an attitude characterized by Ruhlen (1987) as due to "the wild unfettered Romanticism of the epoch". Still, in spite of this hostile climate, the Hungarian Jesuit Janos Sajnovics suggested a relationship between Hungarian and Lapp (Sami) in 1770, and in 1799, the Hungarian Samuel Gyarmathi published the most complete work on Finno-Ugric to that date.
At the beginning of the 19th century, research on Uralic was thus more advanced than Indo-European research. But the rise of Indo-European comparative linguistics absorbed so much attention and enthusiasm that Uralic linguistics was all but eclipsed in Europe; in Hungary, the only European country that would have had a vested interest in the family (Finland and Estonia being under Russian rule), the political climate was too hostile for the development of Uralic comparative linguistics. Some progress was made, however, culminating in the work of the German linguist Josef Budenz, who for 20 years was the leading Uralic specialist in Hungary.
Another late-19th-century contribution is that of Hungarian linguist Ignac Halasz, who published extensive comparative material of Finno-Ugric and Samoyedic in the 1890s, and whose work is at the base of today's wide acceptance of the Samoyed-Finno-Ugric relationship (i.e. the Uralic family).
During the 1990s, linguists Kalevi Wiik, Janos Pusztay, and Ago Kunnap and historian Kyosti Julku announced a "breakthrough in Present-Day Uralistics", dating Proto-Finnic to 10,000 BC. The theory was almost entirely unsuccessful in the scientific community.
The Uralic family currently comprises nine undisputed language groups.  These are not necessarily primary branches of Uralic, but there is no consensus classification. (Some of the proposals are listed in the next section.)  Obsolete names are displayed in italics.
There is also historical evidence of a number of extinct languages of uncertain affiliation:
All Uralic languages are thought to have descended, through independent processes of language change, from Proto-Uralic. The internal structure of the Uralic family has been debated since the family was first proposed. Doubts about the validity of most of the proposed higher-order branchings (grouping the nine undisputed families) are becoming more common.
The traditional classification is as follows:
Three distinct subfamilies are usually recognized: Finno-Permic, Ugric and Samoyedic. It had formerly been widely accepted to group Finno-Permic and Ugric as the Finno-Ugric family, but especially in Finland there has been a growing tendency to cut the family tree lower by rejecting the Finno-Ugric intermediate protolanguage. In more marked opposition to the traditionally accepted branching, a recent proposal unites Ugric and Samoyedic in an "East Uralic" group for which shared innovations can be noted.Hakkinen, Jaakko 2009: Kantauralin ajoitus ja paikannus: perustelut puntarissa.     Suomalais-Ugrilaisen Seuran Aikakauskirja 92. http://www.sgr.fi/susa/92/hakkinen.pdf
The Finno-Permic grouping still holds some support, though the arrangement of its subgroups is a matter of some dispute. Mordvinic is commonly seen as particularly closely related to or part of Finno-Lappic.
Within Ugric, uniting Mansi with Hungarian rather than Khanty has been a competing hypothesis to Ob-Ugric.
One alternate proposal for a family tree, with emphasis on the development of numerals, is as follows:
The grouping of the four bottom-level branches remains to some degree open to interpretation, with competing models of Finno-Saamic vs. Eastern Finno-Ugric (Mari, Mordvinic, Permic-Ugric; *k >    between vowels, degemination of stops) and Finno-Volgaic (Finno-Saamic, Mari, Mordvinic; *     >    between vowels) vs. Permic-Ugric. Viitso finds no evidence for a Finno-Permic grouping.
    when before *i, and after a vowel (cf. *k >    above), or adjacent to *t, *s, *s, or *s.<ref name = EastUralic/>
The inverse relationship between consonant gradation and medial lenition of stops (the pattern also continuing within the three families where gradation ''is'' found) is noted by Helimski (1995): an original allophonic gradation system between voiceless and voiced stops would have been easily disrupted by a spreading of voicing to previously unvoiced stops as well.
Many relationships between Uralic and other language families have been suggested, but none of these are generally accepted by linguists at the present time.
Theories proposing a close relationship with the Altaic languages were formerly popular, based on similarities in vocabulary as well as in grammatical and phonological features, in particular the similarities in the Uralic and Altaic pronouns and the presence of agglutination in both sets of languages, as well as vowel harmony in some. For example, the word for "language" is similar in Estonian (''keel'') and Mongolian (''      '' (''hel'')). These theories are now generally rejected and most such similarities are attributed to coincidence or language contact, and a few to possible relationship at a deeper genetic level.
The Indo-Uralic (or Uralo-Indo-European) theory suggests that Uralic and Indo-European are related at a fairly close level or, in its stronger form, that they are more closely related than either is to any other language family. It is viewed as certain by a few linguists and as possible by a larger number.
The Uralic-Yukaghir theory identifies Uralic and Yukaghir as independent members of a single language family. It is currently widely accepted that the similarities between Uralic and Yukaghir languages are due to ancient contacts. Regardless, the theory is accepted by a few linguists and viewed as attractive by a somewhat larger number.
The Eskimo-Uralic theory associates Uralic with the Eskimo-Aleut languages. This is an old thesis whose antecedents go back to the 18th century. An important restatement of it is Bergsland 1959.
Uralo-Siberian is an expanded form of the Eskimo-Uralic hypothesis. It associates Uralic with Yukaghir, Chukotko-Kamchatkan, and Eskimo-Aleut. It was propounded by Michael Fortescue in 1998.
Nostratic associates Uralic, Indo-European, Altaic, and various other language families of Asia. The Nostratic theory was first propounded by Holger Pedersen in 1903 and subsequently revived by Vladislav Illich-Svitych and Aharon Dolgopolsky in the 1960s.
The theory that the Dravidian languages display similarities with the Uralic language group, suggesting a prolonged period of contact in the past, is popular amongst Dravidian linguists and has been supported by a number of scholars, including Robert Caldwell, Thomas Burrow, Kamil Zvelebil,Zvelebil, Kamal (2006). Dravidian Languages. In ''Encyclopaedia Britannica'' (DVD edition). and Mikhail Andronov.Andronov, Mikhail S. (1971), "Comparative Studies on the Nature of Dravidian-Uralian Parallels: A Peep into the Prehistory of Language Families". ''Proceedings of the Second International Conference of Tamil Studies'' Madras. 267   277. This theory has, however, been rejected by some specialists in Uralic languages,Zvelebil, Kamal (1970), ''Comparative Dravidian Phonology'' Mouton, The Hauge. at p. 22 contains a bibliography of articles supporting and opposing the theory and has in recent times also been criticised by other Dravidian linguists such as Bhadriraju Krishnamurti.Krishnamurti, Bhadriraju (2003) ''The Dravidian Languages'' Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. ISBN 0-521-77111-0 at p. 43.
All of these theories are minority views at the present time in Uralic studies.
Various unorthodox comparisons have been advanced such as Finno-Basque and Hungaro-Sumerian. These are considered spurious by specialists.
Structural characteristics generally said to be typical of Uralic languages include:
The sentence reads:
Although the common origin is easy to notice, University of Edinburgh linguist Geoffrey Pullum, who speaks some Finnish, is suspicious of claims of mutual intelligibility; in a post on his blog, he reported that a Finnish friend of his living in Hungary claimed that neither Finns nor Hungarians could understand the other language's version of the sentence. Nevertheless, each word is traceable to Proto-Uralic, not a more recent loanword.
The following is a very brief selection of cognates in basic vocabulary across the Uralic family, which may serve to give an idea of the sound changes involved. This is not a list of translations: cognates have a common origin, but their meaning may be shifted and loanwords may have replaced them. In general, Finnic languages, and of them Finnish is considered to be the most conservative of the Uralic languages, especially with regard to  . (An example  is ''porsas'' ("pig"), loaned from Proto-Indo-European ''*por   os'' or pre-Proto-Indo-Iranian ''*porsos'', unchanged since loaning save for loss of palatalization, *s     s.)