Bathurst is often referred to as Gold Country as it was the site of the first gold discovery and where the first gold rush occurred in Australia. Today it is education and manufacturing that drive the economy as well as motorsport at the internationally famous Mount Panorama motor racing circuit. The city has an historic city centre with many buildings remaining from the gold rush period of the mid to late 1800s.
The median age of the population is a relatively young 32.9 years this is related to the large education sector in the community and is particularly young for a regional centre, the state average is 36.4. Population growth has reached 2.2% per annum and that places Bathurst in number one position in growth across all NSW regional centres. This growth over recent years has seen the construction of new shopping centres and retail precincts, sporting facilities, housing estates, and expanding industrial areas.
Bathurst is situated on the western edge of the Great Dividing Range in the Macquarie River plain the area also known as the Bathurst plains. The city straddles the Macquarie River a river that feeds into the Murray Darling River system, the largest river system in Australia. The city is protected by a levee bank to protect the city from occasional flood events. Mount Panorama is located 3&nbsp;km from the CBD and effectively within the city limits; it is 877m AMSL and rises 215m above the Bathurst CBD.
Bathurst is located on the Great Western Highway that starts in the centre of the city of Sydney and finishes at Bathurst. At this point two main state highways start, the Mitchell Highway to Bourke and the Mid-Western Highway to Hay. Bathurst is located approximately mid-way along a regional road route from Canberra and Goulburn to Mudgee and the Hunter Valley. Bathurst is also located on the Main Western Railway line that starts at Sydney Central Station and proceeds for 242 rail kilometres to Bathurst.
The Macquarie River divides Bathurst with the CBD located on the western side of the river. Four road bridges and two rail bridges span the river within the city area, from the upstream side they are: Rail Bridge (built in 1876) closed in 2011, replaced with a new concrete single track rail bridge structure alongside and brought into use in 2011, the four lane Evans Bridge opened in 1995, the Denison Bridge opened in 1870, closed to road traffic and now a pedestrian bridge, the George Street low level bridge, and the Eglington Bridge.
Two physical components comprise the Bathurst region, the Bathurst Basin and the Tablelands areas, they are drained by the Macquarie, Turon, Fish and Campbells Rivers to the north and Abercrombie and Isabella Rivers to the south. The central basin area of the Bathurst area is  mainly granite soils while in the north area sandstone, conglomerates, greywacke, siltstones, limestones and minor volcanos predominate. The south is more complex geology with siltstones, sandstones, greywacke, shales and chert, basalt and granite intrusions and embeded volcanic and limestones. Underlying Bathurst is the dominant feature of Bathurst granite (intruded in the Devonian period) and at Mount Panorama and Mount Stewart basalt occurs.
Topography of the region ranges from slightly undulating to rough and very steep country, approximately 30&nbsp;km to the east of Bathurst is the folded and faulted sedimentary and metamorphosed formations of the Great Dividing Range which runs roughly north-south.
Bathurst is located in Australia's cool temperate climate zone which is defined as having mild to warm summers and cool to cold winters. Regular summer thunderstorms particularly in December and January are common as a result of the flat plains country to the west leading into the mountainous nature of the country around Bathurst assisting the development of storm cells. On the other hand in winter light snow falls occur on higher peaks around Bathurst typically a few days each season.
Bathurst CBD is located on William, George, Howick, Russell, and Durham Streets. The CBD is an area of approximately 25 hectares and surrounds two city blocks as distinct from the linear one main street common in other, particularly regional, locations. Within this block layout is located banking, government services, shopping centres, retail shops, a park and monuments. Bathurst has retained a mix of main street shopping along with enclosed shopping centres within the CBD unlike other towns where the CBD focus has split between main street and new shopping centre developments located in the suburbs. Within the CBD is Kings Parade, this is a park setting with several memorials of people and events in history it is a popular location for locals to meet. City planners manage a conservation zone that includes within its boundaries the Bathurst CBD the zone seeks to conserve the city historal buildings and character. Keppel Street is Bathurst's second commercial shopping area, removed from the CBD by two blocks to the south, this area developed once the railway arrived in 1876.
The main suburbs of Bathurst are; Kelso, Eglinton, West Bathurst, Bathurst, Llanarth, South Bathurst, Rose Hill, Windradyne, Windradyne Heights and Abercrombie Estate. One of the newer suburbs is Marsden Estate, in Kelso.
Bathurst's place in Australia's history is clearly evidenced by the large number of landmark monuments, buildings, and parks. Many landmark buildings are included in the 'Architecture' section of this article.
In the centre of the city is a square known as Kings Parade. Originally a markets area from 1849 to 1906 when it was redesignated as a public recreation ground and site for a soldiers memorial. Kings Parade now contains three memorials an open space park and gardens.
 at a cost of   8,880.
The Evans memorial stands at the northern end of Kings Parade, completed in 1920 the memorial commemorates the discovery of the Bathurst Plains in 1813 by George Evans, Assistant Surveyor of Lands.
The Boer War memorial stands at the southern end of Kings Parade, the memorial was unveiled in 1910 by Lord Kitchener.
The Bathurst area was originally occupied by the Wiradjuri Aboriginal people.
The government surveyor, George William Evans, was the first European to sight the Bathurst Plains in 1813. In 1814, Governor Lachlan Macquarie approved an offer by William Cox to build a road crossing the Blue Mountains, from Emu Plains, the existing road terminus west of Sydney to the Bathurst Plains. This first road to cross the Blue Mountains was 12 feet (3.7 m) wide by 1011/2 miles (163&nbsp;km) long, built between 18 July 1814 to 14 January 1815 using 30 convict labourers and 8 guards. Governor Macquarie surveyed the finished road in April 1815 by driving his carriage across it from Sydney to Bathurst. The Governor commended Cox and stated that the project would have taken three years if it had been done under a contract. As a reward Cox was awarded  of land near what is now Bathurst.
Bathurst was founded at the terminus of Cox's Road on the orders of Governor Lachlan Macquarie who selected the site on 7 May 1815, and is the oldest inland town in Australia. The name Bathurst comes from the surname of the British Colonial Secretary Lord Bathurst. It was intended to be the administrative centre of the western plains of New South Wales where orderly colonial settlement was planned.
Local Wiradjuri groups under leaders such as Windradyne resisted the settlers until the Frontier Wars of the early 1820s ended the open conflict.
In the early years of settlement Bathurst was a base for many of the early explorers of the NSW inland, including John Oxley, Allan Cunningham and Thomas Mitchell.
Flecks of gold were first discovered in the Fish River in February 1823, but it was 12 February 1851 in a Bathurst Hotel when Edward Hargraves announced the discovery of payable gold, soon gold was found at Ophir, later Sofala and Hill End in the 1850s and 1860s and the town of Bathurst began to boom. Bathurst was to become the first gold centre of Australia, the nearby gold localities would transport their gold to Bathurst then on to Sydney the mail and gold transport coaches became an obvious target for Bushrangers and this increasingly became a problem for the authorities.
The Ribbon Gang and the Bathurst Rebellion occurred in 1830 when a large group of over 80 convicts roamed the Bathurst district. They were eventually captured and charged with murder, bushranging and horse-thieving. On 2 November 1830 ten members of the Ribbon Boys were hanged in Bathurst for their crimes. The site of the first and largest public hanging in Bathurst is still marked by the laneway sign ''Ribbon Gang Lane'' in the CBD. Ben Hall who became a notorious bushranger was married in St Michael's Church at Bathurst in 1856. In October 1863 a gang of five including Hall raided Bathurst robbing a jewellers shop, bailed up the Sportmans Arms Hotel and tried to steal a racehorse. They returned three days later and held up more businesses. John Piesley, another bushranger, was tried and hung for murder at Bathurst Gaol in 1862.
Bathurst's economy was transformed by the discovery of gold in 1851. One illustration of the prosperity gold brought to Bathurst is the growth of the number, and status of, Hotels and inns. The first licensed inn within the township was opened in 1835, the ''Highland Laddie''. At the peak of hotel activity in 1875, coinciding with the gold rush period, there were 61 operating concurrently. A total of 89 hotel locations have been identified in the town of Bathurst with 112 operating in the immediate district over the history of Bathurst. Initially many pubs were simply a cottage with stables then as prosperity increased during the gold rush the Hotels became typical of architecture of pubs known today.
The Cobb & Co. business was a horse drawn coaching transport business originally established in Victoria but relocated to Bathurst in 1862 to follow the gold rush. The business provided gold escorts, mail services and passenger services to the towns and rural settlements. Cobb & Co. coaches were constructed in the coaching workshops located in Bathurst and the Bathurst Information Centre contains a restored Cobb & Co. coach.
Bathurst later became the centre of an important coal-mining and manufacturing region. The Main Western railway line from Sydney reached Bathurst in 1876 and from that time the town became an important railway centre with workshops, train crew base with locomotive depot, and track and signal engineering offices. It remains today as the railway regional engineering headquarters with a large rail component manufacturing facility.
In 1885 Bathurst had a population of approximately 8,000 and a district population of an additional 20,000 people. The town in 1885 was a hub for stores such as E.G. Webb & Co. with supplies and distribution occurring throughout large parts of western NSW and into Queensland and South Australia.
 The early part of the century saw electricity arrive initially for street lighting; the first electric street light was lit 20 December 1924. Lighting spread along streets through to 1935, over time to businesses and finally private houses. Sewage treatment was an early infrastructure project funded by the state government and built in 1915. Water supply started with private wells in backyards eventually in 1926 a waterworks was built to the south of the town on the river with the water pumped through piping laid progressively to the businesses and private dwellings. In 1931 work started on the 1,700 ML Winburndale Dam project to gravity feed water through a wood stave pipe laid to the town, the scheme opened by the Premier of New South Wales on 7 October 1933. Later a new larger water supply dam was built on the Campbells River and originally known as the Campbell River Dam scheme later renamed the Ben Chifley Dam after the late Prime Minister Ben Chifley of Bathurst, it was opened in November 1956. The Ben Chifley Dam received a major storage upgrade designed to meet the cities needs to 2050, the work was completed in 2001 increasing the capacity by 30% to 30,800 ML.
An ambulance service commenced on 6 June 1925 with a new Hudson ambulance, a new ambulance station was opened 2 March 1929 and is still used by the NSW Ambulance Service. Motor cars were becoming common in the early 20th century and the need for road service patrols commenced in 1927 provided by the NRMA using a motorcycle/sidecar response vehicle.  The early electronic media age arrived with the opening of commercial radio station 2BS on 1 January 1937. Bathurst Aerodrome was opened in 1942 initially to benefit the war effort providing parking for aircraft overflowing from Richmond air force base. The first commercial airline service departed for Sydney on 16 December 1946.
A famous Australian brand name of frozen foods began in Bathurst. Robert Gordon Edgell arrived in Bathurst in 1902, in 1906 he was growing pears, apples and asparagus, he experimented with canning and preserving fruit and vegetables opening a small cannery in 1926, expanding in 1932, in 1930 he formed the company Gordon Edgell & Sons which over time became, and still is, a famous Australian food name.
Many attempts were made to start a University College with the earliest attempts in 1912 through to 1947 when real progress was made with plans for a state teachers college. The first intake of teacher students came at the beginning of 1951 with the official opening on 9 November 1951. The college has transformed over time into the Mitchell College of Advanced Education on 1 January 1970. Again the College grew and ultimately became the Charles Sturt University on 19 July 1989.
Bathurst was one of the locations to campaign to be the site of the new Federal Capital. In an essay prepared by a journalist with the Bathurst Times newspaper, Price Warung, in 1901 to promote Bathurst's candidacy he responds to the Federal committees key requirements for the capital to have; ''centrality and accessibility of situation, salubrity, and capacity for impregnable defence.''
An Army Camp was established at Bathurst in early 1940 and was intended for the 1st Armoured Division of the AIF, soon converting to an infantry training centre due to the unsuitability of the closely settled area to armoury training. Following the war this camp was converted to a migrants 'reception and training centre', the first group arrived at Bathurst in 1948, at times the centre had up to 10,000 residents.
Bathurst's population over its 190+ year history has had rapid growth periods; during the mid to late 19th century gold rush period, then post World War 2 when migrants from the war ravaged countries were settled in the area and returning soldiers were offered farming land, and at the start of this century has been another fast growth period corresponding in part to Sydneys congestion. Other periods have seen a slightly declining population including the decade around 1900's and during the 1960s. The following chart illustrates the growth from 1856 to recent times.
Bathurst has a unique collection of architecture from colonial through to recent times, with many examples remaining intact the townscape is a feature of present day Bathurst. Historical buildings range from workers cottages, terrace houses, mansions, slab huts, industrial, commercial buildings and grand civic structures.
Many Bathurst mansions were built of the Italianate style in this period with features such as bay windows, cast iron columns, lacework and verandahs.
Bathurst's Courthouse (c.1860) designed by colonial architect James Barnet stands in a prominent city position and is neo-classical style with octagonal rennaisance dome, a doric portico with pediment, octagonal tower with turret, stone facings and brick pilasters, a colonnade of doric pillars, a sage-green roof, red bricks, yellow bricks and long lines of sash windows. Barnet also designed the Bathurst Police barracks (c.1875) and the Bathurst Gaol (c.1886) with the ornate lions head holding a key (a Victorian symbol of secure and certain retribution) standing over the gateway entrance.
St Stephen's Presbyterian Church is a Gothic structure built of Bathurst red bricks in 1871-72.
 Bathurst was proclaimed a town in 1852 and incorporated as a borough in 1862, next a municipality in 1883, then gazetted a city in on 20 March 1885. the same day as Sydney was declared a city. Bathurst Regional Council was formed on 26 May 2004 following the amalgamation of the Bathurst City Council, most of Evans Shire and a small amount of land formerly included in Oberon Shire.
To capitalise on Bathurst's growth, education facilities and youthful population the Regional Council is progressing plans for a new ''Australian Centre for Science, Technology and Emerging Industries (ACSTEI)'', also known as the Technology Park, to be established adjacent to the Charles Sturt University Campus with the centre featuring next generation emerging industries.
Bathurst is the state seat in the NSW Parliament, this seat covers the major centres of Bathurst and Lithgow, and all or part of Bathurst, Blayney, Cabonne, Lithgow, Mid-Western and Oberon local government areas.
Since 1859 Bathurst has existed as an electoral district in the NSW Parliament. Before this, between 1856 to 1859, Bathurst was a part of the Electoral district of Western Boroughs. Prior to the 1920s Bathurst was a single member constituency, in the 1920s it became a multimember district with proportional representation. During the middle part of the 20th century the seat was marginal between Labor and Country Parties, from 1981 when the strong Labor town of Lithgow moved from Blue Mountains to Bathurst, the seat was dominated by Labor, except for 1988 when it was won by the Liberal Party for one 3 year term, and the 2011 election when Paul Toole of the National Party won the seat.
Bathurst is currently within the federal electoral district of Calare which includes a large part of western NSW from Lithgow in the east to Tullamore in the west. Prior to the 2010 election Bathurst was within the Macquarie federal electoral district which was more easterly based including the Blue Mountains area with Bathurst as the western boundary of the district.
Crime in the Bathurst local government area over the 5 years period, 2005 to 2009, is generally stable and in some areas the trend is falling (break and enters, and stealing categories), there is no category of crime where the crime trend is increasing. Crime is categorised by the NSW Bureau of Crime Statistics into 17 categories for statistcial purposes.
Bathurst's economy is broad based with a strong manufacturing industry, large education sector, including agricultural, and government service sectors. 
Private sector employers with large workforces in Bathurst, according to statistics published in 2009, include Devro an international company that produces food casing products has a workforce of 221 and Mars Petcare manufacturing plant with 220 employees are the single largest private employers of labour. Then companies such as Telstra's call centre with 144 employees, Simplot Australia's (more recognisable as brands such as Edgells, BirdsEye, Chiko Roll, and I&J Seafood products) food processing and canning plant with 122 employees, Downer EDi's locomotive workshops with 81 employees, and Burkes Transport a local trucking and distribution company with 68 employees.
Government sector employers with large local workforces include Country Energy with their District Field Office and Corporate Office with 468 employees, Charles Sturt University with its 438 employees, Bathurst Regional Council with 317 employees, the Land and Property Management Authority that provide mapping and survey data across NSW with 278 employees, the Greater Western Area Health Service - Regional Office employing 310 people, Bathurst Correctional Centre employing 210 people, Department of Education and Training - Regional Office with 101 staff, Police Service - Chifley Local Area Command with 151 employees, and NSW State Forests - Regional Office with 79 employees, and RailCorp's rail manufacturing workshops.
The Bathurst regions climate of cool winter weather lends itself to stone fruit production and cool variety grapes for wine production. The flat flood plains along the river suit the summer production of corn to supply the Simplot processing plant located in Bathurst.
Bathurst is the location for the Bathurst Primary Industries Centre a government facility that has been operating since 1895 originally known as The Experimental Farm. Originally established to study most facets of agriculture in the early growth years of the western inland, work included dairy, pigs, vegetable, cereal plantings, and fruit trees, the first fruit trees planted in 1896. The site is still one of the most important stone fruit research units in Australia.
Sheep and wool production are the main primary industries in the surrounding area with beef cattle a secondary production. Wool has been a significant part of the Bathurst rural scene since the 1850s when the industry was growing rapidly. The Bathurst area produces fine grade wool due to the ideal cool winters suiting fine wool production. Fat lambs for meat production are a common product of the regions farms. Beef cattle breeds are predominantly British, British cross and European cross, the Bos indicus types are present but not common.
Bathurst is the site of a major timber processing facility using timber harvested from the surrounding forests, including Sunny Corner State Forest, there are large plantations of softwood timber (pinus radiata) that are harvested for timber products, the main product being sawlogs, and some pulp. Bathurst is the headquarters for the Macquarie Region of Forests NSW (a NSW Government Authority).
Today, Bathurst is synonymous with motorsport, being the site of the Mount Panorama motor racing circuit.  It hosts the Bathurst 12 Hour motor race each February, the Bathurst Motor Festival every Easter, and the Bathurst 1000 motor race each October, during which the population swells with visitors. The circuit is a public road when not closed for racing events and is a popular tourist attraction for visitors to the city. Bathurst has a long history of racing beginning with motorcycle racing from 1911. From 1931 to 1938, motorcycle racing was conducted at the Old Vale Circuit  before moving to the newly created Mount Panorama Circuit in 1938. On 16 April 1938, Mount Panorama attracted 20,000 spectators to its first race, The Australian Tourist Trophy and in 2006 the crowd figure reached 194,000 for the 3 day Bathurst 1000 event.
A group known as 'Mount Panorama Second Circuit Action Group' is promoting and lobbying to incorporate additional track and facilities into the existing circuit to capture additional events and increase the use of the facility.
Beside the circuit is the National Motor Racing Museum, this museum was built to encourage visitors to the circuit all year round other than just on race weekends and includes motor cycles and cars representing the racing history of Bathurst. Peter Brock, the race car driver, was synonymous with Mount Panorama racing and a memorial sculpture dedicated to him, is located in the museum grounds.
Sports in general are well supported by the Bathurst community, the Bathurst Regional Council and NSW State Government have contributed significant funds over the past decade to build new facilities, such as a new heated Aquatic Centre, an Indoor Sports Stadium, Hockey Complex, and major upgrade of the track, new pit complex and spectator facilities at the Mount Panorama circuit. The Hockey Complex is an advanced facility which includes water and sand based fields as well as numerous grass fields. Bathurst has had a long association with competitive Hockey at the National level. The city provides 'dedicated' sports facilities for motor racing, Rugby League (part of Group 10), Rugby Union, AFL, Athletics, Cricket, Netball, Tennis, Football and Touch Football. There are over 70 different sporting groups and organisations in the region from Academy's of Dance, croquet, aero, pony clubs, through to the football, rugby, cricket and cycling. Cycling is increasingly considered a specialty sport of the Bathurst Region with ideal road and community facilities around the city. The Bathurst Cycling Club is one of the oldest sports clubs in Australia founded in 1884.
Sports grounds around Bathurst:
Gliding is a popular activity and there is a large gliding community in Bathurst, the participant numbers are boosted by Bathurst being the closest gliding centre to Sydney. Gliding takes place at Pipers Airfield which is approximately 5 kilometres to the north of the city. Gliding also occurs most school holidays at the Bathurst Regional Airport where Australian Air Force Cadets (AAFC) from ''No.327 Flight'' learn to fly.
Bathurst with its young population demographic has established modern sporting competitions such as the Newtons Nation event, at this event, held at Mount Panorama, young people in particular can participate in modern sports such as BMX Dirt Bikes, Mountain Bikes, Wakeboarding, Parkour, Flatland BMX, Krumping, Skateboarding, and Luge.
Bathurst is a cathedral city, being the seat for the Anglican and Roman Catholic bishops of Bathurst. The city is dotted with many churches and other religious buildings such as schools and halls. The main cathedrals are All Saints' Anglican Cathedral, and St Michael and St John's Cathedral (Catholic), then there are many churches and places of worship including St Stephens Presbyterian Church & Hall, Assumption Church (Catholic), St Barnabas' South Bathurst (Anglican) and others.
Bathurst was also the home of wartime Labor Prime Minister Ben Chifley, who represented the area in the Federal Parliament and is buried in Bathurst. His legacy is celebrated by the Labour Party each year with a function known as ''the Light on the Hill'' speech by a senior Labour figure. The Light on the Hill speech was first delivered to the ALP Conference by Chifley in 1949.
Bathurst is unusual in that it has a collection of house museums representing different periods of its history from first settlement to the 1970s.  The house museums include ''Old Government Cottage'' built 1837 - 1860, ''Abercrombie House'' a 40 room historic mansion built c.1870s, ''Miss Traill's House'' built in 1845, and ''Chifley Home'' which retains the simple furnishings that demonstrated the lifestyle and image of Chifley as a    plain man   .
Bathurst is home to several museums including the Bathurst Historical Society Museum located in the left wing of the historic courthouse. This museum includes in its collection a range of Aboriginal artefacts and large collections of documents relating to Bathurst's early history and collection of local items from Australia's early settlement. Central Bathurst is host to the Australian Fossil and Mineral Museum, which houses the Somerville Collection of fossils and minerals, and features Australia's only complete Tyrannosaurus Rex skeleton. The Somerville Collection also consists of one of the largest collections of tourmaline in the Southern Hemisphere. The Fossil and Mineral Museum is located in the historic school building in the CBD.
Organisations that support the various arts are well catered for in Bathurst they include the Mitchell Conservatorium which was the NSW's first regional, community-based, pre-tertiary and non-profit music centre, it was established in May 1978. The Conservatorium provides musical education and performance opportunities to children and adults. The Bathurst Regional Art Gallery focuses on Australian art from 1955 and has a strong representation of local landscapes and particularly local villages and towns. The collection includes several Lloyd Rees paintings. The design of the gallery allows regular exhibitions with an average of 25 exhibitions per year. The gallery is owned by the Bathurst Regional Council and is located in a modern purpose built building incorporating the Regional Library.
Another Arts group is the Macquarie Philharmonia, this professional and amateur orchestra annually brings together professional musicians living in western areas of NSW. Known as Australia's Inland Symphony Orchestra, throughout the year the Macquarie Philharmonia invites selected music students from the region's Conservatoriums to perform alongside professionals to audiences throughout the Region.
Carillon Theatrical Society is an amateur theatrical society that has been performing musicals for the people of Bathurst since 1959. Recent shows include The Producers and Joseph and the Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat.
The NSW Government and Charles Sturt University supports the Arts in the area through Arts OutWest which is the peak arts and cultural body for the Central West area of NSW, operating since 1974. This group promotes and educates arts and cultural development for Bathurst and the region.
The Bathurst Memorial Entertainment Centre (BMEC) is a new purpose built building completed in 1999 that provides a venue for local and visiting performances. BMEC has an annual season of entertainment encompassing all forms of the performing arts from Australia and around the world.
Entertainment and learning is promoted by the historic Royal Bathurst Show, this Agricultural Show has been operating since 1860 and is one of the largest regional shows in NSW. The show has been operating continuously from the present site since 1878 and attendances now typically reach 20,000 people over a two day period. In 1994 approval was received from the Queen to name the show the ''Royal Bathurst Show''.
The Central Tablelands region is a location with a growing reputation as a producer of gourmet food and drink. A non profit volunteer based organisation known as Bre&d was established in 2001 to encourage visitors and residents to experience the regions produce. The organisation operates the monthly Bathurst Farmers Markets held at the Bathurst Showground as well as the ''Bre&d Under the Stars'' and ''Bre&d On the Bridge'' annual events that showcase the regions chefs and local produce. The events are held on the historic Denison Bridge with the Macquarie River passing below.
Education is Bathurst's largest industry with 60 education facilities that represent 7.6% of Bathurst   s Gross Regional Product. The education range covers all levels including university, TAFE, secondary, primary both public and private.  In Bathurst 12.1% of the population are employed in the education sector; the NSW state average is 7.0%.
Bathurst is the headquarters for Charles Sturt University which has a major campus in Bathurst, complementing campuses in Wagga Wagga, Albury, Dubbo, Orange, Canberra, and Goulburn. It is a major provider of regional tertiary education as well as distance education both nationally and internationally.  The Bathurst campus offers courses in business, communication, computer science, nursing, paramedics, policing, psychology, advertising, early childhood, journalism, psychology, and teaching. The university is renowned for its reputation in journalism.
The Western Institute of TAFE has two campuses in Bathurst. The College has 12 Industry Training Divisions including arts and media, building and construction, business services, computing and information services, engineering services, rural and mining services and tourism and hospitality.
Bathurst has numerous primary schools and high schools, both public and private.
Bathurst is a regional highway hub.  Several roads including the Great Western Highway, Mid-Western Highway, Mitchell Highway, O'Connell Road to Oberon and Bathurst-Ilford Road all start in Bathurst. Other major roads in Bathurst include Durham Street, Eleven Mile Drive, and Bradwardine Road.
Bathurst Railway Station is located ten minutes' walk from the city centre. It is serviced by CountryLink trains and buses east to Lithgow then on to Sydney, north west to Dubbo, west to Parkes, and south to Cootamundra.
Local bus services provided by Jones Bros Bus Company operate in the surrounding suburbs of Bathurst, with a bus interchange in Howick Street, opposite Stockland Bathurst.
Interurban bus services are provided between Bathurst and Lithgow, Bathurst and Orange, Bathurst and Oberon and Bathurst to Sydney, these services depart from the Howick Street bus interchange.
Regional Express Airlines is the only airline providing passenger services at Bathurst Airport; it services the route with three daily return flights to Sydney. Several flight schools operate from the airport, and it is used very frequently by trainee pilots during their navigation training.
Bathurst   s location close to Sydney and on major highways places it in a desirable position for decentralisation plans by various governments over the years. Several decentralisation plans relating to Bathurst can be identified:
The local daily newspaper is the Western Advocate, published in Bathurst for 150 years. The publication has a circulation of 5,800 copies.
Bathurst-licensed stations
National and other stations
Television in the town area is transmitted from a tower on Mount Panorama  
Subscription Television services are provided by Austar.
In December 2001 the inaugural meeting of the biennial Australasian Ornithological Conference series, initiated and organised by the Royal Australasian Ornithologists Union, was held in Bathurst.
This gallery of images illustrates the heritage and architectural styles of various buildings and structures and localities in the City of Bathurst.
Image:Holy Trinity Church was the first inland church in Australia.jpg|Holy Trinity Church
Image:Bathurst Carillion.jpg|Carillion
Image:Bathurst Base Hospital.jpg|Bathurst Base Hospital (old section)
Image:Bathurst, Kings Parade.jpg|Kings Parade
Image:St Stanislaus Bathurst Front.jpg|St Stanislaus Private School
Image:Penitentiary Batrurst, NSW Australia.jpg|Bathurst Goal
Image:Bathurst Courthouse.jpg|Bathurst Courthouse
Image:The Commercial Hotel.jpg|Commercial Hotel
Image:Bathurst Post Office and Court House.jpg|Court House and old Post Office
Image:Arhs 26 bathurst.jpg|Bathurst Railway Yard