Caspar Berry was educated at the Royal Grammar School, Newcastle upon Tyne. Berry started his working life as an actor in the first two series of ''Byker Grove'' and has enjoyed a varied career before becoming a professional poker player.  Having studied economics and anthropology at Cambridge University, he went on to write three feature films for Film Four, Miramax and Columbia Tri-Star.  Killing Time starring ''Craig Fairbrass'' and was co-written by future filmmaker Neil Marshall & Downtime starring Paul McGann.  Both these films was directed by Bharat Nalluri.
He changed careers at age 25 and became a professional poker player in Las Vegas where he made a living in the $10   20 and $20   40 games in the The Mirage for three years. According to records, he has no cashes in any live tournaments whatsoever which leads a few people to doubt his poker credentials although his explanation is simply that he never entered any tournaments during this period, concentrating instead on cash game play. Since retiring from live poker in the summer of 2002, Berry set up and ran his own independent production company in Newcastle, although he left that in 2005 to work as a trainer and public speaker. He is also working on his first poker book and is strategy writer for ''Flush'' magazine. Since ''Poker Night Live'''s demise he now presents on ''Sky Poker'' where he is one of the most technical analysts. He was an uncredited poker adviser on the 2006 Bond movie ''Casino Royale'' along with his credited co-host Dr Tom.
Berry appeared as a regular presenter on PokerZone's, ''Poker Night Live'' show. His recent TV work has helped him build a reputation as poker expert with great knowledge and skills. He likes to integrate self-improvement topics, such as sports psychology, positive thinking and neuro-linguistic programming, into his poker commentary. He had the best record among the presenters on pokerzone's  beat the presenter (a tournament between the presenters and online players) cashing in 90% on the SNGs he played in 18 months (although these were very low buy in games).