The '''Smart Forfour''' was a supermini produced by Smart between April 2004 and June 2006. Unlike the other models of the marque, the Forfour was a more conventional five-door hatchback with a relatively roomy interior, available as a four / five-seater.
The car was produced at the NedCar factory in the Netherlands in conjunction with Mitsubishi Motors. This is the same factory that produced  Volvo 300 cars in 1970s and 1980s and the Volvo V40s in the 1990s. To save production costs, the '''Smart Forfour''' shares most of its components with the 2003 Mitsubishi Colt. This includes the chassis, suspension and a new generation of MIVEC petrol engines, ranging from the three cylinder  to the four cylinder  and  engines with power up to . The  common direct injection (cdi) diesel engine, on the contrary, is a three-cylinder Mercedes-Benz engine derived from the four-cylinder used in the Mercedes-Benz A-Class, and is available with either  or .
A Brabus-prepared sports version has been available since 2005. It is powered by a turbocharged Mitsubishi 4G15 engine, developing ,  more than the Mitsubishi Colt CZT. It can reach a maximum speed of  and accelerate from zero to  in 6.9 seconds.  The Forfour was to be sold in the United States along with the revived Smart Formore vehicle. However, due to slow sales, the Forfour has been phased out from production.
The sales brochures state that the interior "is designed around the concept of a lounge"; to test this, Top Gear presenters spent 24 hours inside the Forfour. They said it was a nice place to be in but they would not buy the car due to its high price and poor driving dynamics compared to its rivals.
Following Smart's initial success for the fortwo in the US, and due to a surprise increase in popularity in the forfour, Mercedes-Benz exec Rainer Schmuckle recently revealed that officials were considering relaunching the car. This has also to be seen in the light of the mutual stock exchange between the maker of small cars Renault and Mercedes.
Penske Automotive Group Inc., distributor of Smart in the US, has signed a deal for Nissan to build a new four-door version of its Smart line of small cars, as it aims to boost sales of the suffering brand, set to go on sale in the fourth quarter of 2011, and would expand Smart's lineup to include a larger five-seat passenger car..
A Smart forFour has been converted into a plug-in hybrid by Lithium Technology Corporation and Zytek Systems. The lithium-ion battery can propel the vehicle up to  and last on its own for up to . The engine is a combination of a , , three-cylinder turbocharged diesel engine and two high-efficiency permanent-magnet electric motors. It received an award from the Energy Saving Trust for the    Ultra Low Carbon Car Challenge    project.