The most common application of GAN is in a dual-mode handset service where subscribers can seamlessly handover connections between wireless LANs and wide area networks using a GSM/Wi-Fi dual-mode mobile phone.  UMA technology has enabled the convergence of mobile, fixed and Internet telephony, sometimes called Fixed Mobile Convergence.
The local network may be based on private unlicensed spectrum technologies like 802.11, while the wide network is alternatively GSM/GPRS or UMTS mobile services.  On the cellular network, the mobile handset communicates over the air with a base station, through a base station controller, to servers in the core network of the carrier. 
Under the GAN system, when the handset detects a wireless LAN, it establishes a secure IP connection through a gateway to a server called a GAN Controller (GANC) on the carrier's network. The GANC presents to the mobile core network as a standard cellular base station.  The handset communicates with the GANC over the secure connection using existing GSM/UMTS protocols.  Thus, when a mobile moves from a GSM to an 802.11 network, it appears to the core network as if it is simply on a different base station.
UMA was developed by a group of operator and vendor companies. The initial specifications were published on 2 September 2004. The companies then contributed the specifications to the 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) as part of 3GPP work item "Generic Access to A/Gb interfaces". On 8 April 2005, 3GPP approved specifications for Generic Access to A/Gb interfaces for 3GPP Release 6. 
The original Release 6 GAN specification supported a 2G (A/Gb) connection from the GANC into the mobile core network (MSC/GSN).  Today all commercial GAN dual-mode handset deployments are based on a 2G connection and all GAN enabled devices are dual-mode 2G/Wi-Fi. The specification, though, defined support for multimode handset operation.  Therefore, 3G/2G/Wi-Fi handsets are supported in the standard.  The first 3G/UMA devices were announced in the second half of 2008.  
A typical UMA/GAN handset will have four modes of operation:
In all cases, the handset scans for GSM cells when it first turns on, to determine its location area. This allows the carrier to route the call to the nearest GANC, set the correct rate plan, and comply with existing roaming agreements.
At the end of 2007, the GAN specification was enhanced to support 3G (Iu) interfaces from the GANC to the mobile core network (MSC/GSN).  This native 3G interface can be used for dual-mode handset as well as 3G femtocell service delivery.  The GAN release 8 documentation describes these new capabilities.
For carriers:
For subscribers:
The first service launch was BT with BT Fusion in the autumn of 2005.  The service is based on pre-3GPP GAN standard technology.  Initially, BT Fusion used UMA over Bluetooth with phones from Motorola; since Jan 2007, it has used UMA over 802.11 with phones from  Nokia, Motorola and Samsung  and is branded as a "Wi-Fi mobile service".  BT has since discontinued the service.  
On August 28, 2006, TeliaSonera was the first to launch a 802.11 based UMA service called "Home Free".  The service started in Denmark and later expanded to Sweden and Norway.
On September 25, 2006 Orange announced its "Unik service", also known as Signal Boost in the UK.  The announcement, the largest to date, covers more than 60m of Orange's mobile subscribers in the UK, France, Poland, Spain and the Netherlands.
Cincinnati Bell announced the first UMA deployment in the United States.  The service, called CB Home Run, allows users to transfer seamlessly from the Cincinnati Bell cellular network to a home wireless network or to Cincinnati Bell's  WiFi HotSpots. 
This was followed shortly by T-Mobile US on June 27, 2007. T-Mobile's service, originally named "Hotspot Calling", and rebranded to "Wi-Fi Calling" in 2009, allows users to seamlessly transfer from the T-Mobile cellular network to an 802.11x wireless network or T-Mobile HotSpot in the United States. 
In Canada, both Fido and Rogers Wireless launched UMA plans under the names UNO and Rogers Home Calling Zone (later rebranded Talkspot, and subsequently rebranded again as Wi-Fi Calling), respectively, on May 6, 2008.
Industry organization UMA Today tracks all operator activities and handset development.
UMA is not implemented in Asia, Australia, Africa and some European countries.
While UMA is nearly always associated with dual-mode GSM/Wi-Fi services, it is actually a    generic    access network technology that provides a generic method for extending the services and applications in an operator's mobile core (voice, data, IMS) over IP and the public Internet.  
GAN defines a secure, managed connection from the mobile core (GANC) to different devices/access points over IP.  
GAN/UMA is not the first system to allow the use of unlicensed spectrum to connect handsets to a GSM network. The GIP/IWP standard for DECT provides similar functionality, but requires a more direct connection to the GSM network from the base station. While dual-mode DECT/GSM phones have appeared, these have generally been functionally cordless phones with a GSM handset built-in (or vice versa, depending on your point of view), rather than phones implementing DECT/GIP, due to the lack of suitable infrastructure to hook DECT base-stations supporting GIP to GSM networks on an ad-hoc basis.
GAN/UMA's ability to use the Internet to provide the "last mile" connection to the GSM network solves the major issue that DECT/GIP has faced. Had GIP emerged as a practical standard, the low power usage of DECT technology when idle would have been an advantage compared to GAN.
There is nothing preventing an operator from deploying micro- and pico-cells that use towers that connect with the home network over the Internet. Several companies have developed so-called Femtocell systems that do precisely that, broadcasting a "real" GSM or UMTS signal, bypassing the need for special handsets that require 802.11 technology. In theory, such systems are more universal, and again require lower power than 802.11, but their legality will vary depending on the jurisdiction, and will require the cooperation of the operator.  Further, users may be charged at higher cell phone rates, even though they are paying for the DSL or other network that ultimately carries their traffic; in contrast, GAN/UMA providers charge reduced rates when making calls off the providers cellular phone network.