The '''Colorado Convention Center''' ('''CCC''') is a multi-purpose meeting facility centrally located in downtown Denver, Colorado. Within blocks of the Colorado State Capitol, it is among the landmarks of Denver.
The '''Colorado Convention Center''' underwent a $340 million major expansion that was completed in December 2004. The expansion doubled the size of the facility which now consists of  of exhibit space,  of meeting rooms, and  of ballroom space.  The expansion of the facility also included the spectacular 5,000 seat .  The '''CCC''' is now 2.2 million gross square feet. Curtis W. Fentress, FAIA, RIBA of Fentress Architects designed the '''CCC''', as well as the Phase II expansion.
The '''CCC''' also boasts an attached 1,000 space, 3-level parking structure as well as its own  (Regional Transportation District) Light Rail stop for even easier accessibility.
The '''Colorado Convention Center''' is owned by the City and County of Denver but is privately managed by ''''''. '''SMG''' was founded in 1977 and manages convention centers, exhibition halls and trade centers, arenas, stadiums, performing arts centers, theaters, and specific-use venues such as equestrian centers around the world. Currently, '''SMG''' manages 1.5 million arena seats, 98% of the publicly-owned exhibition space in North America, and over  of convention center space.  The '''SMG''' managed facilities collectively host thousands of events each year and over 30 million event attendees.
The CCC is located between 14th Street and Speer Boulevard, and between Champa Street and Welton Street. Stout Street runs underneath the building, as does the ('''RTD''') Light Rail's Central Corridor. Currently the D, F and H lines run through this corridor's stop.
The CCC is linked by a pedestrian bridge across Champa Street to the Denver Performing Arts Complex with its nine theatres. It is across Welton Street from the Emily Griffith Opportunity School. The University of Colorado Denver, Metropolitan State College of Denver, and the Community College of Denver are all located to the west across Speer Boulevard at the Auraria Campus.
The Colorado Convention Center is central to many other downtown attractions including: the 16th Street Mall, the , the LoDo (Lower Downtown) district, the Pepsi Center- home of the Colorado Avalanche, Denver Nuggets, Colorado Crush and the Colorado Mammoth,  Coors Field- home of the Colorado Rockies, Denver's Downtown Aquarium, Elitch Gardens amusement park, and the Denver Botanic Gardens.
The '''CCC''' hosts hundreds of events each year from local community luncheons to City-wide conventions. Some of the annual events include:
The '''Wells Fargo Theatre''' is quickly gaining popularity as a music venue.  In 2007 it was rated in  among the Top 100 Worldwide Theatre Venues.  Some of the acts that have graced the stage are: