Presentation College is an independent Catholic educational institution, sponsored by the Sisters of the Presentation of the Blessed Virgin Mary (PBVM). The college began in Mitchell, S.D. in 1922, when the Right Reverend Monsignor J.M. Brady, Pastor of Holy Family Church, established Notre Dame Junior College, a parochial junior college. Notre Dame Junior College operated in Mitchell until 1951, when Brady gave sponsorship of the school to the Presentation Sisters, who staffed the school from its inception.
The name was changed to Presentation College and the campus moved to Aberdeen. The campus was housed in Butler Hall at the Presentation Convent for three years before moving to its present  location. In 1968 the college became co-educational.
The 1,200-seat Strode Activity Center was dedicated in 1998 as the home of Saints Athletics. A new student housing complex opened in 1999, featuring suites with private bedrooms, semi-private bathrooms, living rooms, kitchens, computers and Internet access. A new dining and recreation hall opened in 2000, and in 2005 Presentation College launched its Wireless Initiative, which provides a dynamic learning environment for students with access to a flexible and ubiquitous learning community.
Presentation College has been continuously accredited by the Higher Learning Commission of The North Central Association of Colleges and Schools since 1971. The College conferred diplomas to its graduates until 1966, when the College began offering associate degrees in Arts and Sciences. In 1990 the College was also accredited to confer four-year professional baccalaureate programs.
In 1980 the Cheyenne River Lakota Nursing School in Eagle Butte, S.D., became a satellite of the nursing program at Presentation College and enrolled its first class of Native American students. In 1991 the name of the school was changed to Presentation College-Lakota Campus. 
In 2003 a second satellite location, Presentation College     Fairmont Campus, was opened its doors in Fairmont, Minn.
In 2006 Presentation College partnered with Kilian Community College in Sioux Falls, S.D., to offer a Bachelor of Science degree in Social Work.
The College received the ABBY Award for Community Involvement in 1998 and the Outstanding Rural Health Program Award from the National Rural Health Association in 2002.
Welcoming people of all faiths, Presentation College challenges learners toward academic excellence and, in the Catholic tradition, the development of the whole person.
Presentation College (PC)is a specialty Health Science Baccalaureate institution with multiple education sites. Traditionally, the College responds to emerging needs and conditions. The response of the College is critiqued against its values and beliefs. Presentation College is committed to:
The purposes of Presentation College are:
PC is located on a  campus at 1500 N. Main Street in Aberdeen, S.D. Branch campuses exist in Eagle Butte, S.D., and Fairmont, Minn. The College also offers instruction in Sioux Falls, S.D., and Fargo, N.D., as well as online through PC Virtual.
PC offers Bachelor degree programs in biology, business, nursing, radiologic technology, recreation, and social work. Associate degree programs offered at Presentation College include biology, business, chemistry, communication, early childhood education, English, general studies, medical assisting, medical office administration, nursing, radiologic technology, religious studies, and surgical technology. A certificate program is offered in Medical Transcription. 
PC is known for its distinctive and outstanding academics, focusing on health and medical-related programs, professional staff and faculty, and individualized lettering. The academic programs include classroom work and on-the-job experience gained through internships, externships and supervised clinical practice. Graduates are highly sought. Presentation's most popular program is nursing, due in large part to the fact that Northern State University also in Aberdeen, does not offer a path to RN or LPN.
A minimum cumulative grade point average of 2.0 on a 4.0 scale or GED minimum score of 450, and an ACT composite score of 18 or above, or an 860 minimum SAT score. The cumulative high school GPA is considered for first-time students, while cumulative college GPA is considered for transfer students. 
Presentation College serves a large part of its student body through an extensive financial aid program. Aid available through federal programs includes the PELL Grant, Perkins Loan, Federal Supplemental Educational Opportunity Grant, Academic Competitiveness Grant, SMART Grant and Work-Study Program. Other sources of aid include institutional scholarships, student employment, loans and grants.
Presentation College is a member of the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) Division III. The Saints are members of the Upper Midwest Athletic Conference (UMAC). The athletic department at Presentation College offers eleven sports, including Men   s and Women   s Basketball, Men   s and Women   s Soccer, Women   s Volleyball, Men   s Baseball, Women   s Fast-Pitch Softball, Men   s and Women   s Cross-Country and Men   s and Women   s Golf. Football will be added in 2011.