The City   s vision for Tustin Legacy is that of a compact and walkable, mixed-use community with a distinctive sense of place that builds on the major features of the site, and that is synergistically linked with the adjacent disposition parcels.  It is envisioned as a premier master planned district within the City of Tustin   a mixed-use district that enhances the quality of life for Tustin residents and that demonstrates the city   s commitment to quality development, smart growth and sustainability. The district will create a new center of activity within the city, providing an engaging place to live, work, learn and play, a place that complements and supports adjacent neighborhoods and districts, and a place that offers significant new resources to the broader region. 
Tustin is a city of diverse neighborhoods.  From Old Town, which strongly relates to the city   s historical heritage, to Tustin Ranch, a high quality master-planned community, Tustin   s existing neighborhoods have a unique and rich character contributing to the overall identity and livability of the city.  Tustin Legacy is envisioned as a new neighborhood district, one that maintains and enhances the community   s quality of life while establishing a new model for development in the twenty-first century. Tustin Legacy will provide a new activity center and    anchor    for the southernmost sector of the city, which has long been separated from the remainder of the community.  Surrounded by urban development involving an array of land uses, Tustin Legacy also provides for the expansion of major office and light industrial business park uses to the south and southwest. The district will include up to 4,049 units of housing within Tustin   s jurisdiction, and over nine million square feet of commercial and institutional development. 
The centerpiece of Tustin Legacy is its Master Developer Concept.  The Master Development Site is approximately  of the Tustin Legacy property.  The Master Development Site may include up to 1,825 residential units at a range of densities; approximately  of mixed-use development; nearly  of R&D, industrial, and office uses; more than  of retail/commercial uses; a resort hotel with between 250 and 500 rooms; and a range of open space and education uses. 
An  project called    The District at Tustin Legacy    is located at the northwest corner of Jamboree Road and Barranca Parkway.  The one million square foot retail project will be a Class A lifestyle and power retail center with a complete set of high quality amenities intended to function as the leading retail/entertainment element within the larger Tustin Legacy project.  The central lifestyle component of the project will contain over  anchored by a state-of-the-art 14 screen megaplex movie theater complex with at least 3,000 stadium type seats, restaurants, bistros, cafes, entertainment and retail uses.  The second component of the project will include large in-line commercial stores to be located along a portion of the Jamboree Road and Tustin Ranch Road frontages of the project site.  The third component of the project is designed for more regional power uses and will be anchored by large retailers.  
Approximately  of land will be developed by the South Orange County Community College District for the Advanced Technology and Education Park (ATEP), a model 21st century educational environment and a direct link between students and the high tech business community driving Orange County   s economic development.  When fully implemented, the ATEP campus will provide a market-sensitive and sustainable world-class learning environment for residents, workforce education and training, and will encourage County-wide public/private collaboration and innovation.  
Adjacent to the Community Core, an  Urban Regional Park to be developed by Orange County will feature recreational and cultural facilities as well as a family youth resource center and animal control facility.  Retention and reuse of the northern blimp hangar may be considered as part of the Urban Regional Park as well. East of the Urban Regional Park, an approximate  high school will also be developed by the Tustin Unified School District.
The project's shopping center, named "The District", had its grand opening in August 2007. It covers an area of .
The Orange County Sheriff's Regional Training Academy opened in Tustin Legacy in September 2007. It includes state-of-the-art classrooms, a running track and mock village where recruits can practice their skills.
The South Orange County Community College District's newest campus called Advanced Technology & Education Park (ATEP) is located in Tustin Legacy.  Initial classes began in August 2007.
The Tustin Unified School District will be building three new school campuses, a 
The Orange County Fire Authority will build a new fire station in Tustin Legacy at the corner of Edinger Ave and Kensington Park Dr.
The first community in Tustin Legacy called Tustin Field, consisting of Tustin Field I and Tustin Field II, was completed in 2006.  Tustin Field I consists of 376 housing units and Tustin Field II consists of 189 housing units.  The second community called Villages of Columbus, consisting of Columbus Square and Columbus Grove is currently under development.  As of September 2009, Columbus Square had 673 out of 1,075 total housing units completed and Columbus Grove had 381 out of 465 total housing units completed.  Additional housing is planned in the Golf Village and Midtown communities which have not yet started development.
Tustin Legacy   s plan calls for more than  of private and public parkland. This includes neighborhood parks incorporated into each of the Tustin Legacy neighborhoods, as well as larger community parks that will contain more active recreational opportunities.
The major central organizing design feature of the Tustin Legacy Project will be the Tustin Legacy Park, a two mile (3&nbsp;km) long linear park covering . This will stretch across Tustin Legacy from its western corner to its eastern corner.
An  Orange County Urban Regional Park will be located adjacent to the Tustin Legacy Park and Tustin Legacy Community Park.
The  Tustin Legacy Community Park is currently under design development.
The current economic conditions have caused some delays 
Road extension from Warner Avenue on the south to Walnut Avenue 
Kensington Park Drive and initiation of construction in conjunction 
Orange County Community College District   s Advanced Technology 
Education Campus. 
Park, a 24 acre active sports park, adjacent to the Columbus 
Square Neighborhood, including community outreach and Parks 
Enforcement facility adjacent to Armstrong Avenue. 