As well as providing e-mail relaying and archiving facilities for the many Groups it hosts, the Yahoo! Groups service provides additional facilities for each Group web site, such as a homepage, message archive, polls, calendar announcements, files, photos, database functions, and bookmarks. 
It is not necessary to register with Yahoo! in order to participate in Yahoo Groups. The basic mailing list functionality is available to any e-mail address, but a Yahoo! ID is required to access some other features.
Yahoo! Groups was launched in early 2001 as an integration of technology from eGroups.com and community groups from both eGroups.com and Yahoo! Clubs.
Yahoo! Clubs was launched in 1998 as a logical extension of services that had already been developed by Yahoo - message. Unlike previous Yahoo products, this product was designed to allow much deeper levels of user control over creation, membership and overall direction of communities. Development was led by Doug Hirsch
In August 2000, Yahoo acquired eGroups.com, one of the most popular group collaboration products at the time. About 8 months later, the new Yahoo! Groups product was launched which merged eGroups.com and Yahoo! Clubs. The resulting product is typically one of the Top 5 page-view generating sites across the Yahoo network.
Yahoo! Groups functionality remained static between 2000 and 2005.  In 2001 Yahoo! deleted adult groups from its search directory, making it very difficult to locate Yahoo! groups with adult content.  A Yahoo! user who wishes to find a group with adult content must therefore either know the exact name of the group, or attempt to find it by using a search engine or one of several online adult group directories.  This has created what some view as an "underground" atmosphere for Yahoo! adult groups.  While it is unclear whether the intention of Yahoo! was to diminish the number or merely the easy availability of these groups, adult groups on Yahoo! have continued to increase.  In 2005, a revived ability to generate revenue through targeted search-related advertising resulted in renewed interest, which has slowly received new features since then.
In 2006 Yahoo Groups introduced an option to add a Yahoo! Answers module
Also in 2006, Yahoo Groups introduced an improved message search that includes an Advanced Message Search allowing a search by on any combination of message date, author, subject and message body.
The Advanced Message Search also disappeared in Groups Remodel of 2010
On October 2008 Yahoo introduced a new universal Yahoo! Profile replacing the Group profiles  and  Yahoo! 360 Profiles, both of which were utilized by Group members prior to this introduction. The use of "adult" profiles  was discontinued at that time.
This new feature was announced on Nov 19, 2009.
In September 2010 a major facelift was rolled out, making Yahoo groups look very similar to Facebook. However, several key features were removed, notably the ability to respond directly to the sender of a message rather than the group, and the ability to use a Rich Text editor. The first of these changes would dramatically impact the ability of many groups such as Freegle and Freecycle to keep functioning, affecting over 9 million users worldwide. The second would affect many RPG groups and collaborative-fiction projects, as they often use different font colours to distinguish story threads or individual authors.
Other features removed included the Expanded view of the Message Archives, which allowed users to read messages in chronological order from top to bottom; the message history grid on the Home page, a table which showed the number of messages posted by month and year (this was useful for prospective members wanting an idea of a group's activity level); automatic quoting of the original message in replies posted via the group's website; the option of viewing ASCII art, computer programs and tables in messages as plain text in a fixed-width font; the ability for ordinary members (non-moderators) to view the HTML source code of a message (helpful to members and moderators in tracking trolling attempts); and compatibility with any browser not supporting advanced JavaScript, including browsers in mobile phones, PDAs and the like.  Because of the new interface's much greater reliance on visual as opposed to text elements, accessibility issues for blind and visually-impaired users with screen-reading software were also anticipated.
On November 11, 2010 the Yahoo Groups Team announced house cleaning to start the following week.  According to the ygroups blog this would  involve deleting any Group that is more than six month old and contains no Messages, Photos or Files
The current Yahoo! Groups Directory  organizes groups in  these main categories:
There is a Yahoo! Groups search box available at the Yahoo! Groups homepage. The search function currently provides these options for sorting the results by:
A group receives a web address and an email address when it is created and can be listed in one of the Yahoo! Groups directory categories if desired.  Groups listed in the Yahoo! Groups directory can also be found via a Yahoo! Groups search.
New members can join groups directly, or may be invited by a moderator to join.  Some groups have restricted memberships, which allow group managers to accept or reject new members.  Some groups are closed and allow only members who have been directly invited by a group manager to join the group.
Yahoo! Groups also includes so-called adult groups, however, these groups are not publicly listed in the Yahoo! Groups directory and access to them is restricted. People wanting to visit an adult group  receive  an "adult content" warning and must  agree to it each time a member visits the group.
Each new group created at Yahoo! Groups allows the creator (group owner) to have several features attached to the group.
Some of the features can be selected for "off", moderator, members, public. Here is the complete list of possible group features:
In 2006, Yahoo! discontinued the chat feature in Yahoo! Groups. On Feb 1, 2011 Yahoo! Groups launched a beta version of Group Chat.
As of February 20, 2009 the search feature for messages stopped working. The official Yahoo! Groups blog stated that Yahoo was working to fix the problem, the search feature has not been restored to all groups yet. 
In August 2008 YG staff reported 113 million users, 9 million Groups, and availability in 22 languages.
The web analytics website Quantcast reported around 915 thousand unique visitors to the YG website(US) daily in July 2010.  In January 2011 this number increased to 933 thousand unique visitors daily. This number  does not include YG members who access the Groups site via email.
In Sept 2010 at  its "Product Runway" event, Yahoo told reporters that Yahoo Groups has 115 million Group members and 10 million Yahoo Groups 