The paired '''parotid glands''' are the largest of the salivary glands. They are each found wrapped around the mandibular ramus, and secrete saliva through Stensen's ducts into the oral cavity, to facilitate mastication and swallowing and to begin the digestion of starches.
The parotid glands are found overlying the mandibular ramus and anterior and inferior to the external ear. The glands occupy the '''parotid fascial space'''s, an area posterior to the mandibular ramus, anterior and inferior to the ear on each side of the head. Each gland extends irregularly from the zygomatic arch to the angle of the mandible. This gland is effectively palpated (can be felt) bilaterally. Start anterior to each ear and move to the cheek area and then inferior to the angle of the mandible.Fehrenbach; Herring "Illustrated Head and Neck Anatomy", Elsevier, 2007, p. 170-1
Above the parotid gland lies the external auditory meatus and temporomandibular joint. Below, the parotid overlaps the posterior belly of the digastric. Medially lies the styloid process. Posteriorly, the parotid overflows the sternocleidomastoid and anteriorly it overlies the mandible with the overlying masseter.
The parotid gland resembles a three sided pyramid. The apex of the pyramid is directed downwards. the gland has four surfaces: 
The surfaces are separated by three borders: 
Structures which pass through the parotid gland:
The duct to this gland (also known as Stensen's duct) empties within the buccal cavity (the inside of the cheek) opposite the upper second molar. The '''parotid papilla''' is a small elevation of tissue that marks the opening of the parotid duct on the inner surface of the oral cavity butBath-Balogh; Fehrenbach "Illustrated Dental Embryology, Histology, and Anatomy", Elsevier, 1996, p. 166 just lateral to the 2nd maxillary molar.
Serous fluid (as opposed to mucous fluid) is produced by the parotid gland.
Although the facial nerve (CN VII) runs '''through''' this gland, it does '''not''' supply its parasympathetic innervation. 
Secretion of saliva by the parotid gland is controlled by presynaptic parasympathetic fibers originating in the inferior salivatory nucleus; these leave the brain via the tympanic nerve branch of glossopharyngeal nerve (CN IX), travel through the tympanic plexus (located in the middle ear), and then form the lesser petrosal nerve which exits the cranium through the foramen ovale and ends at the otic ganglion.  After synapsing in the Otic ganglion, the postganglionic (postsynaptic) fibers travel as part of the auriculotemporal nerve (a branch of the mandibular nerve (V3)) to reach the parotid gland.
Sympathetic nerves originating from Superior Cervical Ganglion and giving rise to the external carotid nerve plexus reach the gland by traveling along the external carotid arterial branches (as this structure forks into its two terminal branches, the superficial temporal artery and the maxillary artery, within the parotid gland substance). 
Parasympathetic stimulation produces a serous, enzyme rich saliva. Sympathetic stimulation leads to the production of a low volume, glycoprotein rich mucous. This is done by vasoconstricting the blood supply to the parotid gland reducing the potential for water collection. There is no inhibitory nerve supply to the gland.
Branches of the external carotid artery traverse the glandular tissue and supply the parotid gland with oxygenated blood. The main branch to supply the gland is the transverse facial artery, whereas numerous local veins drain the organ. These veins drain into tributaries of external and internal jugular veins. 
The maxillary vein and superficial temporal vein meet to form the retromandibular vein within the parotid gland, but are not responsible for draining it.  
Lymphatics mainly comprise pre-auricular lymph nodes.
Inflammation of one or both parotid glands is known as parotitis. The most common cause of parotitis is mumps.  Widespread vaccination against mumps has markedly reduced the incidence of mumps parotitis. Other infections such as bacterial infections can cause parotitis as may blockage of the duct, whether from salivary duct calculi or external compression. Stones mainly occur within the main confluence of the ducts and within the main parotid duct. The patient usually complains of intense pain when salivating and tends to avoid foods which produce this symptom.  In addition, the parotid gland may become enlarged upon trying to eat. The pain can be reproduced in clinic by squirting lemon juice into the patient's mouth. Surgery depends upon the site of the stone: if within the anterior aspect of the duct a simple incision into the buccal mucosa with sphinterotomy may allow removal; however, if situated more posteriorly within the main duct, complete gland excision may be necessary.
Eighty percent of tumors of the parotid gland are benign. The most common of these include pleomorphic adenoma and Warthin's tumor. Their importance is in relation to their anatomical position and tendency to grow over time. The tumorous growth can also change the consistency of the gland and cause '''facial pain''' on the involved side since the facial nerve travels through the gland.Fehrenbach; Herring "Illustrated Head and Neck Anatomy", Elsevier, 2007, p. 172 
Twenty percent of parotid tumors are malignant with the most common tumors being mucoepidermoid carcinoma and adenoid cystic carcinoma. Critically, the relationship of the tumor to the branches of the facial nerve (CN VII) must be defined because resection may damage the nerves, resulting in paralysis of the muscles of facial expression. If the tumor is deep within the gland, the patient should give consent with specific regard to potential damage of the facial nerve.
The parotid gland secretes alpha-amylase which is the first step in the decomposition of starches during mastication.  It breaks down amylose (straight chain starch) and amylopectin (branched starch) by hydrolyzing alpha 1,4 bonds.
Important Information on the Biological Effects of Cell Phones and Wireless Technologies
Posted by: Dr. Mercola | April 25 2011
According to the New York Times:
During the ensuing conversation, it's advisable to tilt the phone away from your ear when you are talking and only bring it in close to your ear when you are listening ... radiation is 'significantly less when a cellphone is receiving signals than when it is transmitting.'"
In addition, texting instead of talking might be safer.
And if the Volkow study demonstrating increased glucose levels in the brain from cell phone radiation raised major concerns about cell phone safety around the globe, stunning new research from China is following on its heels, waking up people further to the evident very serious risks from cell phones. 
The recent study, by Duan Y, et al , "Correlation between cellular phone use and epithelial parotid gland malignancies," published in the International Journal of Oral and Maxofacial Surgery, showed a dose-response relationship between cell phone use and parotid gland tumors, and as much as a 3,000% increased risk of parotid gland tumors with greater than 2.5 hours of cell phone use per day.
See ElectromagneticHealth.org post, "Important New Chinese Study Connecting Cell Phone Use with Parotid  Gland Tumors," and coverage by Microwave News, "Chinese Put Cancer of the Parotid Gland on Center Stage."
In particular, duration of use prior to diagnosis, average daily number of calls, average daily duration of cellular phone usage, number of calls since first use, and total time of usage were positively associated with parotid gland malignancy."
Brain tumor analyst L. Lloyd Morgan, B.S., who was lead author of the landmark report, "Cellphones and Brain Tumors: 15 Reasons for Concern," says the risks of parotid gland tumors found in the Duan Y, et al parotid gland study were "as large, perhaps larger, than the risk of lung cancer from smoking."
Camilla Rees of www.ElectromagneticHealth.org says:
The International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC), the part of the World Health Organization responsible for the Interphone study, is planning to soon draw conclusions on risk of cancer from RF from cell phones based only on the 50% of Interphone results they have released to date,
Global scientists and activists are now actively protesting this decision and insisting it be held off until the full Interphone data set is released. The Duan Y, et al parotid gland study very strongly reemphasizes we must gain access to the full dataset of the Interphone study, and subject it to independent analysis."
Sources: