As one of the longest running and largest conventions of its type, Otakon offers a very broad range of  programming, exhibits, and other events. Typical Otakon programming includes:http://www.animecons.com/events/info.shtml/738 Retrieved 2010-08-09.http://www.otakon.com/events_schedule.asp Retrieved 2010-08-09.
They also now support the Tokyo anime and manga censorship bill.
While the idea of a four-day convention has some support among the general membership (especially among younger members), the idea has been summarily dismissed as unworkable by Otakon staff.  It was attempted in 1995, over a holiday weekend, back when Otakon fit comfortably in a small hotel, and even then it was an exhausting prospect that didn't pay off. In those days, the entire convention could be set up in a matter of hours, while it currently takes two full days to prepare the site. At its current size and functional requirements, Otakon would face a significant additional expense in running an extra day, and both industry and dealers have said that it would not be worth their time and money to attend a fourth day.  Finally, it is clear that few staffers would be able to afford the extra day (most staffers already use as much as a week of vacation time to help run the con). With almost zero support from staff, industry, or dealers, there is virtually no chance that Otakon will ever attempt a four-day convention again.
During Otakon 2010, at approximately 2:00 PM on Saturday, the entire Baltimore Convention Center had to be evacuated due to a fire alarm, although there was in fact no fire.  Hours of certain events and rooms were adjusted accordingly to accommodate for lost time.
This was only the second safety incident of this sort to take place during Otakon. Nine years earlier, in 2001, the convention center was evacuated due to after-effects of the Howard Street Tunnel fire. Residual explosive chemicals from an earlier train accident reacted with air, and the resulting explosions launched manhole covers into the air.  This incident was spoofed in Otakon's 2008 Opening Animation: in the video, one of the convention's mascots causes a barrage of manhole covers to strike a giant robot menacing the convention center.
Otakon has been located in the Baltimore Convention Center at least in part for every year beginning in 1999, though it soon expanded to require the entire convention center and more recently, other buildings as well. Events such as the masquerade now place in the 1st Mariner Arena, located one block away, and at least some programming takes place in the Hilton Baltimore Convention Center Hotel, connected to the Convention Center by its skybridge, as was the case in both 2009 and 2010.
As Otakon has outgrown the convention center alone, it has increasingly made use of the 1st Mariner Arena for large events, most notably for the Masquerade.
  In 2009, Otakon had been promised a minimum of  out of a total  by the Hilton Baltimore.  and had confirmed that they would use the Hilton for the convention itself; however only a limited number of events and panels took place at the Hilton with the major of events taking place in the more-spacious Baltimore Convention Center.
On February 7, 2009, Otakon posted information on its panels for Otakon 2009, confirming that panel space will be in the Baltimore Convention Center and will be expanded into the Hilton Baltimore. Otakon 2009 utilized in the Hilton, the Poe meeting room for its Manga Library and the Key Ballroom for two additional panel rooms and one additional autographs room.
Otakon 2010 further expanded into the Hilton, using not only the space used in 2009 but also what essentially amounted to all of the convention space on the second floor of the Hilton.
Otakon is run by the Pennsylvania-based non-profit organization Otakorp, Inc. whose focus is on using East Asian popular culture as a gateway to increase understanding of East Asian culture. 
Otakon is the annual meeting of Otakorp, Inc. Otakon attendees do not purchase "tickets" to Otakon; they actually become a member of the non-profit organization that runs Otakon with their paid attendance to the convention. Everyone who pays the annual membership fee to attend Otakon is also a supporting member for Otakorp and is able to participate in sanctioned events, contests, or giveaways that might occur during the year.
All staff are unpaid volunteers, although registration tasks are supplemented by temporary workers provided by the Baltimore Area Convention & Visitors Association, and certain services such as legal and accounting work are by contract. Otakon also enlists the help of non-staff assistants, whom are referred to as gofers. Otakon 2006 listed over 500 staff on its roster, though not all work the convention directly, though in a similar count, At the time immediately following Otakon 2010, Otakorp listed 685 staff on its online roster.
Otakorp, Inc. also sponsors film screenings as part of the National Cherry Blossom Festival in Washington, DC, and assists with programming at other film festivals.
As of July 30, 2010, Otakon has had a great economic impact with its host, the City of Baltimore. Otakon has had the highest economic impact in Baltimore for 2009, 2008 and 2007 and has been a top convention for Baltimore since 2003. Otakon 2009 had an economic impact of $12.5 million in direct spending and booked over 4,500 hotel rooms. Otakon 2010 had a great impact in terms of food vendors, some have been working Otakon since the 1st year Otakon has been in Baltimore (1999). According to the Baltimore Business Journal on December 10, 2010, Otakon 2010 had 4,575 booked hotel rooms and an estimated economic impact of $15.3 million up from $12.5 million the year before.
This all seems to be mere speculation of something that hasn't been brought up in Otakorp discussions to which I have been party too (staff member, attended meetings in 2010). I'll leave the whole section as a comment for now, but it should perhaps be deleted in the future at the discretion of other editors. Please keep in mind the   (I am a   you know), most notably the first, that  , and as according to the second point and the tenth point, WIKIPEDIA IS NOT FOR   and WIKIPEDIA IS NOT FOR  .
In light of Otakon's consistent growth and the continuing popularity of anime in North America, Otakon expects to continue for many years. The Baltimore Convention Center is likely to remain the primary venue for Otakon, mainly due to a lack of other venues of sufficient size in the area.
From various comments by the organization's senior staff, it seems clear that there are only two serious contenders for possible expansion of the convention: expanding within Baltimore to the new Hilton hotel, which is attached to the BCC, or moving to the much larger D.C. Convention Center.  It also seems clear that while DC remains the most viable option if the convention moves, the new convention hotel would be a more logical expansion choice.  (Other nearby locations such as Philadelphia are simply not large enough to accommodate Otakon, or have been ruled out as unsuitable.)
Otakon 2006 convention chair, Jim Vowles, has stated that there is no firm decision to move Otakon to the D.C. Convention Center due to cost and logistics. Vowles stated that "the move to DC would be a bigger challenge than some people think -- and the true cost is as yet unknown" and that it would take "at least a year to plan any such move", and that if Otakon does indeed decide to move from Baltimore "it should be considered a more or less permanent move if at all possible." 
Mr. Vowles continues, "Realistically, unless the BCC is leveled and rebuilt, it will not be a serious competitor with DC, but it may continue to suit our needs for quite a while. Eventually, we're either going to reach the plateau of our growth, or we're going to need to move, and at that point it's pretty much got to be DC. But Baltimore and the BCC have been our home base since 1999, and we put in two years in Hunt Valley before our big growth in the mid/late nineties. I don't see us casually tossing that history aside. So in the meanwhile, we continue to investigate the options in ever greater detail. Real hard numbers are the next stage of the game." Later comments indicated that the differences in how the convention would use the space were likely to mean a significant increase in cost.
In a 2006 interview with Geeknights, a talk radio show (self-described as being for hobbyists, tinkerers, and, for lack of a better word, geeks. The hosts "Rym and Scott delve into topics ranging from computer science to Eurogaming, anime to fantasy fiction, indie comics to gadgetry"), in which Vowles again denied a possible move, and noted how determined Baltimore City was to keep the convention around.  "Baltimore at this point is motivated to keep us, and they're putting their money where their mouth is, so to speak. This year we've seen a noted increase in city support for the event. And frankly, we know pretty much exactly how to use Baltimore's space, and we know all the local players, from hotels to venues to vendors."
As Otakon has increasingly made use of the 1st Mariner Arena for large events, there is concern  about proposals to shut down or relocate that facility in the future. 