The music video opens with a man in a trenchcoat wandering near a street corner. He then sees a young man talking on a cell phone about to get hit by a New Jersey Transit bus, and pulls him back just in the nick of time, and then walks away. The young man starts staring at other people as the song begins. 
Eventually, the viewer sees that the young man sees timers with glowing numbers counting down above the heads of everyone around him; except himself. To everyone else he appears to be crazy. He is baffled by the timers until he sees an elderly woman being brought out on a stretcher: when the timer above her head reaches zero, she dies. Shortly afterwards he sees a young woman sitting down and peeling an orange. She has numbers above her head and in front of her pregnant stomach. He also sees that he cannot see the timer above his own head, and apparently realizes that he needs to save someone just as he himself was saved. He soon spots a business woman about to enter her car, and sees her timer rapidly dwindles much faster than it should, dropping from the millions to the single digits in a matter of seconds. He pulls her out of the way just before her car is crushed by a falling statue in a crate (which, in an example of foreshadowing, can be seen in midair about halfway through the video ). The young man then walks away just as the man who had saved him did, leaving the businesswoman astonished as ''she'' now sees the timers over everyone else's heads. The young man then leaves, again talking on a cell phone.
The band is in an apartment; Chad Kroeger and Ryan Peake are singing on camera, but no instruments are played; the other band members are seen simply staring at the camera, or into space.
The man with the trenchcoat in the beginning of the video was presumably afflicted with the same condition as the two others in the video, judging by the way he looks around above people's heads and saves the man just before he is hit.
There has been a lot of discussion and debate into who exactly the song is "calling out for".  Some believe for it to be a lover of the protagonist, while some believe it to have religious meaning, with themes of forgiveness and redemption, with lyrics such as "Heaven's gates won't open up for me" and "teach me wrong from right".  So far Nickelback has not specifically addressed this uncertainty.