Team New Zealand has become a household name in their home country following their consecutive wins in the America's Cup in 1995 and 2000.  In doing this, they became the first team from a country outside the United States to successfully win and then defend the America's Cup.  Their success in America's Cup competitions have contributed to New Zealand's reputation for producing world-class sailors and boat designers.  Emirates Team New Zealand is currently competing in the World Match Racing Tour.  Led by their skipper Adam Minoprio, they are widely expected to be the basis for a future America's Cup campaign for New Zealand.
Three challenges were launched before the founding of Team New Zealand, all of these backed by Michael Fay.
New Zealand entered the America's Cup competition in 1984, when Marcel Fachler, a Belgian then living in Sydney, entered as a challenger following Australia II's victory.  Later the campaign's director, former government minister Anthony "Aussie" Malcolm, brought in Michael Fay to help organize and finance the challenge.
In 1986 off Fremantle, Australia ''KZ 7'' was the most dominant boat in the rounds robin competition, winning 33 of 34 starts.  In the Semi's she swept ''French Kiss'' 4 races to nil, and reached the Louis Vuitton Cup Finals, where she lost to Dennis Conner and Stars & Stripes 87.  
Despite failing to reach the America's Cup as the challenger yacht, the Kiwi challenge drew great attention through their fast boat and capable sailing.
Five months after the completion of the Royal Perth Yacht Club's America's Cup competition, Fay issued a challenge to the San Diego Yacht Club.  Using a strict reading of the Deed of Gift, Fay realized he could challenge with any yacht that was 90 feet or less at the waterline and require the defending yacht club to meet him in ten months time.  He worked with designer Bruce Farr and Tom Schnackenberg to build a gigantic monohull called New Zealand or ''KZ 1'' . The boat was built by Steve Martin in Mt Wellington, Auckland and was launched on March 27, 1988.
Fay challenged this outcome in court, claiming the defenders were "not sporting" in sailing a catamaran against his big boat.  He won the initial ruling, but the finding of the lower court was overturned on appeal, and the outcome on the water was made to stand. The appellate court decision was then upheld when Fay pressed the issue before the New York State Supreme Court, thus ending the most sordid and controversial of the America's Cup competitions.
Fay challenged again in 1992 with the distinctively red "NZL 20".  In competition, Team New Zealand had another outstanding effort, and progressed through the regatta to the finals of the Louis Vuitton Cup where they faced Paul Cayard and the Italian syndicate of Il Moro di Venezia.  Leading 4-1 in the series, a protest from Il Moro over NZL 20's use of a bowsprit was upheld.  The result of the protest was that Team New Zealand was docked one of its race wins (bringing the series score back to 3-1) and was required to remove the bowsprit.  The New Zealand team never recovered from the enforced changes and blow to morale, losing the next 4 races and the series, 5-3.
Following the 1992 America's Cup competition, Michael Fay withdrew from backing the New Zealand challenges for the Cup.  A new effort under the leadership of Peter Blake and Alan Sefton began putting together a team, raising funds and gaining support for the Royal New Zealand Yacht Squadron.
In 1995 TNZ stunned the world, beating Team Dennis Conner 5-0 in a "Blackwash" off San Diego, California after winning the right to challenge in the Louis Vuitton Cup. The 1995 challenge had everything - the boat was fast (their winning yacht NZL 32 was nicknamed Black Magic), they had a smart crew led by skipper Russell Coutts, and they were ably led by Sir Peter Blake. Coining the famous phrase by sailing commentator Pete Montgomery, "The America's Cup is now New Zealand's cup!".
Both NZL 32 and NZL-38 were built under the supervision of Tim Gurr at the McMullen & Wing yard, Auckland, New Zealand and were launched in September 1993.
The winning yacht NZL 32 was shipped back to New Zealand and gifted to Te Papa Museum. On May 1, 2008, It was announced by the Hon. Prime Minister Helen Clark, that NZL-32 will become the new centrepiece to the Sir Peter Blake Exhibition entitled: 'Blue Water Black Magic' in the New Zealand National Maritime Museum on Hobson Wharf, Viaduct Harbour, Auckland. NZL-32 is to be suspended from the ceiling with numerous exhibits surrounding her about Sir Peter's life.  In addition many other New Zealand designed yachts will be on display along with stories and history of New Zealand yachtsmen and women. Construction on the new exhibition commenced in July 2008 and is planned to be completed by November 2009.
TNZ (NZL 60) beat Italy's Prada Challenge (Luna Rossa) 5-0 in the 2000 match held on Auckland's Hauraki Gulf. On crossing the finish line in the final race, commentator Peter Montgomery exclaimed "The America's Cup is still New Zealand's cup!!" - echoing his comment in 1995 America's Cup.
In 2003, Team New Zealand's eight-year reign ended after they were defeated 5-0 by Swiss-based challenger Alinghi. TNZ dubbed their campaign the "Loyal" campaign, featuring a Silver fern flag with the word "Loyal" and an existing song of the same name by New Zealand musician Dave Dobbyn. This was largely due to the Swiss boat featuring many of the afterguard members from TNZ's previous campaigns (notably Russell Coutts and Brad Butterworth) which, along with a fast boat and a lack of reliability aboard TNZ's NZL 82, contributed to the win.
In 2007, the re-branded Emirates Team New Zealand won the Louis Vuitton Cup and advanced to the 32nd America's Cup against defenders Alinghi. Team New Zealand lost the series 2 - 5 to Alinghi, the last by a single second. 
In late 2003, TNZ announced their intention to challenge Alinghi at the 2007 Valencia America's Cup, with Emirates on board as title sponsor, and Grant Dalton as Team Boss. Dean Barker skippered a more international team than ever before. TNZ were among the "big four" syndicates leading up to the 2007 Cup. The big four consisted of TNZ, Alinghi, BMW Oracle Racing and Luna Rossa.
In the 2007 Louis Vuitton Cup to select the challenger to face Alinghi, TNZ lost their first match to Mascalzone Latino-Capitalia Team, a team who they had beaten in each of their five encounters in the Louis Vuitton Acts. They then won their next 7 races, before losing the final two in round robin 1 to Luna Rossa and BMW Oracle Racing which put them in third place at the end of the first round robin. In Round Robin 2, Team New Zealand were undefeated throughout, taking first place from BMW Oracle Racing. They won their semi-final 5-2 series against Desafio Espanol 2007 and qualified for the finals of the Louis Vuitton Cup 2007 against Luna Rossa. In the finals, they defeated Luna Rossa with a whitewash victory of 5-0, winning the Louis Vuitton Cup and the right to challenge Alinghi for the America's Cup.
On July 3, 2007, Emirates Team New Zealand lost their final race to Alinghi bringing Alinghi's race wins to 5, successfully defending the 32nd America's cup.
Alinghi wins the America's Cup,  5-2.
Team New Zealand hosted the Louis Vuitton Pacific Series in January and February 2009 on the Waitemata Harbour in the Hauraki Gulf, Auckland. Team New Zealand defeated Alinghi by a margin of 3 races to 1 in the final. The final races were reduced to the best of five due to difficult weather conditions resulting in the loss of one day's racing.
In March 2010, the Louis Vuitton Trophy regatta returned to Auckland after the first regatta of the series in Nice in November 2009 won by Italy's Azzura team. On Sunday 21 March 2010, Emirates Team New Zealand won the final of the Louis Vuitton Trophy Auckland regatta with an emphatic 56 sec win over Mascalzone Latino.
On 13 April 2010, along with Camper, the Spanish-based international footwear manufacturer, Emirates Team New Zealand announced that it would compete in the Volvo Ocean Race in 2011-12. The campaign will be run by Emirates Team New Zealand and will be skippered by Olympic and round-the-world yachtsman Chris Nicholson. This announcement led to Emirates Team New Zealand being recognised at the forefront of yachting teams worldwide, as they are actively competing or preparing for the America' Cup, Volvo Ocean Race, TP-52 Med Cup and the Louis Vuitton Trophy simultaneously. 
On the 21st April 2011, Grant Dalton and Emirates Team New Zealand announced their entry for the 2013 America's Cup regatta to be held in San Francisco in 2013. New sponsor Nespresso came on board through parent company Nestle. Grant Dalton expressed his gratitude to numerous corporate interests based around the world, namely Matteo De Nora and Stephen Tindall among others, in keeping the team afloat through the intervening years in what has been a difficult fours years since the last multi-challenger event in Valencia 2007. 