Bay Path College is a member of the Cooperating Colleges of Greater Springfield, an eight-college consortium along with American International College, Elms College, Holyoke Community College, Springfield College, Springfield Technical Community College, Western New England College and Westfield State College.
Bay Path College was founded in 1897 in Springfield, Massachusetts as a coeducational institute offering business teacher training, secretarial science, business administration and accounting degrees. In 1945, the College moved to Longmeadow and became one of three schools in the nation to revert to single-sex enrollment.  Four years later, the institution received approval to be named Bay Path Junior College. In 1988 Massachusetts Board of Regents of Higher Education authorized Bay Path Junior College to become a four-year degree-granting institution, and its name was changed officially to Bay Path College.
Bay Path's annual Women's Professional Development Conferences began in 1996.  Since then, the Conference has featured speakers like former U.S. Labor and Transportation Secretary Elizabeth Dole, PBS/ABC news correspondent Cokie Roberts, NBC news chief and foreign affairs correspondent Andrea Mitchell, former U.S. Secretary of State Madeleine Albright, and writer Maya Angelou.  Former British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher had been invited in 1988 to be a guest speaker at Springfield Symphony Hall.
One-Day-A-Week Saturday College was established at Longmeadow's main campus in 1999.  The following year, the College was authorized to grant the degree of Master of Science in Communications and Information Management. Authorization to grant the same degree in Occupational Therapy was given in 2002.  A campus was established in central Massachusetts in 2003.
Her Royal Highness Princess Maha Chakri Sirindhorn of Thailand received an honorary degree from Bay Path in 2004.
The College was authorized to grant a master   s degree in business administration in Entrepreneurial Thinking and Innovative Practices in 2005, and a master of science in Nonprofit Management and Philanthropy in 2007. Also in 2007, both the Burlington campus and Bay Path Online were established.
Dr. Carol A. Leary was inaugurated the fifth President of Bay Path College in 1995. Dr. Leary introduced The Bay Path College Education Stimulus Plan: a three-part plan to help students and families get the best value in higher education.
Located in the historic New England town of Longmeadow, Massachusetts, the  Main Campus is five minutes from Springfield, one of the state   s largest metropolitan areas and the business and cultural center of the region. It has over 1400 students enrolled in the Undergraduate College for Women, the One-Day-A-Week Saturday College for adult women, and the Graduate School for men and women. The Campus with its long- tree lined driveway with inviting landscape has the look and feel of traditional New England college.
Summer Programs- Kitchen Sink: A Women Writers' Weekend, Film Matters, Animation Matters, Illustration Matters, GoGirls, Girls in Trees, It's MY Business, and such are also offered on the Main Campus.
The Central Mass. Campus offers the One-Day-A-Week Saturday College for adult women and an MS in Education/Special Education for men and women. The campus is conveniently located on the Sturbridge/Charlton line in the JRD Building. Classes are held in the state-of-the-art classrooms in the JRD Building and at the newly renovated Tantasqua Regional High School.
Established in 2007 through a partnership with Burlington High School, the Burlington Campus offers the highly successful and accelerated One-Day-A-Week Saturday College for adult women, and the accelerated MS in Education/Special Education for men and women.
Bay Path College is accredited by the New England Association of Schools and Colleges, Inc., through its Commission on Institutions of Higher Education (NEASC).
With over 30 traditional undergraduate majors and minors, and average class size of 17 students, Bay Path lays emphasis on leadership, innovation and communication needed to succeed in the workplace. The college features majors that are heavily-focused on practical, hands-on application of course work, and students take the majority of their credits within their major. The College offers Certificates, Associate, Baccalaureate, Post Baccalaureate Certificates, and Graduate Programs. State-of-the art resources including the Hatch Virtual Library with access to 6,500 full-text sources are available to students.
Top five majors offered at the College are Forensic Science, Psychology, Business, Criminal Justice and Occupational Therapy. Bay Path's Occupational Therapy Program has been granted accreditation by the Accreditation Council for Occupational Therapy Education (ACOTE) of the American Occupational Therapy Association (AOTA).
For the fifth year in a row, Bay Path College made the elite top tier for the Best Baccalaureate Colleges in the North in the 2009 edition of "America's Best Colleges" by U.S. News & World Report.
Bay Path is a competitive NCAA Division III school which competes in the New England Collegiate Conference in the following varsity sports: Soccer, Tennis, Volleyball, Basketball, Cross Country, Softball and Field Hockey.