The '''Baltimore Convention Center''' is a convention and exhibition hall located in downtown Baltimore, Maryland. The Center is a municiple building owned and operated by the City of Baltimore. The facility was constructed in two separate phases: the original Center, with 425,000&nbsp;square feet&nbsp;(39,500&nbsp;m  ) of exhibition and meeting space, opened in August 1979 at a cost of $51.4 million. A $151 million expansion, which increased the Center's total size to 1,225,000&nbsp;square feet&nbsp;(113,800&nbsp;m  ), was completed in April 1997.  The 752-room, city-owned Hilton Baltimore hotel opened in August 2008, connected to the convention center by an enclosed skywalk bridge. Another expansion to the Baltimore Convention Center has been proposed that includes a new 500 room hotel and a 18,500 seat arena.
As was the case with Harborplace, which opened in 1980; the Maryland Science Center, which opened in 1976; and the National Aquarium in Baltimore, which opened in 1981, the Convention Center was intended to be a catalyst for tourism, an important part of the City's post-manufacturing economic development plans. An Abell Foundation report in June 2005 describes the Convention Center as having been "built as an economic development tool to attract to Baltimore conventions, trade shows, and meetings that would leave in the city millions of dollars spent on lodging, food, entertainment, and other services." (Controversy, 2005, p. 3) A report on economic development in the area, entitled ''Subsidizing the Low Road: Economic Development in Baltimore'', states that "public and non-profit facilities such as the Maryland Science Center, the World Trade Center, the Convention Center, and the National Aquarium" (''Subsidizing'', 2002, p. 11) were part of then-mayor Schaefer's "focus on real estate, retailing and tourism sectors" (p. 10), as areas for growth, as well as his utilization of "'public/private partnerships' to pursue economic development" (p. 11).
During the next two decades, due in part to the success of the Convention Center and the other attractions, Oriole Park at Camden Yards, Sports Legends Museum at Camden Yards, M&T Bank Stadium, Power Plant Live!, and the Reginald F. Lewis Museum of Maryland African-American History, have joined the area, creating a ten-block plus entertainment and cultural destination at Baltimore's Inner Harbor, further increasing tourist dollars flowing into the region.
A June 2005 Greater Baltimore Committee report on tourism in Baltimore illustrates the importance of tourism in the current Baltimore region's economy:
One convention that has been reported by the ''Baltimore Business Journal'' to have had a major economic impact in 2002-2005 for Baltimore is Otakon, a convention that focuses on Anime and other facets of East Asian culture. The convention has resided in the Baltimore Convention Center since 1999.
Thus some   most notably Baltimore's former Mayor and now Governor of Maryland Martin O'Malley   feel that a hotel adjacent to the Convention Center will make it a more appealing site for conventions. The completed construction of a new Washington Convention Center and the National Harbor project in Prince George's County have intensified the debate.
In general, supporters of a convention hotel say that for the Convention Center to be viable in the future, and compete with other cities for conventions, a new, "Headquarters" hotel is necessary to guarantee enough rooms for group meetings. Opponents of the hotel project have either questioned the necessity of a new hotel altogether, or objected to the use of public dollars to finance the project.
The Baltimore Convention Center hotel broke ground in February 2006. The hotel's name is Hilton Baltimore, and it is connected to the Convention Center. Baltimore City used public revenue bonds to cover the $301.7 million cost of building the hotel, which has 752 rooms and is the city's largest hotel. It opened in August 2008.
In Fall 2010, a local influential business group, the Greater Baltimore Committee, proposed an estimated $900 million project that would demolish the 1979-wing of the Baltimore Convention Center bounded by Sharp, Pratt, Charles and Conway Streets and the nearby Sheraton Inner Harbor Hotel and the attached parking lot and replacing the buildings would be a four-story 760,000 SF convention center expansion, an 18,500 seat arena that will replace Baltimore's existing 1st Mariner Arena over two levels of underground parking, a new 500 room Sheraton hotel and stores and restaurants facing Pratt, Charles and Conway Streets. At the time, the $900 million price tag was the only obstacle with the proposal.
However on May 25, 2011, at the annual meeting for the Greater Baltimore Committee, it was announced that the owner of the Sheraton Inner Harbor hotel, local business and construction magnate, Williard Hackerman made an offer that he would be willing to finance more than half of the proposed $900 million price tag and would be willing to build the hotel and the arena which is estimated to cost $500 million and the remainder, $400 million for the convention center expansion would need to be financed by the State of Maryland and Baltimore City, the offer is contingent on whether the city and state can move the convention center expansion project forward. The offer received a positive reception from both Baltimore City Mayor Stephanie Rawlings-Blake and Maryland Governor Martin O'Malley who both have submitted requests to the Maryland Stadium Authority to conduct a feasibility study on the project that is due by the end of 2011.
Visit Baltimore, the architects involved and others have said that this project is unique in that no other cities in the nation would have a combination arena-hotel-convention center the size of the proposed project in Baltimore.
When the 1996 expansion to the Baltimore Convention Center opened, the convention center was ranked 28th largest in the nation in terms of exhibition and meeting space, 15 years later, the convention center plummeted to 73rd largest and as a result, Baltimore is losing convention business. Visit Baltimore reports that the Hilton Baltimore Convention Center Hotel that opened in August 2008 is helping but since the opening of the Hilton, the city has lost over 700,000 hotel-night bookings due to the convention center being too small to meet the needs of a group or the dates the group wanted was not available but expanding the convention center would allow the city to accommodate more than one large meeting or convention at a time. The Greater Baltimore Committee estimates that with the proposed arena-hotel-convention center, Baltimore could accommodate as many as 300 new convention groups that cannot utilize Baltimore currently due to the size of the convention center.
On June 2, 2011, the Baltimore Sun reported that Mayor Stephanie Rawlings-Blake and Governor Martin O'Malley wants the Maryland Stadium Authority to pay for the estimated $150,000 feasibility study that will determine the "estimate of taxes that the project would generate" and if the study finds the project to be viable, O'Malley and Rawlings-Blake wants "an analysis of potential financing options and a strategy for moving the work forward." The Maryland Stadium Authority is expected to consider the feasibility study request at a June 14th meeting.
On June 14, 2011, the Baltimore Sun reported that the Maryland Stadium Authority unanimously approved the feasibility request with a 7-0 vote however the Maryland Stadium Authority wants the city of Baltimore to pay for part of the $150,000 cost for the feasibility study.
The Baltimore Convention Center is located within a superblock bounded by Charles Street, Pratt Street, Conway Street, and Howard Streets.  The east and west halves of the Baltimore Convention Center are linked by an enclosed skywalk bridge over Sharp Street. The total land area of the Baltimore Convention Center is 608,968&nbsp;sq&nbsp;ft&nbsp;(56,575&nbsp;m  ), or  and the total enclosed area is 400,000&nbsp;sq&nbsp;ft&nbsp;(40,000&nbsp;m  ). 
1 West Pratt Street (corner of Pratt and S. Charles Street)
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
The west end of the facility   corner of Pratt and Howard Street   is served by the Convention Center/Pratt Street Station of the Maryland Transit Administration's light rail system, providing direct links to both BWI Airport and Baltimore Penn Station (MARC Penn Line and Amtrak Northeast Corridor trains).
A major Maryland Transit Administration bus stop is located at the intersection of Pratt & Sharp Streets in front of the Baltimore Convention Center, near the western   half of the Baltimore Convention Center (Pratt Street Entrance).
The Camden Yards Light Rail Stop and Camden Line (MARC) station are also within walking distance of the facility.