The association advocates on behalf of the industry at all levels of government. It has been a vocal supporter to try to get more spectrum for the U.S. wireless industry as it sees a    looming spectrum crisis    on the horizon. It supports the Federal Communications Commission   s (FCC) National Broadband Plan, which calls for 500 MHz of spectrum to be made available for commercial wireless purposes in the next ten years. In addition, CTIA has played roles in repealing the Internal Revenue Service listed property rule for mobile devices, and by participating in the development of model state legislation that would make manual texting while driving illegal. It also supported the 2010 passage of the 21st Century Telecommunications Act, which ensured every American has access to wireless services. Regulatory activity that CTIA played a key part in involved the FCC   s adoption of a    shot clock    ruling in November 2009 on tower sting applications, which helps to ensure that local zoning authorities respond to request in a timely manner. Other examples of CTIA advocacy efforts occurred when the association was instrumental in the passage of both the Electronic Communications Privacy Act and the Telecommunications Disclosure & Dispute Resolution Act.
CTIA   s major services and functions on behalf of the wireless industry include:
CTIA also supports industry initiatives such as Wireless AMBER Alerts; On the Road, Off the Phone, a teen-focused safe driving public service announcement campaign; text4baby, a free mobile educational service to promote the birth of healthy babies; and the    Be Smart. Be Fair. Be Safe: Responsible Wireless Use    program to help parents, educators, and policymakers teach kids about responsible mobile behavior, driving, and eco-friendly initiatives.
CTIA provides a semi-annual industry survey that tracks trends and use patterns in the high-velocity growth market for new devices, new services and consumer choices. Conducted since 1985, these surveys cover direct employment, number of cell sites, major categories of industry revenues, the average local monthly bill, the average length of call and other metrics. The average local monthly bill includes voice and data usage and is developed on a weighted basis, to avoid skewing the figures. It is not an average of averages. No adjustments are made to these figures.
The survey tracks the growing trend toward consumers using more wireless data service, which includes statistics on wireless data revenues and wireless data traffic. The survey also develops information on the number of reported wireless subscriber units or    connections    for the responding systems, and an estimated total wireless connections figure for the United States taking into account non-responding systems, which is quite small, as CTIA receives responses from companies serving more than 95 percent of wireless subscriber connections.
The association also operates the industry's leading trade shows:
CTIA provides equipment testing and hardware certification programs for its nearly 300 members in the United States, and coordinates voluntary industry efforts to provide consumers with information regarding wireless products and services. This includes industry guidelines and wireless accessibility for individuals with disabilities.
CTIA is governed by a 35-member Board of Directors composed of six officers and 29 directors. These individuals are elected to serve for a one-year term, effective January 1-December 31.
These are the 2011 Officers:
These are the 2011 Directors:
Founded in 1984 as the Cellular Telephone Industries Association, CTIA adopted the name, CTIA-The Wireless Association in 2004 to reflect that the wireless industry now included data and other communications services in addition to telephone service.
CTIA   s positions include    
CTIA-The Wireless Association and the wireless industry believe that the U.S. must identify and allocate additional licensed spectrum for commercial wireless use in order to meet the growing demand by consumers and businesses for mobile wireless broadband services.
Spectrum is the backbone of the wireless industry     without it, the applications, speed, devices and other innovations of the wireless ecosystem could be in jeopardy. Even though the U.S. wireless industry is the world   s most efficient commercial spectrum user, the explosive consumer demand for wireless broadband will quickly outpace carriers    network capacity. Each year, wireless carriers are investing billions of dollars to meet the insatiable consumer demand. Industry watchers agree that lack of spectrum is an urgent need.
FCC Chairman Julius Genachowski referred to spectrum as the    oxygen    needed to achieve universal broadband service, the key goal of the FCC National Broadband Plan (NBP), released in March 2010. That plan called for the allocation of 500&nbsp;MHz of additional spectrum for the wireless industry. The NBP calls for 300&nbsp;MHz of this spectrum to be made available within three years. In June 2010, President Barack Obama issued a memorandum in support of the NBP   s spectrum goals. CTIA supports these announcements, and also supports the Radio Spectrum Inventory Act (S. 649) and its companion bill (H.R. 3125), which would require an inventory of radio spectrum bands managed by the National Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA) and the FCC. In April 2010, H.R. 3125 passed the House. Identifying where additional spectrum can be relocated for commercial wireless use is the first step in designating the valuable spectrum the wireless industry needs in order to continue to meet consumer   s increasing demand. The evaluation process continues as part of the Obama administration   s support for the National Broadband Plan.
In late 2009, the CTIA advocated to the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) for the destruction of over-the-air terrestrial television, which was just forced through a very expensive transition, so that its members could takeover the UHF radio spectrum for their own use.  The National Association of Broadcasters and MSTV countered by noting that it is a waste of bandwidth to stream multiple copies of a TV show that could instead be watched on a mobile TV broadcast.  The new free-to-air ATSC-M/H mobile standard for TV stations is competition to its own members' pay TV business model (FLO TV and video on demand).
Countering this view by the broadcast industry, in a December 2009 joint filing, CTIA and the Consumer Electronics Association (CEA) proposed a common-sense approach to repurposing significant amounts of television broadcast spectrum that is particularly well-suited for mobile broadband. The reengineering approach outlined in the joint proposal would accomplish the following: enable broadcasters to move to more efficient network architecture; maintain free over-the-air television for consumers who choose that option; and free-up valuable spectrum for mobile broadband consumers.
CTIA   s and CEA   s position is that this transition would not cost broadcasters, nor would these upgrades impact consumers. While there are many challenges and complexities involved in this process, CTIA and CEA believe this proposal offers a feasible way to meet over-the-air television broadcasters    needs while recapturing significant amounts of spectrum for mobile broadband to enable next-generation wireless services.
Scientists have been studying cell phone use and possible health effects for many years. Leading global health authorities, such as the WHO, the U.S. National Institutes of Health, National Cancer Institute. Retrieved December 9, 2010. and the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) FDA.gov. Retrieved December 9, 2010. have reviewed this research or have conducted their own, and have found that the available scientific evidence does not show that the use of wireless phones is associated with any health problems, including cancer.
 has adopted safety standards governing radiofrequency (RF) fields from wireless phones, and has determined that all cell phones sold in the United States must meet the FCC   s RF exposure standard. In adopting the current RF safety standards, the FCC stated that its standards represent the    best scientific thought and are sufficient to protect the public health.    The FCC   s RF standards governing wireless phones incorporate a 50 fold safety standard.
The FDA, which also has regulatory power over wireless phones and helped to develop and approve the FCC standard, has similarly concluded that    the weight of scientific evidence has not linked cell phones with any health problems.   
The FCC, FDA, and other government agencies work cooperatively to monitor the ongoing scientific research to determine if the safety standards need to be adjusted.
The Interphone project, coordinated by the International Agency for Research on Cancer, is the largest study of cell phone use and brain tumors ever undertaken and included substantial numbers of subjects using cell phones for 10 years or longer, found that    overall, no increase in risk   was observed with the use of mobile phones.    Health and telecommunications agencies will continue to monitor ongoing research on the safety of cell phones. According to the FDA and WHO, among other organizations, the weight of scientific evidence has not effectively linked exposure to radio frequency energy from mobile devices with any known health problems.
Though some studies have concluded there is a link to an elevated risk, those studies have not been replicated and responsible expert authorities do not reach their conclusions based on the latest study. Instead, they base their conclusions on an evaluation of all of the relevant scientific research. Additional research can be used to fill gaps in the existing scientific work on this topic. For example, studies are being conducted on the effects of cell phone use by children and on even longer-term use. For more information about potential health effects of RF energy, see: the American Cancer Society, Food and Drug Administration, National Cancer Institute, World Health Organization and Federal Communications Commission.
Despite the evidence from these well-respected and highly credible organizations, some critics such as the Environmental Working Group (EWG) choose to ignore the decades of research. Instead, they state that    there is sufficient research that shows higher risk for brain and salivary gland tumors among heavy cell phone users. EWG encouraged consumers to look up their cell phone's radiation level, and to wear a headset when talking on the phone to limit their exposure.   
The FCC says that    Even though no scientific evidence currently establishes a definite link between wireless device use and cancer or other illnesses, and even though all cell phones must meet established federal standards for exposure to RF energy, some consumers are skeptical of the science and/or the analysis that underlies the FCC   s RF exposure guidelines. Accordingly, some parties recommend taking measures to further reduce exposure to RF energy. The FCC does not endorse the need for these practices, but provides information on some simple steps that you can take to reduce your exposure to RF energy from cell phones."
More information and links to other resources, including long-term health studies and RF exposure standards information, is available at a resource CTIA makes available to consumers.