On March 6, 2011, the Supreme Court issued an opinion affirming that Skinner may sue under 42 U.S.C.    1983 (See Civil Rights Act of 1871) claiming that Texas' rules for seeking post-conviction DNA testing upon which the judges rely are too narrow or restrictive.  The ruling, however, did not specifically grant Skinner the DNA testing he had been seeking.
Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg wrote that a Section 1983 suit was available in cases where the relief sought by the inmate would 
Skinner echoed this strategy to a CNN reporter: "all the District Attorney's gotta do is turn over the evidence, test it and let the chips fall where they may. If I'm innocent, I go home, if I'm guilty I die..."
Skinner lived with the victims and admitted that he was in the home when the murders took place, but claims he was in a comatose condition from a near lethal dose of codeine and alcohol. In a letter published in April 2010, Skinner put forth a new claim that he was colorblind and accidentally ingested the near-lethal mix because he had confused the victim's "fuschia pink" glass (which contained codeine) with his own "baby blue" glass. Twila Busby was murdered in the living room just feet from the couch where Skinner claims he was lying passed out on a sofa. 
After the murders, Skinner claims he was roused off the couch by one of the mortally wounded victims   Elwin "Scooter" Caler.  Caler died on the porch of a neighbor of Twila Busby.  Skinner made his way to the home of Andrea Joyce Reed, 4 blocks away, and she let him in.
Reed initially testified that Skinner threatened her if she called the police.  Later, however, Reed recanted that claim and said Skinner merely "told" her not to call the police   never actually threatening her.
Skinner was arrested several hours later, being found in the darkened front bedroom of Reed's home.  When he was arrested, Skinner was wearing clothes bearing blood spatters that were DNA-matched to two of the victims.
Skinner married Sandrine Ageorges-Skinner while on Texas death row in 2008.  Sandrine Ageorges-Skinner, a French national, has been an anti-death penalty activist for more than 30 years   well before she met Skinner.  She has corresponded with numerous death row inmates and has participated in numerous protests against the death penalty.  Sandrine Ageorges-Skinner was banned from visiting or corresponding with Mr. Skinner because of violations of prison policies   a charge both claim was fabricated but, because the Texas Department of Criminal Justice refuses to release records, the claim cannot be supported or contradicted. Sandrine Ageorges-Skinner has received the official support of the French Government in her persistent efforts to save her husband from execution and prove his innocence.
On July 22, 2010, Skinner's lawyer presented his brief to the U.S. Supreme Court.  In it, he asks one question: "may a convicted prisoner seeking access to biological evidence for DNA testing assert that claim in a civil rights action under 42 U.S.C.    1983, or is such a claim cognizable only in a petition for writ of habeas corpus?"
Skinner's lawyer's brief also notes: "Mr. Skinner   s suit for access to DNA evidence does not challenge the validity of his underlying conviction or sentence."
Skinner's petition was heard by the Supreme Court on October 13, 2010 at 10:00. The oral argument was widely covered by, among others media, the Washington Post.
On March 7, 2011, the decision of the Supreme Court agreed that the civil rights action was appropriate in this case.
On March 24, Thirty five minutes before the scheduled execution, the U.S. Supreme Court granted Skinner a stay of execution to allow time to consider his petition for writ of certiorari.  
On May 24, 2010, the U.S. Supreme Court announced that it would review Skinner's case. The justices agreed to grant full review of the issue his lawyers raised: whether prisoners can use a federal civil-rights law to request DNA testing after their convictions.  
At issue is whether post-conviction DNA testing is a civil right even though the DNA, in this case, was available at trial but Harold Comer, the appointed attorney of Skinner at trial, chose not to have it tested at the time because he believed it could be damaging to the case.  Today, Mr.Comer says that even though he still defends his trial strategy, he would now request the testing. According to Professor David Protess, "Comer failed to request DNA testing, or present compelling evidence about the alternative suspect. And, at the sentencing hearing, he failed to object to using Skinner's prior convictions -- which he had prosecuted -- to justify the death penalty.". 
Gray County District Attorney Lynn Switzer responded to the Supreme Court's decision to hear Skinner's case in a letter to an Amarillo News Station.  Switzer accused Skinner of "gaming the system" and said that, on two previous appeals, Skinner had failed to show how additional testing could exonerate him. The position of Mrs. Switzer is based on the decisions of The Texas Circuit Court of Appeals (CCA) which writes" The Appellant's request to compare fingerprint evidence would not provide a reasonable probability of the Appellant's innocence, but instead would only demonstrate the presence of a third party.". So the official position of the Texas authorities is that demonstrating the existence of a third party, being not an actual proof of innocence, is not a point to investigate.
On May 26, 2011, the Senate of Texas voted unanimously for the Senate Bill 122, a Criminal Justice Reform Bill, expanding access to post-conviction DNA testing. This bill, will require testing "whenever there is biological evidence that has not previously been tested, or when the evidence can be subjected to newer techniques that might be more revealing than the results of an older test". The passing of this law would prevent Texas courts from blocking access to DNA testing in cases where DNA was not tested because of a decision by the original Defense attorney, such as in Skinner's case. 
Skinner's appointed defense attorney in the trial, Harold Lee Comer was a former district attorney who had prosecuted Skinner in earlier cases, before losing his position and pleading guilty to criminal charges over the mishandling of cash seized in drug cases. The Washington Post cited Mr. Comer's appointment as a possible case of cronyism, where Mr. Comer was appointed to a highly-paid case by a friend in order to help him raise the funds needed to pay off his overdue federal income taxes.
Portions of the trial relied on the testimony of Andrea Joyce Reed who owned the house where Skinner was found by police several hours after the murders.  Andrea Reed recanted several specific elements of her testimony after the trial.  Reed's daughter's testimony, however, contradicted portions of the new claims and ultimately a magistrate found Reed's recantation not to be credible.
Mrs. Reed claimed that she had given false testimony at trial after having been threatened to be charged as an accomplice to capital murder, to have children taken away and to have her daughter called to testify at trial.  Among the new claims, Mrs. Reed said that Skinner told her not to call anybody (police) but did not threaten to kill her (as Reed testified in court).  Mrs. Reed also claimed that she believed Skinner's sentence "I have kicked Twila. She's dead" to be "a drunken fantasy like the other violent stories that he told me to explain how he was injured."
Skinner has never explained why he didn't call the police and why he instructed Mrs. Reed not to call the police that evening.  The only explanation Skinner has given for this is: "The phone cord was jerked out of the wall. Nobody could call from our house. Scooter tried."
No physician has testified or affirmed Tarpley's opinion either at trial or in the evidentiary hearings on appeal.
At trial, the defense's toxicology expert, Dr. Lowry, had stated that based on the alcohol and codeine in his blood, Hank Skinner was too intoxicated to be able to physically commit the murders, but his testimony was weakened by the original statements of Andrea Joyce Reed, which led the jury to accept the prosecution's theory that Skinner had developed a resistance to alcohol and codeine which would have allowed him to function even under heavy doses.  Dr. Lowry did not testify to when, exactly, Skinner ingested the codeine.  The timing of the codeine ingestion has been called into question, but at trial, prosecution witness Howard Mitchell claimed that 90 minutes before the crime, Skinner was lying on the living room couch completely unresponsive.
Dr. Harold Kalant, professor emeritus of Toxicology and Pharmacology at the University of Toronto, reviewed several of Skinner's trial documents.  Based on his review, Dr. Kalant wrote a "Declaration" dated February 16, 2010, which he distributed to several anti-death penalty organizations.  Dr. Kalant wrote that he believed Dr. Lowry underestimated Skinner's blood-alcohol content and the level of codeine ingested by Skinner.  Dr. Kalant wrote: "I wouldn't be surprised if the heavy drinker would be able to move about somewhat, but he would be very confused and badly impaired, and would have difficulty standing or walking in a coordinated manner".  Dr. Kalant based his calculations on the assumption that Skinner consumed the alcohol and codeine at 9:30 the evening of the murders.
Shortly before the murders Twila Busby, it is claimed, had been threatened by an uncle (killed in an automobile accident on January 5, 1997), Robert Donnell.  Though Skinner and his legal team have raised questions, Donnell was never considered to be a suspect by the D.A. or the police.
During cross-examination, at an evidentiary hearing in 2005, Deborah Ellis testified that she did not see any blood in the truck and that Donnell was just cleaning the truck.
According to the Texas Department of Public Safety, Donnell had no prior criminal history. According to the affidavit of Cliff Carpenter, Donnell had a criminal history in Oklahoma, for theft, embezzlement and burglary in the 1950s, and served three years in prison in 1989 for auto theft.  According to the State of Oklahoma, Robert E. Donnell (white/male, born May 5, 1930, 5'0" and 185&nbsp;lbs.) was incarcerated for 7 years (which may have included parole) for one conviction of auto theft beginning on November 29, 1988.  No other criminal history is recorded in Oklahoma   nor is any assaultive offense attributed to Donnell.
Though Skinner's theory raises the possibility that Donnell raped Twila Busby, a photograph of Busby's body circulated by Skinner's defense team shows Busby's pants were snug around her waist at the time her body was found. This would tend to contradict claims made by Skinner, on his website, that Busby was raped ("Next, the rape kit: When Twila was found, her pants were unbuttoned and unzipped, pulled down; her blouse was pushed up over her breasts.").
There is also an affidavit  by Mr. Ronald Campbell, an acquaintance of Twila Busby, who said that on the night of the murders he tried to place a collect call to Busby from the Gray County Jail, where he was an inmate, around 11:00 PM (2300 hrs).  Campbell claimed that the oldest son answered but couldn't summon Twila Busby to the phone.  Campbell claimed the boy sounded "upset and scared."  Campbell also claimed he could hear the noise of "one hell of a fight," in the background, and the deep voice of an unknown male individual who wasn't Skinner. Phone records didn't corroborate Campbell's statements   so his testimony was not used at trial.
Exactly how Skinner ingested the codeine, he said made him comatose, has never been clearly determined.  Skinner's website has always claimed (and still does) "it is believed that he was either accidentally or intentionally poisoned by the addition of the  pills to his drinks." 
In an April, 2010 letter responding to what Skinner called "false and undocumented allegations" circulating on the web, Skinner put forth a new theory that he was colorblind at the time and drank from the wrong cup.
Skinner himself explains: "A few years ago I learned that truth from a toxicologist who testified in another guy   s case, here. He says that once you reach a certain level of intoxication you go colorblind. Twila was always putting pills in her drink and sipping that one drink all evening. I later learned her girlfriend (G.S.) had given her 13 Fiorinal #4 codeine that she   d put in her drink. Twila and I had identical glasses but hers was fuschia pink, mine was baby medium blue. I vaguely remember seeing the dregs of pills in the bottom of my cup and getting sick, passing out. I couldn   t figure out how it got into my cup. So I thought someone must have poisoned me. I think now I was just too messed up and colorblind to tell our cups apart anymore, I accidentally got Twila   s cup and drank from it, thinking it was my cup."
Skinner's and his appellate team have repeatedly tried to obtain a DNA analysis on the rest of the items found at the crime scene; including fingernail clippings, a knife found on the porch of Busby's house and a second knife found in a plastic bag in the house, a towel with the second knife, a jacket next to Busby's body and any hairs found in her hands that were not destroyed in previous testing, and vaginal swabs taken from Twila Busby at the time of her autopsy. 
At the time of the trial, DNA analysis had been performed only on the clothes that Skinner was wearing at the time of his arrest, and the results were incriminating because DNA of two of the victims were found on the clothes.
All DNA that Skinner's defense team seeks to have analyzed, now, was available for testing at Skinner's original trial. Skinner's defense attorney at the time, Harold Comer, chose not to have it analyzed believing it could incriminate his client further.  Skinner contends that he never agreed with the decision by Comer.
During the post-conviction appeals, DNA analysis of only the hairs clutched in Twila's hand were tested and the results may have been either exculpatory (one of the head hairs and an unmatched fingerprint found on a plastic bag containing a bloodied knife excluded Skinner), or inconclusive, and no further analysis was made. All the requests for DNA testing of the other items have been denied on the grounds that Skinner's trial attorney did not seek DNA analysis. Lynn Switzer, the Gray County District Attorney, claims that additional testing would not prove Hank Skinner's innocence. The DNA issue is a key element in the Supreme Court decision decision to review the case in the fall of 2010.
The claim that Twila Busby had been raped was not raised at Skinner's trial. Further, medical examiner Dr. Elizabeth Peacock testified at trial that Twila Busby was not raped.
On November 27, 2009, the defense team filed a complaint in federal court against the Gray County DA, Lynn Switzer, for refusing to release the evidence to the defense for private DNA testing, which she could conceivably do without a court order. On January 15, the magistrate in charge of the complaint recommended that it be dismissed and on January 20, the Federal district Judge affirmed the dismissal. This decision is being appealed at the Federal Court of Appeals. In  January 2010, Hank Skinner wrote to Lynn Switzer a letter where he states that his former prosecutor John Mann lied about the results of the hair analysis, and concludes his letter "All what I am asking you, Madam, is to do the right thing and test the evidence.
The right for Skinner to bring suit under Civil Rights laws claiming that Texas law regarding post-conviction DNA testing was too restrictive was affirmed by the Supreme Court in March, 2011.
Skinner maintains he is innocent, and has repeatedly appealed his conviction both at state and federal levels.
For the post-conviction appeals, Rob Owen,  co-director of the University of Texas at Austin School of Law's Capital Punishment Clinic was appointed to represent Mr. Skinner.
Rob Owen has represented Mr. Skinner since 2004, after his previous court-appointed attorney, Steven Losch, died.
Skinner's new defense team obtained an evidentiary hearing in November 2005, the full transcript of which is available, along with numerous other legal documents, on the website set up to defend his case.
On May 14, 2008, a limited certificate of appealability was granted.
Skinner's  consecutive appeal, a federal habeas corpus petition centering on inadequate performance by his trial attorney on issues involving the investigation of an alternative suspect and a blood spatter analysis, was denied by the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit on July 14, 2009. On August 10, 2009, Skinner's Defense team introduced a new petition for a rehearing en banc with the 5th Circuit Court of Appeals. The petition was rejected on August 28, 2009.
On October 26, 2009, Judge Steven Emmert signed the order setting an execution date for Hank Skinner on February 24, 2010.  The date was then changed to March 24, due to procedural errors which rendered the original mandate invalid. The Texas Board of pardons and paroles voted unanimously against an additional stay and against a commutation of Skinner's sentence. Governor Rick Perry did not issue a decision as the US Supreme Court issued an unlimited stay of execution.
On November 23, 2009, Hank Skinner's attorneys filed a petition for writ of certiorari with the Supreme Court of the United States.
Skinner resides on death row in the Allan B. Polunsky Unit in Polk County, Texas.
Mr. Skinner is author of, and self-publishes a series of articles, "Hell Hole News" which covers a broad range of topics related to his case and the conditions on Texas' death row.
After a fellow death row inmate, Richard Tabler, used a smuggled cell phone to threaten a Texas State legislator from his jail cell, authorities conducted a series of raids aimed at confiscating the contraband phones.
During the raids, according to a statement issued by TDCJ's spokesperson Michelle Lyons, two SIM cards were found hidden in Skinner's bible. Skinner denied having a cell phone, but an x-ray revealed an illegal cell phone hidden in his rectum.
These facts turned out to be false allegations and Mr. Skinner was never charged for possession of a cell phone or SIM cards.
On March 17, 2010, Texas Attorney General Greg Abbott issued a media advisory relating to Skinner's upcoming execution and summarizing details of the case that sent Skinner to death row. 
Abbott's letter claims that DNA testing ''had'' been performed on the blood-stained clothing Skinner was found wearing at the time of his arrest, which matched two of the victims.  The letter doesn't give any reason for the State's refusal to analyze other key elements of evidence.
The advisory also reports that: Skinner had previously been convicted for assault on a police officer as well as several other felonies; that Skinner also had charges pending stemming from assault on two other police officers in Gun Barrel City, Texas; and that his ex-wife had testified in court that Skinner was abusive to her, and that she had left Skinner after he threatened to use an axe handle to beat her to death. According to Skinner, these accusations of assault were bogus. He writes "When I was arrested, the District Attorney had me under indictment for two felony crimes. He had previously had me arrested for a bogus burglary, but I had demanded the first examining trial in Gray County in seventeen years, before he could get me indicted, and proved all his allegations false". 
He also denies having threatened his ex-wife, who he began blaming as a party to Twila Busby's murder in a 2009 television interview.
On November 10, 2007, Al Jazeera International aired a two-part program entitled "American Justice - Fatal Flaws", the second part of which deals with wrongful convictions and evokes Hank's case and that of Curtis McCarty, who was exonerated from Oklahoma death row after 22 years.
As of February 2010, the Hank  Skinner case is included in the Medill Innocence project of Professor David Protess.
On February 24, Amarillo News Channel 10 posted its full, unedited exclusive 30-minute interview with Hank Skinner.
In March, 2010, The Skeptical Juror site carried a 10-part series reprising the facts of the Hank Skinner case.
On March 24, the evening Skinner's execution was stayed, Sandrine Ageorges-Skinner and Curtis McCarty, a former inmate on Oklahoma's death row who was exonerated by post-trial DNA analysis, were interviewed on Larry King Live. Both pleaded against the denial of analysis of the full available evidence and expressed their belief that Skinner is innocent.
On April 4, Twila Busby's daughter Lisa and Busby's uncle Dave Brito "broke years of silence" and gave an interview to News Channel 10 in Amarillo.  Lisa was the only one in her family to survive the murders and chose "to stay at her aunt and uncles' place -- keeping away from home because she was scared her mom's boyfriend  might turn violent after drinking that night at a New Year's Eve party."  Lisa Busby also appeared to advocate for Skinner's execution. "We're suffering. We have no closure. We have no peace because he's still alive," she said. Lisa finished her interview by agreeing that the testing needed to be done, saying "I mean test the DNA and get it over with  That way we have something of peace and closure."
On April 22, 2010, Skinner wrote Channel 10 a letter to "clarify" statements he made in an interview that was aired nationally.
On May 3 Channel 10 produced a followup piece containing Skinner's letter to them regarding the statement he made.  The statement in question related to the "violent stabbing and death of the beating victims" in the February interview.  On camera, Skinner said referring to the murders: "if it had to happen and it had to go that way I wished I had 'uv done it because I wouldn't have done 'em like that."
On May 5, Skinner took issue with "false and undocumented allegations" circulating on the web.
On May 25, 2010, Time Magazine published an article about the case: "In death penalty case, innocence has to matter".
On June 10, 2010, "Politics Daily" published a report of recent interviews of former jurors at Skinner's trial, which states "Many of the jurors interviewed were taken aback by the amount of untested evidence, stunned that even the blood on two of the murder weapons had not been analyzed. The seven jurors agreed that all the evidence should undergo DNA analysis" 