The vernacular names in other cultures and languages for ''Ceratonia siliqua'' include:  ''kharrub''; ;  or  ; ; ;     aruv; ; .
The ''Ceratonia siliqua'' tree grows up to  tall. The crown is broad and semi-spherical, supported by a thick trunk with brown rough bark and sturdy branches. Leaves are  long, alternate, pinnate, and may or may not have a terminal leaflet. It is frost-tolerant.
Most carob trees are dioecious. The trees blossom in autumn (September   October). The flowers are small and numerous, spirally arranged along the inflorescence axis in catkin-like racemes borne on spurs from old wood and even on the trunk (cauliflory); they are pollinated by both wind and insects. Male flowers produce a characteristic odour, resembling semen. 
The fruit is a pod that can be elongated, compressed, straight or curved, and thickened at the sutures. The pods take a full year to develop and ripen.  The ripe pods eventually fall to the ground and are eaten by various mammals, thereby dispersing the seed.  Likewise, carob consumed by humans is actually the dried (and sometimes roasted) pod, and not the 'nuts' or seeds.
The carob genus, ''Ceratonia'', belongs to the Fabaceae (legume) family, and is believed to be an archaic remnant of a part of this family now generally considered extinct.  It grows well in warm temperate and subtropical areas, and tolerates hot and humid coastal areas. As a xerophytic (drought-resistant) species, carob is well adapted to the ecological conditions of the Mediterranean region.  Trees prefer well drained loam and are intolerant of waterlogging, but the deep root systems can adapt to a wide variety of soil conditions and are fairly salt-tolerant.
While previously not believed to form nitrogen fixation nodules typical of the legume family, trees have been identified more recently with nodules containing bacteria believed to be from the Rhizobium genus.
Although used extensively for agriculture, carob can still be found growing wild in eastern Mediterranean regions, and has become naturalized in the west.  The carob tree is typical in the southern Portuguese region of the Algarve, where it has the name ''alfarrobeira'' (for the tree), and ''alfarroba'' (for the fruit), as well as in southern Spain (), Catalonia and Valencia (), Malta (), on the Italian islands of Sicily and Sardinia (), and in Southern Greece, Cyprus as well as many Greek islands such as Crete and Samos. The common Greek name is (), or (), meaning "wooden horn".  In Turkey, it is known as "keciboynuzu", meaning "goat's horn". The various trees known as ''algarrobo'' in Latin America (''Albizia saman'' in Cuba and four species of ''Prosopis'' in Argentina and Paraguay) belong to a different subfamily, Mimosoideae.
In late Roman times, the pure gold coin known as the solidus weighed 24 carat seeds (about 4.5&nbsp;grams). As a result, the carat also became a measure of purity for gold. Thus 24-carat gold means 100% pure, 12-carat gold means the alloy contains 50% gold, etc.
During the Second World War, it was common for the people of Malta to eat dried carob pods and prickly pears as a supplement to rationed food.
Carob was eaten in Ancient Egypt. It was also a common sweetener and was used in the hieroglyph for "sweet" (''nedjem''). Dried carob fruit is traditionally eaten on the Jewish holiday of Tu Bishvat. Carob juice drinks are traditionally drunk during the Islamic month of Ramadan. Also it is believed to be an aphrodisiac.
In Cyprus the carob syrup is known as Cyprus's black gold, and is widely exported.
In Malta a syrup (''gulepp tal-harrub'') is made out of carob pods. This is a traditional medicine for coughs and sore throat. A traditional sweet, eaten during Lent and Good Friday, is also made from carob pods in Malta. However, carob pods were mainly used as animal fodder in the Maltese Islands, apart from times of famine or war when they formed part of the diet of many Maltese.
In the Iberian Peninsula carob pods were used mainly as animal fodder, especially to feed donkeys.
Carob pods were an important source of sugar before sugarcane and sugar beets became widely available.
The Carob tree has particular significance in Jewish culture. Talmud claims that a carob tree takes 70 years to give fruit, as a result the planter could not generally expect to benefit directly from their own planting, but should do so for the good of future generations. This story is commonly known as "Honi and the Carob Tree" and is common even today with modern Jewish groups. 
Carob, dried or roasted and having a slightly sweet taste, in powder or chip form, is used as an ingredient in cakes and cookies. Carob is sometimes used as a substitute for chocolate. The seeds, also known as ''locust beans'', are used as animal feed. They are also the source of locust bean gum, a thickening agent used in numerous processed foods. In Egypt, carobs are consumed as a snack. Crushed pods are used to make a refreshing drink. Compotes and liqueurs are made from carob in Turkey, Malta, Portugal, Spain and Sicily. Carob has proven effective in relieving diarrhea in infants. In Libya, a syrup extracted from carob named rub is used as a complement to an Asida meal. The so-called carob syrup made in Peru is actually from the fruit of the Prosopis nigra tree.
Carob has also been used as an alternative to chocolate in dog treats.