In 2005, it was confirmed that Reece-Wilmore would be reprising her role of Debbie to join many ex-cast members returning for the show's 20th anniversary episode.
Debbie is first seen on screen in hospital after she tries to commit suicide after tensions between her parents Philip and Loretta escalate. Several months later, Debbie reappears with her brother Michael when Julie Robinson arrives at their neighbour's house to break the news of a car accident that leaves Philip paralysed and  Loretta dead. Julie helps look after the children and eventually marries Philip and they all move to the country and are heard from sparingly throughout the years.
The Martin family return to Erinsborough in 1992 for the funeral of Todd Landers (Kristian Schmid) but get lost along the back roads, after finding Helen Daniels (Anne Haddy) (who was taken hostage earlier by Todd's father, Bob (Bruce Kilpatrick). The family settle into Ramsay Street and Debbie is immediately attracted to Rick Alessi (Dan Falzon) and they begin dating much to Julie's chagrin. When Rick wins tickets to see Michael Jackson in London, he invites Debbie but knowing their respective parents, the teens concoct a plan with Rick's older brother, Marco (Felice Arena) acting as Rick's chaperone and while Helen and Debbie tell Philip and Julie that they will be visiting a friend of Helen's in the outback. The plan works and the four of them arrive in London. While there, Rick and Debbie encounter George Carter (Andrew Dicks), a young thief who has been stealing to raise money for his dying brother, Terry (Lee Cheesewright) to see Michael Jackson in concert. Rick and Debbie then give their tickets away. Their act of generosity makes news and the two appear on the Casey Butler show. They worry about the show being broadcast in Australia but are assured that it won't. However, it makes Australian news and is eventually broadcast leaving Julie livid, sparking a war between the Martins and Alessis.
Debbie and Rick's relationship steps up a gear when the couple decide to have sex. Soon after, Rick's parents decide to move to Sydney, which could spell the end for the couple. However, Rick gets to stay. Debbie and Rick later break up and Debbie begins dating Darren Stark (Scott Major), who unknown to her, has served time in a juvenile detention centre with Michael. Rick tries to warn Debbie about Darren but she ignores the advice. After a robbery goes awry, resulting in Michael being shot while trying to save Debbie, Debbie realizes Rick was right about Darren.
When Andrew "Macca" McKenzie (John Morris) begins working for Doug Willis (Terence Donovan), Debbie becomes besotted with him. When Macca rejects Debbbie's advances, she questions him and he reveals he is gay. Debbie spirals into an eating disorder, which is discovered by Cody Willis (Peta Brady and Brett Stark (Brett Blewitt)
More problems arise for Debbie when Julie dies and Philip is the prime suspect for pushing her off the roof of the hotel they stayed in during a Murder Mystery Weekend. Philip is cleared when Debbie reveals Julie had been drunk that night and she watched her fall from the roof.
Following Julie's funeral, Debbie agrees to go with Rosemary Daniels (Joy Chambers) to New York. Several weeks later, Debbie receives a phone call while on 5th Avenue and talks with Philip. 
In 1996, Debbie returns home in the wake of an affair with Rosemary's boyfriend, Joel Supple. After settling back in the area, Debbie begins first working at the pub and later the coffee shop. She is upset to find Darren has been released from prison and is cold towards him.
When Luke Handley (Bernard Curry) is diagnosed with cancer and undergoes chemotheraphy, Debbie is keen to help him and ends up embroiled in a battle for his affections with Danni Stark (Eliza Szonert). In the end, Luke chooses Danni.
Debbie later becomes manager of the coffee shop and briefly begins a second romance with Darren. This isn't to last as Debbie  believes Darren still has feelings for his ex-girlfriend, Libby Kennedy (Kym Valentine). When Helen dies in October 1997, the family are devastated. Michael, who arrives home for the funeral suggests Debbie comes back to Marree with him. Their younger sister, Hannah (Rebecca Ritters) feels like everyone is deserting her but Debbie comforts her and leaves with Michael after the funeral
In 2005, Debbie is seen in Annalise Hartman's (Kimberly Davies) documentary about Ramsay Street where she is seen at a desk at the New York branch of Lassiter's talking about how she was a mess when she lived on Ramsay Street until Rosemary offered her a job.
The BBC named Debbie's most notable moments as "Going to London to see Michael Jackson" and "Tipping a bowl of dip over Rick Alessi's head during dinner." Heckler Spray placed Debbie on their list of "The Best Ever Mid-90s Neighbours Characters". Of Debbie they said "One word: eyebrows."