Set on a high profile,  site on a bluff overlooking Riverside Drive (US Highway 51) and the Rock River, the  Beloit Plaza was the first major shopping center in Rock County. Early success was followed by a decline due to competition with the Janesville Mall and development in Janesville and Beloit with easy access to Interstate 90. Several redevelopment efforts failed, but with the involvement of Beloit billionaire Ken Hendricks beginning in 2004, a new plan to make it a mixed-use development with public services and other facilities has raised local hopes for the site.
Current tenants include an Elder-Beerman store, Cardinal Stritch University, the University of Wisconsin Extension, the , the Rock County Health Department, the Beloit Area Community Health Center, a convention center/banquet facility, and numerous smaller businesses along with the School District of Beloit.
While the location caused some difficulties placing entry points to the parking lot, Beloit Plaza overcame its shortcomings through a broad array of strong tenants. When it opened in 1966, Beloit Plaza could boast three major department stores and three other anchor-quality tenants:
In addition to its anchors, Beloit Plaza had a variety of primary tenants (including Fannie May, Fashion Bug, Hallmark, and Radio Shack), two banks on outparcels, a location in the heart of Beloit, and a hub for the city   s bus lines. While the mall's architecture was the basic, Kohl   s did feature a reduced form of the chain   s trademark arch facade (still seen at some existing older Kohl   s Supermarkets).
As the 1960s turned into the 1970s, though, changes in the landscape would eventually doom Beloit Plaza:
Due to the drop in nearby traffic, competition from nearby enclosed malls, and a general contraction of the city   s large industrial base (with resultant loss of jobs), patronage at Beloit Plaza began to fall. Though several of the secondary stores departed, the anchors stood firm.
Beloit Plaza management finally enclosed the shopping center in the early 1980s. The dark and low-ceilinged (16    ceilings) layout retained the wide common areas of the open-air mall, but added only a few new storefronts. Unfortunately, this would also be the last major remodeling the Beloit Mall would ever receive, until it became the Eclipse Center.
As the area around Beloit Mall declined (due to the loss of jobs), foot traffic at the Mall declined further. Indeed, it became something of a hangout for teens and "the criminal element". Then, on February 2, 1981, Raymond Lee Stewart robbed the Beloit Plaza Radio Shack at gunpoint, killing the manager and a customer before he left. Beloit Plaza acquired a reputation as an unsafe place, further diverting shoppers away from the Mall.
Changes in the retail environment beyond Beloit also occurred in the 1980s. Following the merger of Bergner   s and Myers that formed P.A. Bergner & Co. in 1982, and the new company   s purchase of the Boston Store chain in 1985, the Charles V. Weise stores were renamed as Bergner's (which was perceived to be a "stronger" name). Shortly thereafter, Beloit Plaza was renamed Beloit Mall to reflect its newly-enclosed status. But more importantly, in Janesville, the intersection of US Highways 14 & 26 (just blocks from the Janesville Mall) became a hotbed of "big box" development, attracting Wal-Mart, Target, ShopKo, K-Mart, and Blain's Farm and Fleet. Due to the factors noted above, Beloit Mall was seeing little development in its general area. (A section of the Mall   s property was declared a "brownfield" due to the presence of foundry sand, further hampering efforts.) Consequently, most of the county   s shopping dollars started traveling from Beloit to Janesville. Still, the Beloit Mall soldiered on.
The 1990s, however, would be less kind to Beloit Mall. In addition to near-stagnant local population growth, a series of defections and business problems would crush the mall:
With the blighted mall largely abandoned (except for the Elder-Beerman anchor and a few parcels with direct-to-outside entrances), a variety of plans were floated for the Beloit Mall parcel. Some of these plans included new commercial and/or residential development; one plan proposed a huge Native American-owned casino for the property.  None of these plans ever came to fruition, however.
Finally, in 2004, Beloit billionaire Ken Hendricks purchased the entire property, with the idea of converting it into a giant municipal center for the city of Beloit.  Hendricks has successfully redeveloped a large number of commercial and industrial sites in Beloit and elsewhere.  His plan involves converting various sections of the mall complex into a new police station, library, convention center, and ice skating rink.  So far, his plan has been met with enthusiasm; the Rock County Board and the Rock County Health Department have already taken up residence in the old mall.  The Beloit 2020 redevelopment plan envisions new commercial and residential properties around the revitalized sections of the mall.
In March 2007, Hendricks Development Group announced that the property would now be known as ''Eclipse Center'', a name recalling the Eclipse Windmill Company, which was formerly located on part of the property, and long ago merged with Fairbanks-Morse. The Center opened a banquet facility capable of seating 1000 in January 2007. The  moved to the Center in April 2009, and other announced projects are in the works.