In the early 1990s Martin Cooper and Arlene Harris, along with Harris's parents and brothers, founded SOS Wireless, a company that provided senior citizens with a basic, oversized, three-button mobile telephone designed for emergency use. In 2004, Cooper and Harris brought their idea for a simple mass-market cellular phone to Samsung. Jitterbug officially launched as a joint venture on April 3, 2006.
Jitterbug offers airtime on a month-to-month or prepaid basis.  GreatCall, Jitterbug's parent company, is now a Verizon MVNO. 
Jitterbug currently offers two mobile phone models.  The flagship model is the Jitterbug J, a clamshell handset custom-built for the company by Samsung.  The J phone has speakers with increased volume levels, hearing aid compatibility and brighter screens with larger text than on most cell phones. It emits a dial tone when opened to simulate a landline phone's behavior. The menu system uses a question-based interface with keys labeled "YES" and "NO."  The newest phone in the Great Call family is the Samsung R100(Stunt), a "candybar" form model.  The R100 phone provides the same service, without the unique features of the J phone.  Older Jitterbug models, such as the    The Jitterbug Dial    and    The Jitterbug One Touch    are still supported on the network, but not offered for sale to new customers.
GreatCall subscribers can reach a live US-based operator 24 hours a day. Operators greet customers by name when they call and are trained to connect calls, provide directory assistance and make changes and updates to customer phone number contact lists. Calls to an operator deduct minutes from the customer's monthly allowance.  Subscribers can also reach a US-based customer service representative 24 hours a day for no charge for assistance with the phone use, billing questions, and technical support.
Jitterbug customers can also take advantage of a number of additional services offered by GreatCall.  These include:
Jitterbug has received a number of industry awards, including the New York Times Top 10 Brilliant Ideas of 2006, Andrew Seybold   s 2007 Choice Wireless Technology Award for    Best New Company    in the cell phone industry, as well as a 2007 selection for the Reader   s Digest: America   s 100 Best.
As of August 27, 2009, Jitterbug and Verizon Wireless announced that Jitterbug's phones and services will now be available on the Verizon Wireless network. Previously it had a series of roaming agreements with a number of different CDMA providers. Now, Verizon Wireless will be the main wireless network provider for Jitterbug's services. Verizon and Jitterbug will offer more minutes and also will have less expensive nights and weekend plans. 
On April 13, 2010, GreatCall announced that they would be the sole cellular telephone provider for the American Automobile Association.  Customers who signed up for GreatCall service would receive a $20.00 off of the Jitterbug handset, making it $79.00, and $20.00 off the price of the R100 Handset, making it $19.99.  They also receive a free accessory pack, a 5% discount on the monthly rate plans, and a 30% discount on all accessories.  All customers can take advantage of the discounts simply by calling the customer service line, and providing their member number and club code.
Jitterbug requires a $35 activation fee with all of its plans but unlike other MVNOs it offers more services supported by live US operators and agents.  Intended as a handset for older subscribers or ones that want a simple usage experience, the J phone supports text but lacks a camera and is limited in data support.  Because Jitterbug does not offer long-term contracts, the company cannot offer discounts based on such contracts.
On top of the activation fee, the monthly service tends to cost significantly more than competing wireless services. Additionally, although Greatcall allows changes to customer's plans, like competing carriers, the change is not effective until the following month, unlike competing carriers. This is true even in the case of the death of the customer.