The superintendent of Orange County Public Schools is Ronald Blocker. The position of superintendent is appointed by the school board.  The district is overseen by the Orange County School Board, a body of seven elected officers, each board member sitting for a particular geographic district. School Board districts are not analogous in any way with County Commission districts. As of 2010, the current School Board members, in order of district number, are Joie Cadle, Daryl Flynn, Rick Roach, Vicky Bell, Kathleen "Kat" Gordon, Nancy Robbinson and Christine Moore. 
Board members are elected every four years with no term limits, with Districts 1 through 3 elected during midterm election cycles (next in 2010) and Districts 4 through 7 elected during presidential cycles (next in 2012). School Board elections in Orange County are non-partisan.
A county wide public vote in 2009 created the elected position of School Board Chairman.  Candidates running for this position include Bill Sublette, William Booker, Leona Rachman, Homer Hartage and John Mark Coney.  The primary election for this non-partisan position is scheduled to held on August 24, 2012.
OCPS has used an attendance model of Kindergarten through Grade 5 for elementary schools, Grades 6   8 for middle school and Grades 9   12 for high school since 1988.  Before then, Grade 6 was part of elementary school and Grade 9 was part of middle school (called Junior High in OCPS prior to 1988). As now required by Florida law, virtually all elementary schools have Pre-Kindergarten programs.
OCPS has 178 regular-attendance schools as of the 2009   10 school year: 125 elementary, 34 middle and 19 high.  Three of the middle schools are really K   8 schools, but are classified by OCPS as middle schools. In addition, one high school (Lake Nona High) currently houses middle school students as well. The district also has an adult education system with six dedicated campuses and night classes at most high schools, four dedicated special education schools as well as a hospital/homebound program, and dozens of alternative education centers, including charter schools. Six of the high schools in OCPS have separate ninth-grade centers, three of them off-site of the main campus, built after the shift from K   6/7   9/10   12 to K   5/6   8/9   12. One more elementary schools is scheduled to open for the 2010   11 school year.
The schools of OCPS are divided into six areas called Learning Communities: North, East, West, Southeast, Southwest and Central. Central was known as the "Urban Cohort" until 2005. Southeast and Southwest were split from a larger South Learning Community in 2006.
The district is in an aggressive expansion and school improvement project being fueled by a 0.5% sales tax option passed by the voters of Orange County in 2002. Skyrocketing land and materials costs, however, has outpaced faster-than-expected sales tax revenue increases and slowed progress. Many projects have been pushed back, and some have been cancelled altogether. The district is currently working on extending the half-penny option tax in 2012, when it is set to expire.
Most paperwork distributed to students and parents by OCPS is available in both English and Spanish. Many such documents are also available in Portuguese, Vietnamese and Haitian Creole, due to the significant populations in Orange County that speak each language.
Prior to 1952, there were only two high schools in OCPS: Orlando High School and Jones High School, which was a Segregation-era Black-only high school until integration was enforced. In 1952, Orlando High was split into what became Edgewater High School and William R. Boone High School. Originally to be named "Orlando North" and "Orlando South", respectively, Orlando South took its modern name after its principal, William R. Boone, died before it opened. Orlando North took the name of the road it was built on, Edgewater Drive. The former Orlando High became Howard Middle School. Jones High moved to its present location in 1952, which was reconstructed in 2004.
Ten of the district's high schools have been opened in the last 25 years, not including reconstructed campuses for existing schools.