Each episode consists of three contestants (typically 10   14 years of age), called "gumshoes", answering questions to determine the location of one of Carmen Sandiego's henchmen with sketches performed to provide clues. Eventually, the gumshoe with the lowest score is eliminated and the remaining two gumshoes play a game to capture the day's criminal. The winning gumshoe then moves on to the final round, where markers must be correctly placed on a giant map of Asia, Africa, North America, etc. If the player is successful in this round, Carmen is "captured" and the gumshoe wins a trip to anywhere in the continental United States in Season 1. This grand prize was expanded to include anywhere in North America during later seasons.
The first season's programs were recorded at Chelsea Studios in Manhattan, but subsequent seasons were recorded at Kaufman Astoria Studios in Queens. Gumshoes were required to reside in the New York City area. Later in the run, Gumshoes attempted to earn spots on the program by competing against one another in a nationwide Carmen Sandiego contest held at local schools. A total of 296 episodes, or five seasons, were recorded in all. The series was replaced by two seasons of ''Where in Time Is Carmen Sandiego?''
Disney's Buena Vista Productions International (BVPI) co-produced the series in Germany with MDR in Chemnitz (formerly Karlmarxstadt) where it aired on national broadcaster ARD and was entitled ''Jagd um die Welt     Schnappt Carmen Sandiego! (Chase Around the World: Catch Carmen Sandiego!)'' in 1994.  In the same year, BVPI also co-produced the Italian series in Naples with national broadcaster RAI and the Spanish version was co-produced in Valencia with national broadcaster TVE. Canada's Tele-Quebec produced a French language version called ''Mais, ou se cache Carmen Sandiego? (But Where is Carmen Sandiego Hiding?)'' which aired from 1995 through 1998 and stars Pauline Martin as "The Chief" and Martin Drainville as ACME Agent in Charge of Training New Recruits.
The series was produced in the early 1990s when many new nations were formed and many borders shifted. As a result, the recording date and an announcement that "all geographic information was accurate as of the date this program was recorded" was incorporated into each episode.
The show was funded by the Corporation for Public Broadcasting (1991   1995) and by the annual financial support of Viewers Like You (1991   1995). Delta Air Lines (1994   1995), Holiday Inn (1991   1993) and Toyota (1991   1994) also provided funding.
All of the music on the series was vocal music, arranged and performed by the a capella group, Rockapella. The music package included a popular theme song, and many short signature stings, such as "Let's Get Packing" when the contestant won the grand prize. The full theme song was played over final (animated) credits, as Greg Lee invited the final contestant to look up and shout, "Do it, Rockapella!"
The theme song, "'''Where in the World Is Carmen Sandiego?'''", was written by Sean Altman and David Yazbek, and performed by the vocal group Rockapella as the studio audience danced to the music.
Rockapella's original recording appears on the 1992 soundtrack album ''Where in the World Is Carmen Sandiego?'' and ''Television's Greatest Hits Volume 7: Cable Ready''(TVT 1996).
Developed for the television series, and based upon a teletype machine in the original computer game, the Chief was played by Broadway and television actress Lynne Thigpen as a comically no-nonsense figure with a strong sense of justice who spoke with dialogue that was riddled with puns, alliteration and other forms of word play.
The character proved popular and became a part of subsequent editions of the computer games. Thigpen reprised the role for the Where in Time Is Carmen Sandiego? series.
The Chief also has a great-grandmother, Agnes Acme, who is the founder of ACME. Agnes Acme was also played by Thigpen and is apparently deceased, though that didn't stop her from providing clues.
Although Greg Lee was referred to by his real name, he adopted a goofy yet amiable persona, often playing "Lucy" to Lynne Thigpen's "Desi" in various sketches. On the show, it was explained that he was a Special/Senior Agent in charge of training new recruits, but the show's continuity was very loose and the fourth wall was frequently (and intentionally) broken.
In the program's opening, the three gumshoes are introduced, followed by Greg's entrance into the office where he meets them.  The Chief explains the spectacularly impossible heist by one of the bad guys in Carmen Sandiego's gang--this provided the producers with the opportunity to brief the gumshoes--and the home audience--about notable historical sites throughout the world. The Chief's description of the day's theft was accompanied by an animation of the criminal, inserted into stock photographs, perpetrating the crime in a humorous way (the photographs were doctored to show the loot being removed from the scene). The opening typically ended with the Chief explaining for what reason the criminal wanted the loot (examples: Vic the Slick steals Carmen Island as a gift for Carmen's birthday, Patty Larceny steals the Lascaux cave paintings so she can turn them in as her school art project and Wonder Rat steals the Kenyatta Conference Center so that he can make it the centerpiece of his resort, "Rat-lantic City".)
Each gumshoe was given 50 "ACME  crime bucks" (the program's official currency) to begin the round.  Various live action, celebrity, musical, animated, and costumed comedy sketches were performed, each providing clues to a geographical location of the day's criminal.  Examples included a "Dying Informant" who fell into a typical crime scene chalk outline and took seemingly forever to die--while providing essential clues; a world band radio; an animated fish that sounded a lot like actor Joe Peschi, celebrities including first lady Barbara Bush, stars of dozens of television series, famous models, politicians and ballplayers, and more, songs that parodied pop hits performed by Rockapella (often in silly costumes; a song about Nebraska, for example, featured the singers as giant ears of corn). After each clues were provided, a map with three possible locations, all within proximity to one another, were shown to the players. Each gumshoe chose his or her answer and was rewarded 10 ACME crime bucks if correct. Other features of this first game:
After a few more clues or The Chase, Greg showed the gumshoes one more map, in this case before the skit was performed. They were asked to make a wager of anywhere from 0   50 crime bucks, in increments of 10, on their ability to provide a correct answer. After the final skit was performed, the gumshoes select their answers. If the gumshoe answered correctly, their wager was added to their score, but if the gumshoe answered incorrectly, the wager was subtracted from their score. The top two gumshoes advanced to the next round, and the third gumshoe was eliminated.
In case of a tie for second place, Greg read clues related to a famous person or place (typically a U.S. state). Gumshoes could buzz in as often as they wanted; the first gumshoe to guess correctly earned 5 ACME crime bucks, and moved on to Round Two. In case of a three-way tie, Greg would read two tiebreaker questions.
The two gumshoes advanced to their final destination from the first round, where The Chief described various landmarks in that country, city or region, in what was called a "Photo Recon". Often, these descriptions were silly and poked fun at the pictures (in one notable visit to Key West, for example, the camera zoomed in on graffiti on a small landmark and the Chief openly scolded the people who had spray painted their first names on it). Fifteen names of the local landmarks were placed on a board. Hidden behind three of the landmarks were the loot that was stolen at the beginning of the program, the warrant to arrest the criminal, and the criminal him/herself. Hidden behind the remaining landmarks were shoe prints, indicating that nothing was there.
The top gumshoes played first (if the two gumshoes were tied, a coin toss would determine who starts). If a gumshoe found any of the three key items, they could select again. Their turn ended if they did one of 3 things:
The gumshoes alternated turns until one found the loot, the warrant, and the crook in that order in a single turn (as the loot is the evidence needed to get a warrant and the warrant is needed to arrest the criminal). When the gumshoe found all three items in the correct order, they pull on a hanging chain to capture the criminal before advancing to the final round, while the runner-up is eliminated.
On the one occasion in the show's history that a gumshoe (Ali Haider) won the round on the first try, he also earned the chance to win a $100 savings bond. The bond was hidden behind one of the remaining 12 landmarks, and Haider was given 5 chances to find it, although he was unsuccessful in doing so.
In the final round, the gumshoe was given a chance to capture Carmen Sandiego. If the gumshoe captured Carmen, he or she won the all-expenses paid trip to anywhere in the lower 48 United States in season one and North America after that. After the gumshoe wrote down the desired trip destination, the henchman called him or her on a telephone so as to rat on Carmen. The henchman gave Carmen's general location, one of five continents or the United States. The Chief then gave a list of 13 possible countries, states, or provinces Carmen "may have traveled" in that area.
The gumshoe was presented with a giant map that covered the floor of the studio, often with small circles representing the cities. As Greg read off a location, the gumshoe had to place a marker with a red flashing siren light on the map in the same location. If the gumshoe guessed correctly, the marker was activated and the gumshoe was given the next location. If the gumshoe was incorrect, a two-note buzzer sounded and he or she would try again. After two incorrect guesses, the gumshoe had to leave the marker where it was, pick up a new marker and receive the next location.
If within 45 seconds, the gumshoe could successfully identify 7 locations (8 after Season 1) on the map, he or she captured Carmen and won the trip. If not, the show awarded consolation prizes. Regardless of the outcome, the Chief promotes the gumshoe to a "sleuth." There were at least two episodes in which there was a one minute time limit for the Asia map.
In the unaired episode "Auld Lang Gone," the winning gumshoe (Jasmine Doman) slipped and broke her arm on the map during the final round. Production stopped for a moment until the second-place finisher (Ed Mann) ran the map for her.
The maps featured on the show are as follows:
The show is noted for concluding with Greg, the sleuth and the audience pointing and yelling "Do it, Rockapella!" into the camera, signaling the group to begin again their title song for the animated closing credits, which depicted members of Carmen's gang stealing the names of production staff members against a background resembling a notepad (for the final season a black backdrop with confetti was used). After the credits and in Season 2 (sometimes in Season 1), the audience was invited onto the map to dance and sing the theme song.
Afterward, the Chief, who has joined in the celebration from her office, says "This is Lynne Thigpen speaking for ''Where in the World is Carmen Sandiego?'', and remember, (something funny in rhyme)," or instead of the rhyme, she would say "See ya next time!" Before the camera fade, a disclaimer would appear on the screen reading, "All contestants have been briefed prior to their appearance." In Seasons 2 and 3, the Chief read the disclaimer aloud. Seasons 4 and 5 did not have the disclaimer.
One episode (Season 2's "Disturbing the Heavenly Peace") has a celebrity teamup with the gumshoes.  The celebrities were Mayim Bialik (''Blossom''), Tatyana Ali (''The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air''), and Jeremy Miller (''Growing Pains'').
The series was produced without a pilot, but the first few episodes were produced as examples of the series, and so, included several elements later discarded. For example, in these early episodes, the map of the United States was used in the bonus round, and the markers placed on it were flags of each state. Sound effects from ''Double Dare'' (5 quick bells and a short buzz, respectively) were used in the pilots instead of the usual siren and two-note buzzer; in addition, the time buzzer sound was performed by one of the Rockapella singers. Sound effects from various game shows were used in the other early-recorded episodes until the flags were replaced by markers. The pilot episodes did not require the correct order of the loot, warrant and crook in the second round. In the pilots, the limit on the amount of Crime Bucks that could be wagered was 25 (20 in the first pilot), in increments of 5. Also in the pilot episodes, there was no Lightning Round. In each season, the order and rules of the games changed slightly, mostly to maintain audience interest, sometimes to eliminate tricky or costly production sequences.
For each trip, the winning sleuth, a parent, and a guest flew round-trip coach from New York City to the selected location. The sleuth spent one week at a luxury hotel chosen by the Chief. Later in Season 4, the sleuth stayed in the hotel of his or her choice. A rental car was included in Seasons 3   5. The sleuth also received extra money to add to the Crime Bucks as spending money.
Gumshoes who were eliminated received a set of consolation prizes called the official ACME Crimenet Travel Kit, renamed Travel Pack in Season 4 and Gumshoe Gear in Season 5. Some of the consolation prizes on the show included: