The '''Century Center Convention Center''', managed by Global Spectrum, opened in 1977 and has been managed by Global Spectrum since January, 2007.  This convention center overlooks the St. Joseph River in downtown South Bend, Indiana. It features over . of convention space and is home to Island Park, an  riverfront park attached to the convention center.
Century Center includes a . Convention Hall that can be split into two smaller halls. This level also offers a . Discovery Ballroom that can be separated into two equal halls.
Century Center Convention Center's . Great Hall is includes a  glass wall which overlooks the St. Joseph River.  Eighteen meeting rooms, with over 35 combinations, complement the overall space. A pre-function area is located on the lower level adjacent to the Great Hall.  A two-story high glass wall encompasses the Great Hall, with a view of the St. Joseph River.
The Century Center Convention Center also provides access via an enclosed, climate-controlled skywalk to 300-Room Marriott Hotel, connected by an underground tunnel to the College Football Hall of Fame and houses the South Bend Museum of Art.
75,000 square/feet of function space
Including:
Great Hall- 16,600 sq/ft
36,500 sq/ft of column free Convention Halls
Eighteen Suites- 17,600sq/ft
Bendix Theatre- 694 Fixed Seats
Recital Hall- 166 Fixed Seats
Spacious Pre-Function and Registration Area
Wired for High-Speed and WiFi Internet Access
Full on-site Media Services
In-House Food and Beverage, Including Kosher Prep Area
350 space parking lot adjacent to Century Center
Loading docks with two bays; large overhead doors with the ability to drive indoors into Convention Halls
Connected to a 300-Room Full Service Marriott Hotel
An additional 175 rooms located within two blocks of Century Center
Over 4,000 Hotel Rooms within the cities of South Bend & Mishawaka
On average, 650 events per year
Over 250,000 visitors per year
The '''Century Center Convention Center''' hosts a variety of events throughout the year, from consumer shows to conventions to corporate meetings to weddings.  Some of the more notable open-to-public annual events include:
Michiana Home Show
Michiana Boat and Outdoor Show
Valley RV & Camping Show