Mitchell-Hedges spent some years alternating between Central America, the Caribbean, the United Kingdom, and the United States.  Some sources say he was a mercenary, others thought he was a British government spy, and others that he was independently wealthy and traveling for diversion. Some of his "expeditions" to Central America were financed by well-to-do British socialites. For a time he was sponsored by the ''Daily Mail''.  He was also supported by the British Museum to whom he donated numerous artifacts.
Mitchell-Hedges repeatedly made claims of having "discovered" Indian tribes and "lost cities" that had already been documented years, sometimes centuries, before. He claimed he discovered "the cradle of civilization" in the Mosquito Coast of Nicaragua, and that the Bay Islands of Honduras were remnants of the lost civilization of Atlantis.
In 1906 he married Lillian Agnes Clarke, known as "Dolly". Most of the time he lived apart from his wife. They had no children on their own but adopted Canadian orphan Anne Marie Le Guillon, today known as Anna Mitchell-Hedges.  
For a time in the 1930s he had a weekly radio show out of New York City on Sunday evenings. Talking over a background of "jungle drums", Mitchell-Hedges would tell dramatic tales of his adventures, usually including narrow escapes from death at the hands of "savages" or from jungle animals ranging from a jaguar to a vicious attacking iguana.
Mitchell-Hedges claimed to have discovered a "crystal skull"     he called it "The Skull of Doom"     at the Maya ruin of Lubaantun (which he also claimed to have discovered) on an expedition to British Honduras (present-day Belize) in the 1920s. However he published no mention of the skull until the late 1940s, not long after a crystal skull was auctioned off by Sydney Burney at Sotheby's in 1943. Mitchell-Hedges's crystal skull could have been the one from Sotheby's as a skull with identical measurements was described in 1936, and its owner was Sydney Burney.
A body of popular culture and New Age-mythology grew to surround Mitchell-Hedges' tales of the crystal skull, and it is through his association with this alleged artifact that Mitchell-Hedges is best-known today.  Accessed 13 October 2008 
Mitchell-Hedges' crystal skull was retained in the possession of his adopted daughter Anna until her death on 11 April 2007 at the age of 100, during which time she periodically exhibited it to the public, continuing to make claims for the skull's mysterious powers and origin.  Even after Anna's death, the claimed '17 000' year old crystal skull continues to be publicly exhibited.
The release of the 2008 adventure film ''Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull'' revived public awareness of the crystal skull mythology, and by extension, F. A. Mitchell-Hedges. His name is one among many to have been speculatively put forward as the "real-life" inspiration for the fictional Indiana Jones character.
Books and other titles written by Mitchell-Hedges include: