Underwood was born in Portland, Oregon. She graduated from Scappoose High School in Scappoose, Oregon in 2002. She has been a student at Oregon State University and Portland State University.
She was a childhood friend and schoolmate of American football player Derek Anderson.
Her first job was assisting in sales of heavy construction equipment.. 
She worked in the Beaverton, Oregon branch of the Hooters chain of restaurants.
When Underwood first appeared in ''Playboy'' magazine, in its ''The Girls of the Pac 10'' pictorial in the October 2005 issue, she was also featured on the cover, holding a football and clad only in a body painted imitation of an Oregon State Beavers football jersey and matching bikini briefs.
She next appeared in the magazine in July 2006, as the Playmate of the Month. When she became Playmate of the Year in June 2007, her prize included a Mini Cooper convertible. 
She was the first Miss July to receive the title, although she herself said, "I didn't think I was pretty enough".
In March 2008, Playboy magazine ranked her at #25 on their "25 Hottest Playboy Celebrities" list.
Underwood appeared in episode #2 of the E! network's series ''The Girls Next Door'', as a Playmate hoping to have her test shoot taken at Playboy Studio West.  Subsequently, ''Playboy'' featured her as Miss July 2006. She has since appeared in several more episodes of ''The Girls Next Door''. 
On June 7, 2007, a group of Oregon State University women's studies students created a poster celebrating Underwood's selection as ''Playboy'''s 2007 Playmate of the Year, and posted it outside Bexel Hall, where it remained in place for only a few hours before Oregon State University staff took it down. The poster embraced the theme and the style of the "Achievement" posters that line Campus Way at the university. The poster read, "Sara Jean: First OSU Beaver ''Playmate of the Year'', Playboy June '07, OSU Centerfold, ''People, Ideas, Innovation''."
Underwood is credited with discovering Ida Ljungqvist while shopping on Rodeo Drive in Beverly Hills, California.
Underwood appears as a pirate wench in the 2007 film ''Epic Movie'', along with fellow Playmates Qiana Chase, Irina Voronina and Jillian Grace. Underwood appeared as a playmate in the 2008 comedy, ''House Bunny'', along with fellow playmates and in 2009 was in the film ''The Telling'' with Bridget Marquardt and Holly Madison, 
She appeared on the wedding episode of ''Kendra'' where it was announced at Kendra Wilkinson's bachelorette party that Underwood had undergone breast augmentation surgery.
Underwood has also worked in television as a presenter. She worked as a "fight jock" or continuity announcer for the Blackbelt TV cable network. In 2009 she co-hosted five episodes of G4's ''Attack of the Show'', filling in for a vacationing Olivia Munn. She has also co-hosted episodes in 2010. As of Summer 2011, she is a substitute host and one of the regular presenter's of G4's ''Attack of the Show'''s news segment, 'The Feed'.  Sara's popularity was evident when G4 held a charity auction in May 2011 to raise money for Japan earthquake relief and the auction's highest bid went to a fan who bid/donated $7,300 to have Underwood present 'The Feed' from their home in a future episode.
An avid practitioner of yoga, she competed in the 8th ''Kunoichi'' competition in Japan, known in the U.S. as ''Women of Ninja Warrior''. She won her first stage heat after gaining a big lead on three Japanese contestants that had more pedigreed backgrounds in athletics. She failed on the second stage when she misjudged the second step of the Dancing Stones and fell.
After modeling in advertising for VictoryPoker.net and playing in charity poker tournaments, she joined their team of professional poker players.
Introduced by a mutual friend, Underwood had a two year on-and-off relationship with television presenter Ryan Seacrest, Sara said they dated sporadically for 2 years but never had sex.