The '''Bush family'''  is a prominent American family. Along with many members who have been successful bankers and businessmen, across three generations the family includes two U.S. Senators, one Supreme Court Justice, two Governors, one Vice President and two Presidents. George Herbert Walker Bush and Barbara Pierce Bush have been married for 66 years, holding the record for the longest-married presidential couple. Peter Schweizer, author of a biography of the family, has described the Bushes as "the most successful political dynasty in American history."
The following is a selective family tree of notable members of the modern Bush family: 
Samuel Prescott Bush married Flora Sheldon, who had a common ancestor with the Fishes (e.g. Hamilton Fish) and the Keans (e.g. Thomas Kean). Their common ancestor was the famed Robert Livingston the Elder.
First Lady Barbara Bush (''nee'' Pierce), the wife of George H. W. Bush (the 41st President of the United States) and the mother of George W. Bush (the 43rd President), is descended from a second cousin of Franklin Pierce (14th President).
President George W. Bush is related to other presidents as well as Pierce, to whom he is also related on his father's side via Daniel Brewer. He is also a cousin of Washington (via Hutchinsons), Adams (via Prescotts link to Hoar, through Abigail Adams wife of John Adams), Fillmore (via Millards), Lincoln (via Gilmans), Grant (via Lathrops), Hayes (via Smiths, Footes, Parmelees, and Huckinses), Garfield (via Wheelers, Carpenters, Cookes, Warrens, Holbrooks, and Arnolds), Cleveland (via Smiths and Stanleys), Theodore Roosevelt (via Schuylers), Taft (via Holbrooks, Thayers, Haywards, Cookes, Footes, Ravenses, Waterses, and Shermans), Coolidge (via Phillipses, Hortons, Garnseys, Pulsiphers, Ravenses, Richardsons, Moores, Bulkeleys, and Morses), Hoover (via Brookses, Reades, Wheelers, Richardsons, and Shermans), Franklin Roosevelt (via Beekmans, Hutchinsons, Popes, Jenneys, Richardses, Palgraves, Lathrops, and Howlands), Nixon (via Lippincotts, Footes, Traverses, Morses, and Howlands), Ford (via Vanderburghs, Wheelers, Marvins, Gilmans, and Howlands) and Obama (via Hinckleys). Barbara Pierce Bush is a distant niece of Franklin Pierce.
George W. Bush, the 43rd U.S. president, and Barack Obama, the 44th president, are 11th cousins through Samuel and Sarah Soole Hinckley of 17th-century Massachusetts.
Former President George W. Bush is related to Winston Churchill three ways: through the Coes of New York, the Sumners of Massachusetts, and the Shermans of Rhode Island.
George W. Bush is descended from ''Mayflower'' passengers John Howland, John Tilley, Henry Sampson, and probably Francis Cooke.