These services allow their users to provide information about themselves in a short profile which is either stored in their phones as a dating ID or as a username on the mobile dating site. They can then search for other IDs online or by calling a certain phone number dictated by the service. The criteria include age, gender and sexual preference. Usually these sites are free to use but standard text messaging fees may still apply as well as a small fee the dating service charges per message. 
Mobile dating websites, in order to increase the opportunities for meeting, focus attention on users that share the same social network and proximity. Some companies even offer services such as ''homing devices'' to alert users when another user is within thirty feet of one another.  Some systems involve bluetooth technology to connect users in locations such as bars and clubs. This is known as proximity dating. These systems are actually more popular in some countries in Europe and Asia than online dating. With the advent of GPS Phones and GSM localization, proximity dating is likely to rise sharply in popularity.
According to The San Francisco Chronicle in 2005, "Mobile dating is the next big leap in online socializing." More than 3.6 million cell phone users logged into mobile dating sites in March 2007, , Globe and Mail, July 11, 2007 with most users falling in the under 35 age range.
Some experts believe that the rise in mobile dating is due to the growing popularity of online dating. Others believe it is all about choice, as Joe Brennan Jr., vice president of Webdate says, "It's about giving people a choice. They don't have to date on their computer. They can date on their handset, it's all about letting people decide what path is best for them."
Some avoid these services for fear that the technology could be used to electronically harass users., Ref: 7.3 (Virtual Chat services) and 7.4 (Contact and Dating services), October, 2007Another issue is "asymmetry of interests", i.e. attractive member receives excessive attentions and leaves, which may result in deterioration of membership Crush or Flush Mobile Dating Review, March, 2008. The pictures are very small and cell phones are still a step behind computers in their ease to use.
The mobile dating market is expected to grow to $1.4B by 2013. Juniper Research Report Summary on TechCrunch
3G Dating is emerging as 3G networks and Video Mobiles become more widespread. The potential for one-to-one video calling offers additional safety and helps ensures members are real.