The sole shareholder of Toronto Hydro is the City. 
In 1879, Toronto saw its first electric light powered by a small steam-powered generator. Two years later, an arc lighting system was installed and a number of stores, including Timothy Eaton's, were illuminated.
By 1900, a few wealthy citizens could afford to have electricity in their homes. Instead of metering consumption, private power companies charged a hefty price for each bulb and shut power off during the day so people wouldn't waste it.
In 1910, a sub-department under Toronto's City Engineer adopts the name "Toronto Hydro-Electric System". 
A year later, a crowd of 30,000 Torontonians watch as the first hydro power from Niagara Falls lights the streets. 
Toronto Hydro-Electric System begins its new life as a public corporation. The Utility's average revenue per kilowatt-hour is just under five cents and assets total a little over $4,000,000.
As Canadians battle in WWI, Toronto now has more than 50,000 wired poles - 30,000 of which are concrete poles manufactured in Toronto Hydro's own shops.
By the end of WWI, Torontonians could purchase an hydro-powered, engine-driven washing machine for $42.00.
By 1922, Toronto Hydro has over 93,000 customers and assets of $17 million. At this time, the company launches its "Red Seal Programme", to ensure that the wiring in every home was sturdy enough to support ovens and other newly available appliances.
In 1929, the city's high-density load requirements are increasing, and Toronto Hydro makes Toronto one of the first cities in North America with an underground low-voltage network.
Kitchens across the country are modernizing. Toronto Hydro begins its first significant marketing campaign, promoting cooking with electricity at the rate of one cent per kilowatt-hour.
1933 marks the official opening of Toronto Hydro's new headquarters at 14 Carlton Street. Newspapers describe it as the very "model of modernity". It still serves as our headquarters today. 
Two years later, Toronto Hydro develops a low-cost electric water heater. 
In 1939, Canadians are once again at war. By 1941, all of Ontario's utilities band together to do their part for the war effort. As "Keepers of the Light", they urge their customers to "Save Hydro in Your Home: Help Win the War!"
In 1955 Toronto Hydro undertakes its largest power project to date: a four-year Frequency Standardization Programme, converting from 25-cycles to the 60-cycle standard now common throughout North America. Approximately 200,000 meters are replaced and 12 new stations are built.
By the end of the decade, Toronto Hydro has spent $20 million burying cable and many of the new volt feeders. Power consumption has reached 10 million kilowatt-hours for the first time.
In the early 1960's, Toronto Hydro is actively promoting its "Live Better Electrically" theme to consumers through their black and white TVs.
By the end of the 1960's, more than 60% of the downtown network system is now underground.
A 1970 building boom increases the utility's peak load by 5.6%. The building of First Canadian Place, Hydro Place and the Royal Bank Plaza a year later increases the peak load another 4%.
By 1980, Toronto Hydro has more than 200,000 customers. The company joins forces with Ontario Hydro and the City of Toronto to review the city's long-term energy needs.
Toronto Hydro begins a 25-year, $1.5 billion, energy-saving upgrading program. The existing 4,000 volt distribution system is upgraded 13,800 volts.
Following the amalgamation of the Toronto area's six municipal electric utilities in 1998,  is transformed into a holding company owning two new operating subsidiaries: Toronto Hydro-Electric System Limited and Toronto Hydro Energy Services Inc. The City of Toronto becomes the sole shareholder.
With a combined customer base of over 655,000 customers and annual revenues of approximately $2 billion, Toronto Hydro-Electric System is the second largest municipal electricity distribution utility system in North America.
2000: Despite months of dread and speculation on how electronics worldwide will be impacted, Toronto Hydro comes through the Y2K transition with flying colours.
2001 marks the company's 90th birthday - a celebration of extraordinary times, extraordinary people and an extraordinary future!
In 2002, Toronto Hydro Energy Services partners with WindShare, constructing North America's first urban wind turbine. Standing 30 storeys tall, it has the capacity to power up to 250 homes with 100% "green" electricity.
On August 14, 2003 a major blackout occurs, and Ontarians and their U.S. neighbours experience a significant power interruption. Power to parts of the GTA is slowly restored, with full restoration on August 16.
In 2004, the anniversary of the blackout is commemorated by an event called "Toronto Unplugs". Held at Kensington Market's Pedestrian Sunday, it focuses on energy conservation. Compact fluorescent light bulbs are distributed to promote conservation. 
Toronto Hydro launches the city's first solar panel at its service centre at 500 Commissioners Street, Toronto's largest industrial solar generation system. This earns the company the 'PV Project of the Year' award from the Canadian Solar Industry Association.
In 2005, Toronto Hydro introduces several . Keep Cool takes 5,772 inefficient air conditioning units out of circulation. Over 22,000 strings of seasonal LED are exchanged for old incandescent lights. Toronto Hydro partners with the Fatal Light Awareness Program (FLAP) and the City of Toronto to launch 'Lights OUT Toronto' to protect migratory birds.
This year, Toronto Hydro was named one of  and one of Canada   s Greenest Companies; one of Greater Toronto   s Top Employers; and one of Canada   s Top Family-Friendly Employers. 