All Liberal Arts College Preparatory Magnet students entering the program as 9th graders must earn a total of 32 Carnegie units. To remain in the magnet program, students must maintain at least a "C" average in any taken course. Failure to do so can result in the removal of the student from Columbus High School, the one exception being for Freshmen who fail during their first semester, as the transition to high school might be overwhelming. Students take one core course each year in English, Math, Science and Social Studies.
Each year, students serve 20 hours of volunteer work around the area as part of their Social Studies class. 12th graders do a senior project in which they must pick an activity they have never tried before, have a mentor teach the student what to do and how do it. Each senior must spend 100 hours on it and maintain a portfolio documenting their progress from the summer before their senior year until the final presentation in April. Then they must present their project in the form of a speech to a board.
Students qualify for entrance into the program based on:
The school sits atop a hill in the Lakebottom area of the city and across Cherokee Avenue from Lakebottom/Weracoba park, where the school shares athletic facilities with the Columbus Parks and Recreation Department.
Students are required to wear ID cards around their necks at all times during school hours. It serves as the students' library and lunch card and can only be removed at the end of the day off of school property. Lack of wearing student ID can result in detention, and is the most common disciplinary problem at the school.
The second most common infraction at the school results from the school district's cell phone policy. In accordance to the policy, if cell phones are used in class and discovered, they are confiscated and a student is assigned detention.  The cell phone may be retrieved by the parents after a few days, depending on the regularity of the offense.
Students can spend their time out of class in the following extracurricular activities.
The school is the recipient of state awards including three state one act play competition wins, the most recent being in 2007 with the play, "Bee-Luther-Hatchee." The department typically produces three plays and one musical yearly through their company, Full House Productions, in the small CHS Auditorium. 
The CHS Chorus puts on concerts throughout the school year, including the annual Potluck, Christmas Concert, and Spring Concert.
The orchestra, concert bands, jazz ensemble and advanced choirs have consistently earned superior ratings at competitions. Many CHS vocalists and instrumentalists are typically chosen for All-District, All-State, and the Governor's Honors Program. In the visual arts, individuals exhibit and compete locally and statewide using painting, sculpture/pottery, and photography.
Students take at least one Fine Arts class in order to graduate from Columbus High School.
Young Activists; Junior Civitan; GSA; Ballroom Dance Club; Fellowship of Christian Athletes; National Art Honor Society; National Honor Society; Beta Club; National English Honor Society; National German Honor Society; Students Against Destructive Decisions; Language Clubs: Spanish, Japanese, German, French, Latin; Science Club; Robotics Club (Georgia State BotBall competition winner); Dead Poet's Society; Competition Mathematics Team; Academic Decathlon; Thespians Drama Society; Dance Team; Model UN; Gavel Club; Fired Up; Debate; Youth Alive; Student Council; Chess Club; Mock Trial Club
The school newspaper and Sampler pieces are written by students as part of their Creative Writing class.