James was born in Saginaw, Michigan, the son of Mary (nee Kelly), a seller of children's books, and a lawyer father, Thomas F. James. Brian's maternal grandfather was Harry F. Kelly, former Governor of the state of Michigan. His uncle was Brian Kelly, an actor featured in the series "Flipper" and a producer of the movie ''Blade Runner''. His sister, Kate James, is an actress and writer who performs in the Chicago based sketch comedy group, Schadenfreude.  His sister, Anne James Noonan, teaches performing arts in the Chicago suburbs.  She is also an actress.T
James graduated from Northwestern University's School of Communication. He received a nomination for the Tony Award for Best Featured Actor in a Musical in 2002 for his portrayal of Sidney Falco in ''Sweet Smell of Success'', co-starring John Lithgow. He also received an Obie Award for his performance in the one-man play ''The Good Thief'' by Conor McPherson. 
Additional Broadway credits include playing Frederick Barrett in ''Titanic'', Lincoln Center's ''Carousel'', and ''Blood Brothers''. Off-Broadway credits include Andrew Lippa's ''The Wild Party'' in 2000 opposite Julia Murney and Idina Menzel for which he received a Drama Desk Award nomination, as well as Adam Guettel's ''Floyd Collins'' and the Gershwins' ''Pardon My English''. He appeared in Martin McDonagh's ''The Lieutenant of Inishmore'' on Broadway, replaced Norbert Leo Butz in ''Dirty Rotten Scoundrels'', and starred in ''The Apple Tree'' opposite Kristin Chenoweth.
In 2004, Brian released a Christmas album titled ''From Christmas Eve to Christmas Morn''. He was the Broadway version of Bob Wallace, whose character was originated by Bing Crosby, in ''White Christmas'' in 2004.
He played the role of Dan Goodman in the new musical ''Next to Normal'' Off-Broadway at Second Stage Theatre in 2008. He recently starred opposite Sutton Foster and Christopher Sieber as the title character in ''Shrek the Musical''. The show began previews on Broadway November 8, 2008 and opened on December 14 at The Broadway Theatre after a tryout in Seattle. For this role James won the Outer Critics Circle Award for Outstanding Actor in a Musical and the Drama Desk Award for Outstanding Actor in a Musical. He was also nominated for the Tony Award for Best Leading Actor in a Musical for his portrayal. He departed the cast after one year in the role and was replaced by Ben Crawford.
James starred alongside Laura Linney, Alicia Silverstone, and Eric Bogosian in the Broadway play, ''Time Stands Still''. It began preview performances on January 5, 2010 and officially opened on January 25 at the Samuel J. Friedman Theatre. The show ended its limited run on March 27, 2010. For this role he won the broadway.com Audience Award for Favorite Featured Actor in a Play.
James reprised the role of Dan Goodman in the Broadway company of ''Next to Normal'' at the Booth Theatre. He replaced J. Robert Spencer beginning May 17, 2010. James ended his limited engagement on July 18, 2010 and was replaced by Jason Danieley.
On July 19, 2010 James performed in front of President Barack Obama and First Lady Michelle Obama at ''A Broadway Celebration: In Performance at the White House'', which also aired on PBS October 20, 2010.
Most recently, James returned ''Time Stands Still'' when the show returned to Broadway. It closed on January 30, 2011.
James has been cast in the upcoming NBC musical pilot ''Smash'', where he will play the husband of Debra Messing's character. NBC officially picked up ''Smash'' as a series on May 11, 2011.