Prentice was elected to the Washington House of Representatives in  1988, taking office the following January. She served until 1992, when she was elected to the Washington State Senate, taking office in January 1993.  Her current term ends January 2013.  Prentice is the current Chair of the Senate Ways and Means Committee.  She is also the former chair and current member of the Senate Financial Institutions and Insurance Committee and serves on the Labor, Commerce, Research and Development Committee.  Prentice also serves as an ex-officio member of the Washington State Gambling Commission.
On June 7, 2006, legislation that Prentice pushed through made it illegal to gamble on-line in Washington state.  
The legislation's implementation was delayed until courts ruled on it's legality.  A week before the law took practical effect, Dan "Wretchy" Martin won an on-line poker tournament and netted $160,000 for his efforts.
Mr. Martin has won more than $2 million dollars playing poker on-line.  Regarding Martin's statement's about the possibility of leaving his home state to pursue his life's dream and chosen profession, Sen. Prentice said:
In 1993, Prentice was a sponsor of SB 5347 to permit farm and agricultural workers to    self-organize, to join employee organizations, to bargain collectively and to engage in other lawful concerted activities for mutual aid and protection, or to refrain from such activities. . . .    
In 1995, Prentice was a sponsor of SB 5503 which directed the Washington Department of Housing to begin reporting on the status of temporary worker housing conditions and to develop livable and decent temporary worker housing in Washington State.
In 1997, Prentice was a sponsor of SB 5193.
In addition, Prentice has worked to prohibit discrimination in housing, employment and insurance based on sexual orientation. In 2007, she prime-sponsored a bill extending retirement benefits to domestic partners.
In 2007, Prentice prime-sponsored bills asking that the federal government to provide veterans' benefits owed to Filipino veterans. She was also the prime sponsor of a bill providing for the exclusion of veterans benefits from the income calculation for the retired person property tax relief program.
Prior to the Seattle SuperSonics departure from Seattle, Prentice supported funding a new sports complex that would have accommodated them, among others.  Prentice explained her support of a proposal to locate a new arena in her district in a February 9, 2007 op-ed in the ''Seattle Times'' for "the economic activity the new center will bring to the region ...  valuable community asset that will create jobs and promote the development of new hotels and great restaurants."   Prentice went on to contend that funding the new center would "have almost no impact on King County taxpayers, and no new general taxes  are even being considered to pay for the arena."
While the chair of the Senate Financial Institutions and Insurance Committee, Prentice sponsored the first bills in Interstate Bank Branching.
Prentice also sponsored legislation transitioning credit unions to federal share insurance while serving as the chair of the Senate Financial Institutions Committee.
This legislation was approved by the Washington Legislature in a 144 to 1 vote and became effective July 23, 1995.  When the $15 fee per $100 borrowed on a two-week term is converted into an APR (annualized percentage rate) it is approximately 390%. News sources have reported on Prentice's opposition to attempts to cap the allowable fees on these loans to 36% APR.
Prentice is a fund raising heavy hitter for herself and for the State Democratic party.  August 2008 Washington Public Disclosure Commission records show that Prentice has raised more than $231,000 in the 2008 election year reporting period.
In a series of articles attacking Prentice, the Seattle ''Stranger'' dubbed her "Senator MoneyTree" because of her acceptance of contributions from Moneytree, a financial services company founded and headquartered in her district. Washington State Public Disclosure Commission records as of August 19, 2008 indicate that there have been no Moneytree-related contributions to the Senator since 2004 and that in the past combined 10 years, Prentice has accepted a total of $1,050 from Moneytree and/or its principals - less than half of one percent of contributions the Senator has raised in the 2008 reporting period alone.
Throughout her legislative career, Prentice has received recognition for her political and civic work.  In 2006, she received the following honors:
Prentice is a member of various civic and political organizations including:
Prentice attended Phoenix College; Youngstown State University, St. Joseph   s Hospital School of Nursing in Phoenix and the University of Washington. A nurse for more than 20 years, she worked in various capacities, including hospital administrator and various assignments as a registered nurse. She also served as a member of the Renton school board.
She has three children and five grandchildren.