He pursued acting at a young age, participating in local drama festivals in and around the Los Angeles area (DTASC). He received a BA from UCLA's prestigious School of Theatre/Film/Television and also studied at New York's Circle in the Square Theatre. Kevin was a founding member of BUFFALO NIGHTS THEATER COMPANY, and went on to produce and act in over fifteen award winning shows in and around the Los Angeles area.
Weisman is recognized around the world for his work as    Marshall Flinkman    on the ABC series ALIAS. He received a BA from UCLA   s Theatre/Film/Television and studied at New York   s Circle in the Square Theatre.
Weisman has worked extensively in the theater, most recently at the La Mirada Theater for Performing Arts, where he appeared as 'Gabe' in Donald Margulies' pulitzer prize winning play, "Dinner with Friends" ("Weisman shows Gabe's touching naivete, his love of the stability and order of marriage, and his agonized confusion over having to take sides" O.C. Register) and as 'Uncle Louie' in Neil Simon's pullitzer prize winning "Lost in Yonkers". A founding member of the award-winning and critically acclaimed Buffalo Nights Theatre Company, Kevin has served as an actor and producer on numerous productions. He starred as Griffith J. Griffith in the award- winning "Crazy Drunk" at the John Anson Ford Theatre. He also appeared in the title role in Arthur Schnitzler's "Anatol," Jean Giraudoux's "Apollo of Bellac," which received a Garland for Production of the Year and seven LA Weekly award nominations, Archibald McCleish's "J.B," "Suburban Motel," Arthur Miller's "Incident at Vichy," Oscar Wilde's "Salome" and the West Coast premiere of Jonathon Marc Sherman's "Sophistry." Additional theatre credits include "Tis Pity She's a Whore," "The Greeks," which received the LA Weekly 1999 Production of the Year Award, and "The Goldoni Trilogy" at the Mark Taper.
Since finishing ALIAS, Weisman has worked with esteemed director Rob Reiner on FLIPPED, with JJ Abrams (once again) on FRINGE, with Anthony Zuiker (creator of CSI) on all three CSI's and the New York Times Best Selling digi novel, LEVEL 26, on Chris Peckover's upcoming indie, UNDOCUMENTED. He also just completed principal photography on the Samuel Goldwyn/ WWE produced feature BENDING THE RULES. Other current work includes roles on HUMAN TARGET (FOX), CSI MIAMI (CBS), MIAMI MEDICAL (CBS), THE FORGOTTEN (ABC), NUMBERS (CBS) and CSI NY (CBS). He has been a recurring character on MOONLIGHT (CBS) and guest starred as a villainous poisoner on CHUCK (NBC), a snarky college professor on OCTOBER ROAD (ABC) and as a character with high functioning Autism on THE GHOST WHISPERER (CBS). Previous television credits include recurring and guest starring roles on FELICITY, ROSWELL, BUFFY THE VAMPIRE SLAYER, THE X-FILES, GIDEON'S CROSSING, FRASIER, E.R., JUST SHOOT ME and THE DREW CAREY SHOW . Kevin has also become quite prolific in the world of voice-over. You've probably heard his soul soothing vocal timbre on radio and television ads for such companies as Nike, Coke, ATT and as the current voice of HONDA.
Weisman's recent film work includes FLIPPED, the Rob Reiner-directed feature adaptation of Wendelin Van Draanen's young adult novel, which revolves around the confusing romantic developments of 2 young neighbors as they age from 7 to 13. Aidan Quinn and Penelope Ann Miller play the girl's parents, and Weisman plays her mentally-challenged uncle. He also stars in the upcoming independent horror film, UNDOCUMENTED, playing a member of a documentary crew that is captured by a gang of sadistic radicals while accompanying a group of illegal immigrants crossing the border, as well as the action/comedy BENDING THE RULES, which was filmed entirely on location in the city of New Orleans. In it, Kevin plays 'Gil Ott', a small time crook with a big secret.
Other film work includes Rob Reiner's FLIPPED, the upcoming comedy UNICORN CITY, BENDING THE RULES, and UNDOCUMENTED. Previous film work includes GONE IN SIXTY SECONDS, LIP SERVICE, ROBBERS, BUYING THE COW, Disney's SPACE BUDDIES, Kevin Smith's CLERKS II, B.O.H.I.C.A., (2008 Winner of Special Jury Award at the WorldFest-Houston Intl. Film Festival and Audience Award at the Newport Intl. Film Festival), and the 1998 Slamdance Audience Award winner, MAN OF THE CENTURY.
Weisman produced and acted in the feature film Illusion, which was released at theaters in 2006. Fellow Buffalo Nights founder & Emmy winner, Michael Goorjian directed, as well as starred in the film opposite screen legend Kirk Douglas. Illusion won the "Best Screenplay" award at the 12th Annual Hamptons International Film Festival, and it was an official selection of the 16th Annual Palm Springs Int. Film Festival. The film also competed at the 8th Annual Sonoma Valley Film Festival, the 1st Annual Inspiration Film Festival (Santa Monica), & the Maui Film Festival.
Weisman is very active in the world of voice over, working on spots for such companies as Nike, Apple, PAC bell, and Cox Cable Comapny. Weisman is currently is the national voice of Honda.
Weisman takes advantage of every opportunity to participate in celebrity golf, ski & poker tournaments (he is an avid player) that benefit organizations such as Tony LaRussa's Celebrities Fore! ARF (Animal Recue Foundation), The Special Olympics, The Urban Health Institute, The Melanoma Research Foundation, and The Clear View Treatment Center, which provides a residential treatment program for adolescent boys who have been neglected,, abused & abandoned.
Additionally, Kevin Weisman and his family are  avid supporters of numerous children's charities and Jewish organizations, including the L.A. Children's Hospital, The Children's Defense Fund, Wheels For Humanity, Bet Tzedek, a non-profit law-firm that provides free legal services to low-income, disabled & elderly residents of Los Angeles Country, and Koreh LA, a local Jewish organization that assists kids in advancing their reading skills. Particularly close to his heart is Kevin's involvement in the fight against Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy, serving as a board member of the DMD Fund (www.dmdfund.org).
Weisman is a founding member of the Buffalo Nights Theatre Company and appeared in numerous plays at their resident space, the Powerhouse Theatre in Santa Monica.
Weisman's stage resume includes roles in Arthur Schnitzler's ''Anatol'', Jean Giraudoux's ''Apollo of Bellac'', which received a Garland for Production of the Year and seven ''LA Weekly'' award nominations; ''Madman and the Nun'', ''The Firebugs'', ''Suburban Motel'', Ethan Lipton's ''Hope on the Range'', Arthur Miller's ''Incident at Vichy'', Oscar Wilde's ''Salome'', and the West Coast Premiere of Jonathan Marc Sherman's ''Sophistry''.
His other theatre credits include '''Tis Pity She's a Whore'', ''The Greeks'' (which received the 1999 LA Weekly Theater Award for Production of the Year) and ''The Goldoni Trilogy''.  Weisman has also worked at the La Mirada Theater for Performing Arts, where he appeared as 'Gabe' in Donald Margulies' pulitzer prize winning play, "Dinner with Friends" ("Weisman shows Gabe's touching naivete, his love of the stability and order of marriage, and his agonized confusion over having to take sides" O.C. Register) and as 'Uncle Louie' in Neil Simon's pullitzer prize winning "Lost in Yonkers"
Weisman produced and acted in the 2001 feature film, ''The Illusion'', directed by Michael Goorjian. His best-known acting role is as Marshall Flinkman on the hit television series ''Alias'' (2001   2006). He has also appeared on Bravo's ''Celebrity Poker Showdown''. Weisman was the drummer for the rock band Trainwreck and loves to play poker, softball and golf.  Weisman is very active in the world of voice over, working on spots for such companies as Nike, Apple, PAC bell, and Cox Cable Comapny, and Honda.
He is also involved in a number of charities, including Koreh LA, Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy, and Wheels for Humanity.
Weisman married Jodi Tanowitz, a preschool teacher, on May 21, 2005. Their daughter, Maya Rose, was born on March 31, 2006 in Los Angeles and their son, Eli Samuel, was born on February 11, 2008.