The Swedish Police Service consists of the Swedish National Police Board and 21 county police authorities. 
The Swedish National Police Board (''Rikspolisstyrelsen'') is the central administrative and supervisory authority of the police service. It is also the supervisory authority of the National Laboratory of Forensic Science. The SNPB is headed by the National Police Commissioner who is appointed by the government. The current National Police Commissioner is Bengt Svenson. Among other things, the SNPB is responsible for the development of new working methods and technological and administrative support. It is also - through the National Police Academy - responsible for the training of police officers. It is also the principal agency for the Swedish National Laboratory of Forensic Science.
The National Police Board also consists of two national departments:
Responsibilities:
Responsibilities:
In each of the 21 Counties of Sweden there is a County Police Authority, which is headed by a County Police Commissioner. There is also a County Police Board, consisting of local politicians and the commissioner. The Commissioners and the members of the board are all appointed by the Government of Sweden. The County Police Authorities report to the National Police Board which in turn report to the Ministry of Justice.
The police have special units that are used in more difficult situations or serious security threats, such as the ''Piketen'' emergency response teams and the paramilitary National Task Force (). For larger issues, there is also opportunity to receive reinforcement from auxiliary ''Beredskapspolisen''.
The Swedish police operate a number of helicopters as support units. Tasked mainly with observation and search duties while being stationed in a number of locations in Sweden (Stockholm, Gothenburg, Ostersund and Boden). The type used at present is the Eurocopter EC-135.
For most of the 20th century, Swedish police vehicles were painted black and white. In 2005, Swedish police cars changed to a blue and fluorescent yellow livery (Battenburg markings), from a white and blue one. Most Swedish police cars are either Volvos or Saabs, with the same livery all over Sweden.
Almost all officers wear a waistbelt which carries a service pistol (the official side arm for the Swedish police is the SIG Sauer P226, P228 & P239), extra magazine, expandable baton, handcuffs, Sepura radio, Nokia mobile phone, pepper spray, keys and gloves. They also have a duffel bag which has additional equipment including masks 90 and vest. Many police officers also carry a RAKEL radio communication device. All police officers must carry identification.
Currently the police use two radio systems, the analogue S70 and S80. S70 is used nationwide, while S80 is used as a complement to the S70 in Stockholm, Gothenburg and Malmo. Both systems are becoming obsolete and the Swedish Emergency Management Agency (SEMA) began the introduction of a new digital radio system, RAKEL (''RadioKommunikation for Effektiv Ledning'' ,"Radio Communication for Effective Command and Control"). Police made the first tests with RAKEL in April 2006.
Since radio systems can be scanned, for sensitive information the police choose to use cell phones that are practically impossible to intercept, even though the cellphone only allows calls between the communication center and an individual officer, while the radio allows a large number of police units to communicate with each other simultaneously.
Image:VolvoPV56policecar.jpg|1939 Volvo PV56 Swedish police car.
Image:1974plymouthvaliantpolicecar.jpg|1974 Plymouth Valiant Swedish police car in the period black and white paint.
Image:1988Volvo244GL-policecar-rear.jpg|Swedish police Volvo 244 in the middle 1980s to early 1990s paint.
Image:Swedish patrol car new livery.JPG|Swedish police car (Volvo V70) in current livery.
Image:Black_Swedish_riot_police_car.jpg|Swedish riot police vehicle
Image:Swedish_police_on_motorcycles.jpg|Swedish MC-police.
Image:Polisattack.jpg|Riot police charge during the Gothenburg riots in 2001.
Image:Kravallpolis.jpg|Current uniform of the riot police.