The '''Sunsphere''', in Knoxville, Tennessee, is an  high hexagonal steel truss structure, topped with a  gold-colored glass sphere that served as the symbol of the 1982 World's Fair.
Designed by the Knoxville architectural firm Community Tectonics, the Sunsphere was created as the theme structure for the 1982 World's Fair. It was noted for its unique design in several engineering publications. Most of the World's Fair site is now a public park and a convention center, but the Sunsphere remains.
In its original design, the sphere portion was to have had a diameter of  to represent symbolically the  diameter sun. The tower's window glass panels are layered in 24-karat gold dust and cut to seven different shapes. It weighs 600 tons and features six double steel truss columns in supporting the seven-story sphere. The tower has a volume of  and a surface of .
During the fair it cost $2 to take the elevator to its observation deck. The tower served as a restaurant and featured food items such as the ''Sunburger'' and a rum and fruit juice cocktail called the ''Sunburst.''
The Sunsphere has been used as a symbol for Knoxville, appearing in postcards and logos. Between 1993 and 1999, the Sunsphere was featured in part on the logo for the Knoxville Smokies minor league baseball club. The 2002 AAU Junior Olympics mascot ''Spherit'' took its inspiration from the landmark. It featured red hair and a body shaped like the Sunsphere. On Sunday, May 15, 2000, nuclear weapons protesters scaled the tower and hung a large banner that said "Stop the Bombs." They remained on the tower for three days before surrendering to police.
In March 1991 officials from the Pensacola Tornados of the Continental Basketball Association were looking at Knoxville for possible location and said of the Sunsphere as potential office space, "What better place for basketball offices than a giant gold basketball in the sky."
A pair of failed proposals was presented to the World's Fair Park Development Committee on March 31, 1994, that sought to reopen the Sunsphere as a restaurant (similar to Dallas' Reunion Tower, which features a restaurant at the top of the tower). The proposal from CEB Enterprises would have opened a casual dining restaurant called World's Fare Restaurant. The proposal from Cierra Restaurant Group would have opened a fine dining restaurant.
The Sunsphere was proposed to be included as part of the new Knoxville Convention Center. While not physically incorporated into the final design, the Convention Center was designed with an open curve along its north edge to allow access to the Sunsphere. During construction of the Convention Center, the observation deck, which had been briefly reopened by the city (still sporting the original World's Fair-era displays and explanations of the panorama), was closed while the tower was commandeered by the Knoxville Public Building Authority as offices for, quite literally, overseeing the construction of the Convention Center. The Convention Center was completed in 2001.
Kinsey Probasco Hays of Chattanooga propose reopening the tower complete with a renovated restaurant, snack bar, office space and a public observation deck.
25 years after the Fair, the level 4 observation deck was reopened July 5, 2007 to give visitors a view of Knoxville. The observation deck can hold 86 people. At the time of its reopening, level 5 became a cafe with sandwich and drinks service and an early evening drinks service. Level 6 served as an open space leased out for functions. Both levels 5 and 6 are being managed by Southern Graces Catering and Events. Level 7 (Upper Restaurant level) & Level 8 (Mountain View Observation Level) will become the offices for the Knoxville magazine ''Metro Pulse''.
On August 27, 2008 the 5th floor was opened as the SkyBox bar and lounge. It has since closed, and now business offices are on the 5th, 7th, and 8th floors.