The '''ZAP Xebra''' is an electric car that was launched in May 2006 in the United States market by ZAP corporation. It is classified legally as a three wheel motorcycle in some jurisdictions, and is available in both sedan (model SD) and pickup (model PK) truck variants. It has seat belts. It does not have regenerative braking. The PK pickup has a dump bed, with fold-down sides and tailgate, that allows easy access to the batteries, controller, motor, and charger. The Xebra was phased out in 2009.
The top speed of the Xebra is , with a range of about  with the standard batteries, or  with the optional extended range batteries.
The sedan version can carry up to four people. The listed cargo weight capacity for both the SD sedan and the PK pickup is 1000&nbsp;lb (460&nbsp;kg), although PK owners have carried more weight than that.
An optional rooftop-mounted solar panel on the Xebra Xero variant allows for trickle solar charging, which should lengthen the range and life of the six traction batteries; it is also available as a roof over the PK pickup bed.
The 2008 "version 6" all-steel-bodied version of the Xebra sedan is now in production.
The Xebra is the first production vehicle to be imported from China to the USA, and one of the only city speed electric vehicles in production. It is available from licensed ZAP/Voltage Vehicle dealers. According to the owner and dealer reports, some of the early 2006 models had problems with the body work, DC-to-DC converters, controllers, or chargers. They were not properly waterproofed and would degrade and malfunction when wet. Newer models delivered in 2007 are waterproofed and these problems are resolved.
More recent models have been greatly improved with many low-quality parts being eliminated in the new production facility. Some replacement parts, even on new vehicles, are hard to find.. Most of these issues have been resolved with the building of and move to a modern high tech moving production line facility. The interruption in production and flow of parts has greatly improved.
According to various news reports, over a hundred and fifty Xebras were sold in 2006. The PK became available in late 2006. According to Zap! 500 Xebra sedans and pickups were ordered by July 2007.
Some details: