MK1 & MK2 Mondeo only,
The '''Ford Mondeo''' is a large family car sold by the Ford Motor Company in various markets throughout the world. The name "Mondeo" derives from the Latin word ''mundus'', meaning "world". The initial generation of the Mondeo was developed as a "world car", along with North American models marketed as the Ford Contour and Mercury Mystique until 2000.
The Mondeo was launched on 8 January 1993, and sales began on 22 March 1993. Available as a four-door saloon, a five-door hatchback, and a five-door estate, all models for the European market were produced at Ford's plant in the Belgian city of Genk. The Sierra had been built there since its launch in 1982, although until 1989, right hand drive Sierras had also been built in UK at the Dagenham plant.
Intended as a world car, it replaced the Ford Sierra in Europe, the Ford Telstar in a large portion of Asia and other markets, while the Ford Contour and Mercury Mystique replaced the Ford Tempo and Mercury Topaz in North America. Unlike the Sierra, the Mondeo is front-wheel drive in its most common form, with a rarer four-wheel drive version available on the Mk1 car only. Instigated in 1986, the design of the car cost Ford US$6 billion. It was one of the most expensive new car programs ever. The Mondeo was significant as its design and marketing was shared between Ford USA in Dearborn, and Ford of Europe.  Its codename while under development reflected thus: '''CDW27''' signified that it straddled the C & D size classes and was a "World Car".
The car was launched in the midst of turbulent times at Ford of Europe, when the division was haemorrhaging hundreds of millions of dollars, and had gained a reputation in the motoring press for selling products which had been designed by accountants rather than engineers. The fourth generation Escort and Orion of 1990 was the zenith of this cost-cutting/high price philosophy which was by then beginning to backfire on Ford, with the cars being slated for their substandard ride and handling, though a facelift in 1992 had seen things improve a little. The Sierra had sold well, but not as well as the all-conquering Cortina before it, and in Britain, it had been overtaken in the sales charts by the newer Vauxhall Cavalier. Previously loyal customers were already turning to rival products and by the time of the Mondeo's launch, the future of Europe as a Ford manufacturing base was hanging in the balance. The new car ''had'' to be good, and it had to sell.
Despite being billed as a world car, the only external items the Mondeo shared initially with the Contour were the windscreen, front windows, front mirrors and door handles. The rear end of the American sedan was basically the same as the European saloon, but with a red, dummy lense connecting the tail lights. The front end treatment, however, skipped a generation, from the European viewpoint, being the same as the Mk2 Mondeo right from the start. The Contour's oval grille was modified slightly on the Mercury variant. The interior also was slightly different. The CDW27 project turned out not to be a true world car in the sense that the original Ford Focus and the Mk.6 Ford Fiesta would later be, one design for the world.
A large proportion of the high development cost was due to the Mondeo being a completely new design, sharing very little, if anything, with the Ford Sierra and using an all-new, Volvo derived, platform. Over optimistically the floor pan was designed to accept virtually any conceivable drivetrain, from a transverse four to an in-line V-8. This resulted in a hugely obtrusive and mostly disused bellhousing cover and transmission tunnel. The resulting interior front of the car, especially the footwells, feel far more cramped than would be expected from a vehicle of this size. The Mondeo featured new manual and automatic transmissions and sophisticated suspension design, which Ford hoped would give it class-leading handling and ride qualities, and subframes front and rear to give it executive car refinement. The automatic transmission featured electronic control with sport and economy modes plus switchable overdrive.
Safety was a high priority in the Mondeo design with a driver's side airbag (it was the first ever car sold from the beginning with a driver's airbag in all of its versions, which helped it achieve the ECOTY title in 1993), side-impact bars, seat belt pretensioners, and ABS (higher models) as standard features. Other features for its year included adaptive damping, self-levelling suspension (top station wagon models), traction control (V6 and 4WD versions), and heated front windscreen, branded Quickclear.
The interiors were usually well appointed, featuring velour trim, an arm rest with CD and tape storage, central locking (frequently remote), power windows (all round on higher models), power mirrors, flat-folding rear seats, etc. Higher specification models had leather seats, trip computers, electric sunroof, CD changer and alloy wheels.
During its development, Ford used the 1986 Honda Accord and 1990 Nissan Primera as the class benchmarks that the CDW27 had to beat.. An official Ford brochure, which explains the development of the Mondeo, is freely available 
Along with an all-new platform, the Mondeo also used Ford's then-new Zetec engines, first seen in 1991 in the Ford Escort and Ford Fiesta.
Three versions of the 16-valve Zetec engine were used. The 1.6 L version (rated at ) from the Escort was used, a 1.8 () also found in the Escort and Ford Fiesta (), while a new  2.0 L version was launched.
An alternative to the Zetec engines was the Endura-D 1.8 L turbodiesel. This engine had origins in the older 1.6 L diesel design used in the Fiesta and elsewhere. Although not without merits, it was not seen as a strong competitor to other European diesels such as that produced by Peugeot. The contrast between this unit and the competition seemed enormous by the time the engine was dropped in 2000. Strangely, the diesel powered vehicles could easily be distinguished by dint of their having a slightly redesigned grille.
A less popular engine (for the UK and Ireland) was introduced in 1994 in the form of the  2.5 L 24-valve V6 Duratec unit, primarily included for markets where four-cylinder petrol engines are not favored and are usually intended for the upmarket European buyer. This engine, first unveiled in the Mondeo's North American cousin, the Ford Contour, is characterized by its smooth operation, chain-driven camshafts and an ability to operate using only half its 24 valves at low engine speeds. Fuel economy was reasonable, with the automatic barely much worse than the manual (but far less reliable). This engine was originally branded 24v (when valve count was all important), but later on sold as the more glamorous sounding V6.
This engine was also used to introduce the new "ST" brand to the Mondeo range as a flagship model (with less specification than a Ghia or a Ghia X), the ST24 in 1997. The power of the engine stayed at , the same as other 2.5 L-engined models (so was slower than a Mk1 24v), but the ST featured unique cabin trim (half leather seats), unique 16 in alloy wheels (that were originally only available on a Ghia X Estate), and a full Rally Sport Appearance Pack body kit as standard, The bodykit option was listed as a delete option for those that did not want it fitted as standard. This was later replaced by the Limited Edition ST200 in 2000, featuring a modified version of the V6 Duratec with a power output of .
Although neither of these models ever sold in high numbers, the marketing was important to Ford, as it was an introduction to the ST range as a sportier side to the full range, especially significant as apart from the Focus RS, both the XR and RS model ranges were phased out during the 1990s.
The 1993-1996 range had the following trim levels:
Additional trim levels in other European markets included:
The Mk2 Mondeo, known in some quarters as the Mk1 Face-lift, launched in October 1996 seeing three of the Mk1 Mondeo's biggest criticisms addressed: its bland styling, the bad performance of the headlights, the reflectors of which quickly yellowed and the cramped rear legroom. The lowering of specification levels around that time (e.g. air-conditioning and alloy wheels became optional on the UK Ghia models) may have indicated a desire by Ford to cut costs and recoup some of the huge sums invested in the original design. These specification levels were improved again in 1998 as the Mondeo approached replacement.
The Mk2 saw almost every external panel replaced, becoming in every respect, other than the rear elevation, the same as the American Contour. This left only the doors, the roof, and the rear panels on the estate the same as the original Mk1 model. Even the extractor vents on the rear doors were replaced by a panel bearing the name Mondeo. The most notable change was the introduction of the Contour's corporate 'oval' grille and big, wraparound lighting units. The saloon version featured some distinctive rear lights. These incorporated an additional reflector panel that extended around the top and the side of the rear wings. Unlike the iterations seen on the heavily facelifted Scorpio and Mk4 Fiesta during the previous year, this facelift was well-received.
The interior was also mildly revised, though the basic dashboard architecture was the same as before. Safety specification was improved, with the car gaining a full-size driver airbag in place of the smaller 'euro-bag' fitted in the Mk1 Mondeo. The Mk2 gained a 'flagged' 3 star rating in EuroNCAP testing, which was average for rivals of its time (the same as the Vauxhall Vectra, better than the Citroen Xantia and Peugeot 406, and worse than the Nissan Primera).
The Zetec engine was thoroughly revised in 1998. The updated version was far more refined at high revolutions, addressing a common criticism of the Zetec motor.
The Mk2 Mondeo was initially popular, being Britain's third best selling new car in 1996 through to 1998. However in 1999 it dipped into sixth place and had been outsold by its biggest rival, the Vauxhall Vectra.
Although production of the MK2 Mondeo ceased in 2000 when it was replaced with the MK3, sales of the model continued into 2001 with models appearing on a UK Y-registration plate and some even on a 51-plate.
In Europe, the Mondeo was instantly declared a class leader, It was elected Car of the Year in 1994, ahead of PSA's new Xantia model.
Ford briefly sold a version using the 2.0 L Zetec engine and four-wheel drive, available between 1995 and 1996 on cars with Si, Ghia and Ghia X trim. The timing was not ideal though, as four-wheel drive had already become synonymous with large SUVs such as the Land Rover Discovery, and the bottom dropped out of the four-wheel drive sedan market, with the notable exception of Subaru.  People who would tolerate the knock on performance and economy, preferred to graduate to a full-blown SUV, rather than a sedan with good all-round traction, especially since SUVs had become fashionable at the time.
In Europe, the Mondeo sold well, but in other markets such as the United States and Australia, it had not fared well, as there were larger locally-produced Ford models, such as the Taurus and Falcon that had stronger brand loyalty and offered better value for money. Ford claimed that it was a 'world car', but in a letter to ''Autocar'' magazine in the UK, a Ford dealer retorted 'What world was it designed for?'  Because of this, the Contour and Mystique proved unpopular with American buyers. While the Contour sold at an average rate, the Mystique fizzled. The Mondeo Mk3 was much larger than the Mk1/2 version, but was not sold in the United States and Canada, where Ford now offers the Fusion.
There is however another theory advanced by some motoring journalists: because the Contour and Mystique were not created in the United States, they suffered from a lack of enthusiasm from inside Ford's North American operations. Those same theorists point to the fact that the BMW 3 Series     arguably a "world car", in the sense one version is sold globally, does quite well in the United States and it is the same size as the Contour and Mystique.
The Mondeo was released in Australia in 1995, but was not a sales success, where, similarly, there was a much larger local model, the Falcon, and was dropped in 2001. Ford Australia withdrew completely from the medium-sized segment of the Australian market, arguing that it was in decline. The wagon version, the first medium-sized Ford of its kind to be sold in Australia since the Cortina, was dropped in 1999. It struggled against Japanese models such as the Honda Accord and Subaru Liberty, as well as the Holden Vectra, also imported from Europe, although unlike the Mondeo, briefly assembled locally. The Mondeo has since returned to Australia in 2007 with an all-new model.
The Mondeo Mk2 was voted Car of the Year in 2001 by ''Autocar New Zealand'' and ''National Business Review''. In addition, many earlier model Mondeos, imported used from Japan were also sold locally (Japan was also a good market for the Mondeo, a rare feat in a country with a high proportion of domestic automobiles). It was launched to replace the Telstar in New Zealand following the plant closure in 1997.
In Australia, the 1995-2001 Ford Mondeo was assessed in the Used Car Safety Ratings 2006 as providing "significantly better than average" protection for its occupants in the event of a crash.
In 1997, the Mondeo was introduced into South Africa as a replacement for the Mazda-based Ford Telstar. It was produced locally at their Silverton plant in 1.8-litre and 2.0-liter sedan models. As production was limited to one body style, Stationwagon (2.0-liter) Hatchback (2.5-litre V6) models were imported alongside the sedan models. The Mondeo was one of the first mainstream cars in South Africa to introduce airbags as standard equipment. Sedan sales were never a major success - fairly radical styling being cited as the main problem by a still conservative vehicle market. Styling was partly addressed by an Aspen model, which featured 15" alloy wheels, front fog lamps and full leather trim.
In its final year in China, the Ford Mondeo M2000 gained a front fascia not dissimilar from the outgoing Mercury Mystique, but had Ford badges. Its rear end was identical to that of the European models.
The 1996-2000 range had the following trim levels:
In South Africa, the trim levels offered were:
Mondeo Mk2 sports variants included the ST24 and the ST200. The ST24 produced  from its 2.5 litre V6 24v engine and was launched with Rally Sport Appearance Pack body kits, along with sports suspension and half-leather sports bucket-seats. Its standard setup saw the ST24 from standstill to  in 8.2 seconds, coupled with a maximum speed of . North America got an SE "Sport" Version of the Contour, which featured exclusive wheels and the coveted 9" Sport Drum rear brakes. Rear disc brakes eventually became available in North America on certain Contour and Mystique models.
The ST200 was then launched as the Enthusiast's car, with a tuned 2.5 litre V6 24v engine producing . This engine made the ST200 go from standing to  in around 7.7 seconds, and reach a maximum speed of . Tuning included a different throttle body, cams, flywheel, and upper manifold to name a few. This version of the Mondeo also had even harder sports suspension than the ST24, and came with full-leather Recaro sports bucket-seats. The ST200 was released to the public in Imperial Blue colour, Moondust Silver and a very limited number in white (mainly for use by the police). The North American counterpart to this model was known as the Ford Contour SVT.
In 1998, Ford released in Europe a sports car with a coupe bodyshell based upon the Mk2 Mondeo called the Ford Cougar (or Mercury Cougar in North America. This car shared the engines (2.0 I4, 2.5 V6), transmissions, suspension (partially) and floorpans from the Mondeo, but the body shell was unique to the Cougar, and was one of the last Ford cars to be designed under Ford's New Edge philosophy.
This third generation model was launched in October 2000 and is known as the Mk3. This Mondeo was considerably larger than its predecessor, and although Ford abandoned its New Edge design theme for the Mondeo Mk3, it was their first vehicle to fully benefit from the Prodigy concept car. This gave it an overall effect which many critics felt was more restrained and mature, if much less distinctive. Two of the old car's biggest weaknesses, the modest rear legroom, and uncompetitive diesel version were addressed by a longer wheelbase and the new Duratorq diesel engine. The basic chassis and suspension design was carried over from the previous generation, which meant that the car continued its predecessor's reputation for class leading handling and ride.  This Mondeo came to Mexico, replacing the North American built Ford Contour, and was sold from 2001   2007, when the Ford Fusion replaced it. The Fusion and Taurus, both of which derived from the 2004 Ford 500 sported almost identical styling, inside and out, to the Mondeo. Apart from being, very slightly, larger, having a taller grille treatment and rear three quarter 'opera' windows, from the rear, only the differing lenses fitted to the tiangular tail-lights gave the game away.
Following the standard setting interior of the Volkswagen Passat Mk4 in 1996, Ford paid a great deal of attention to the Mk3's interior and was the first mainstream manufacturer to react to the new standard set by Volkswagen. Ford dispensed with the rounded American style interior of the Mk2, and developed a more sober 'Germanic' design, which not only seemed more sophisticated but, more importantly, was of a higher quality due to the use of more expensive materials.
As with its predecessor, passive safety was a major selling point of the 2000 Mondeo. With an even stronger bodyshell, Ford introduced its so-called "Intelligent Protection System" (IPS), which used an "intelligent" array of sensors based on a neural network , to decide the best combination of safety devices (traditional front passenger airbags, side airbags and curtain airbags) to deploy for a given crash situation. To enhance active safety, all models were fitted with anti-lock brakes and electronic brake-force distribution, with electronic stability program (ESP) available as an option. Ford's marketing of the time claimed the Mondeo was 'One of the safest places to be'. However, EURONCAP testing of the Mk3 found that it protected worse than most key rivals (Vauxhall Vectra, Citroen C5, Toyota Avensis, Volkswagen Passat), achieving a lower-end 4 star rating. Ford redesigned part of the car and it was re-tested, but the higher-than-average risk of chest injury to the driver in the frontal impact remained.
The Mondeo established itself as Britain's most popular automobile in its class and held this position every year from 2001 onwards, though this size of car has fallen slightly in popularity during the 2000s. This version of the Mondeo has never come higher than sixth in the SMMT's official list of the top selling cars in the UK each year. In 2003, it came tenth in the list.
For the Mk3, the Zetec engine was dropped, while the all-new 1.8 and 2.0 L Duratec engines were introduced. The standard 2.5 L V6 engine was carried over, while a 3.0 L version was developed for the ST220 model.
Unfortunately, there was a design flaw with the new 1.8 and 2.0 L petrol units with the butterfly valves in the inlet manifold, which could cause severe engine damage when they failed. The plastic components of the butterfly valves wear out too quickly and when loose enough can result in them falling apart and releasing metal and plastic parts into the engine cylinders, potentially causing severe engine damage () The part was uprated by Ford in late 2002 to early 2003 and this prevented the problem from occurring in later engines.
The archaic Endura-E 1.8 L turbodiesel engine was dropped, and replaced by a more sophisticated 2.0 L 16v Duratorq common rail (TDCi) unit with a variable geometry turbine. This clever turbine system allows a certain amount of ''overboost'', giving an extra 10% or so of torque for short periods. This engine, known within Ford as the "Puma"-type Duratorq, was first seen in the Transit in detuned form.
A new automatic transmission was added to the range called the Durashift. This unit has five gears and may be shifted manually or shifted like an automatic.
In June 2003, the Mondeo was given a very mild upgrade, the new models being identifiable by the larger chrome honeycomb grille, a new central dashboard made from higher quality materials, with electronic climate control, either a standard Ford radio, Sony radio, or a satellite navigation radio/CD player, which also has climate control built into the unit in lieu of the space taken up by the unit. The Durashift automatic is now available with steering wheel control. The petrol engines were revised at this stage also     the new SCI (common rail) version of the 1.8 L Duratec engine was introduced, which generates 4&nbsp;kW (5 PS) more than the standard unit. In addition, equipment was upgraded across the range     with trip computer now standard on all models, and cruise control is also standard in selected trim levels and markets.
In 2005, there were two new Duratorq common rail (TDCi) options, a 2.2L with 114&nbsp;kW (155 PS) and a detuned version of the 2.0L with 65&nbsp;kW (89 PS). Also, the Seat Belt Warning System was added and is now standard, with an audible/visual warning signal reminding the driver to fasten his/her seat belt. The styling was upgraded again, the most notable difference being tweaked taillights.
In 2002, it was the fifth best selling new car in the UK, but was pushed down to third place in the  large family car charts by the Vauxhall Vectra and Peugeot 406, not claiming top spot in its sector until 2005.
Engines:
In Brazil, Ford do Brasil re-imported the Mondeo from 2002, until the Fusion replaced it in 2006.
The Mondeo was offered only as a sedan, and had the 2.0 143&nbsp;hp inline-4 engine. The V6 version was sold only during the past generation (1999   2000). No flexifuel variant was available.
There was only one trim level, the Ghia, with manual or automatic gearbox.
In Mexico, the model was similar to the European version to replace the Ford Contour. Trim levels were Core, Edge, Ghia and 100 units of the ST220 (sold as a limited edition), it was sold only with the 2.0 4-cylinder, 2.5 V6 and 3.0 V6 (for the ST220) petrol: no turbodiesel or station wagon versions were available in Mexico. Its nearest rival were the Chevrolet Vectra and Volkswagen Passat.  2007 was the last year of the Mondeo for Mexico, being sold together with the Ford Fusion until it finally replaced it.
The fourth generation Mondeo (codename: ''CD345'') was officially unveiled in 5-door production form in late 2006. Based on the EUCD platform developed with Volvo, the platform is the same used in the new large MPVs Galaxy and S-MAX, but not the North American Ford Fusion or the Mazda Atenza in Japan. It will also possibly be used for several Volvos.
The Mk4 Ford Mondeo was released in May 2007 in the UK where it is currently available in five different trim levels: Edge, Zetec, Ghia, Titanium and Titanium X. In February 2008, Ford announced that in some European markets the Mondeo will be made available with a new Titanium S series trim. This model aims to add an even more 'sporty character' than the current Titanium series. In March 2008, a new 2.2  TDCi common-rail diesel engine will be available on Mondeo providing acceleration to 0-60&nbsp;mph in 8.4 seconds on the saloon and fuel consumption of returning 45.6 mpg combined (this engine was replaced with the 2.0l TDCi 163 returning a combined 53.3mpg imp gallons, with a marginal loss of performance). Also available in March 2008 will be Mondeo ECOnetic based on the Zetec series. The Mondeo ECOnetic is powered with a 2.0  TDCI diesel that returns CO2 ratings of just 139 g/km on the 5-door.
Although the fourth production model, after the Mk3 Galaxy, S-Max and C-Max, to adopt Ford's current 'kinetic' design language, the Mondeo's design theme was first shown at the 2005 Frankfurt Motor Show, which gave an indication to the look of the Mk4 Mondeo. The new car, in estate bodystyle, was pre-launched in 'concept' form at the Paris Motor Show on 30 September 2006.
The new platform will allow for the use of Volvo's five-cylinder petrol engine, already featured in the Focus ST and S-Max. Also, Ford dropped the two V6 engines for this platform. The petrol engines include a 1.6-litre with two power outputs (110 PS & 125 PS), the 2.0-litre (145 PS), 2.3-litre (161 PS) for automatic models only, and a 2.5-litre five cylinder turbo with . It was initially believed performance models may have featured engines from Jaguar and Volvo, but following Tata's purchase of Jaguar/Land Rover, performance variants are more likely to feature other 'in-house' Ford engines such as an uprated 2.5l T5 petrol(as found in the Focus RS) or Volvo's D5 diesel.
The new Mondeo uses the new electro-hydraulic steering system, first used on the C-Max, that sharpens the steering response, and helps to save fuel  Inside, the Mk4 features Ford's Human-Machine Interface (HMI) first seen on the Galaxy and S-Max whilst an enhanced instrument cluster featuring a  LCD for displaying trip computer and satellite navigation is available as an option on all models. Like the facelift Mk3, base specification models have a manual heating/air-conditioning system in place of the climate control system. Also new on the Mk4 is the option of keyless starting of the engine via a "Ford Power" button on the dashboard.
A product placement promotional initiative made the Mk4 Mondeo James Bond's car for one incidental scene in ''Casino Royale'', introducing the new model to global audiences in November 2006 on the launch day of the movie. 
As with the previous model, the Mk4 Mondeo is not marketed in the US or Canada because Ford currently sells the same-class Fusion, which was launched in 2005. The new Mondeo is not sold currently in Venezuela, Brazil or Colombia because the Fusion is sold locally, nor is it offered in Mexico, although the Mk3 model was popular there. It is, however, sold in Argentina.
The 2007 Mondeo marked the return to the Australian market after a six-year absence, due to a resurgence in popularity of medium-sized cars in the last few years. This is in no small part the result of high fuel prices making people reconsider purchasing large cars like the Ford Falcon. Marketing for the Mondeo in Australia has so far focused on the theme that the Mondeo looks good but offers even more than style, with television commercials showing silly quotes from celebrities such as Britney Spears ("I've been to lots of overseas places... like Canada") interspersed with scenes of the vehicle and finally the slogan "more than just good looks".
The Australian spec Mondeo TDCi took out the award for Australia's Best Cars "Best Mid-Size Car over $28,000" for 2007 and was runner up for the Wheels Magazine "Car of the Year" award.
Initial sales have been good in Australia, despite supply constraints from Europe (or possibly Thailand, where many Australian market world vehicles were built) limiting the car's success there. At this stage, the Mondeo is sold as a sedan (discontinued when the wagon was launched), hatch and wagon on the Australian market, in both diesel and petrol engines and in four trim levels; LX, TDCi, Zetec and XR5T. In June 2009, Ford Australia announced that the 'Titanium' badge would also be used on Australian spec Mondeos, along with the release of the MK4 Mondeo wagon. Only the 2.3L petrol, 2.5L petrol and 2.0L diesel engines are offered there, the 2.5 being the only model available with a manual transmission. The ECOnetic Mondeo is also now being considered for the Australian market.
The Mk4 Mondeo was named one of two cars for the 2007 "Car of the Year" award by ''Top Gear'' on 23 December 2007 (the other being the Subaru Legacy Outback).
By the end of 2010 a facelifted Mk4 Mondeo was introduced with changes such as the new ecoboost engines and LED daytime running lights. The final changes was shown at the 2010 Moscow International Motor Show. The front and rear of the car have minor changes, the biggest being the new Kinetic Design. The interior is improved with a better use of materials. The Ghia trim line has been totally removed from UK markets, so the Titanium takes over as the top of the range models, along with the saloon. The new econetic has higher mpg and further reduced CO2  emissions thanks to Stop-Start technology. Also introduced is an improved version of the 2.2L PSA diesel engine, delivering a healthy 200PS. This facelift is prompted by similar revisions to the S-MAX which was launched in summer 2010.
The 2008 UK range has the following trim levels:
The Australian range has the following trim levels:
The Irish range has the following trim levels:
The Norwegian range has the following trim levels:
The Mondeo competed in the British Touring Car Championship (BTCC) between 1993 and 2000. The cars, prepared by former series champion Andy Rouse, did not enter the 1993 season until the 8th round at Pembrey in Wales. Rouse and Paul Radisich were the drivers in the Mondeo's first season. Radisich went on to win the 1993 and 1994 World Touring Car Championships in the Mondeo.
Ford ran a factory-sponsored team, called Ford Team Mondeo, for eight seasons. As mentioned above, Andy Rouse Engineering ran the cars from 1993   1995, at which point West Surrey Racing ran the works team from 1996   1998, with Prodrive taking over beginning 1999. In 2000, the team expanded from two cars to three when drivers Alain Menu and Anthony Reid were joined by 1998 series champion Rickard Rydell, recruited from the disbanded Volvo team. The team dominated the 2000 season, finishing 1-2-3 (Menu-Reid-Rydell) in the drivers' standings and winning the manufacturers' championship by a staggering 104 points.
A complete overhaul of the BTCC following the 2000 season saw the supertouring regulations scrapped as the series moved towards lighter and less expensive race cars based on compact car chassis and not family saloons. Ford withdrew from BTCC competition prior to 2001.
The Touring Cars after their withdrawal went on sale to the public and are now in the hands of other drivers. Two of the 2000 series Mondeos have been spotted in the BRSCC series of LMA Euro saloons; drivers known to own them at present are Bernard Hogarth and Alvin Powell.
The Mk1 & Mk2 Mondeo have followed many other previous Ford models into the world of banger racing in the UK, and with many plenty of older cars being available for very little money, the Mondeo is now a popular and relatively easy car to race. The Zetec engines are converted to run off a carb set up and the Mondeo bodyshell is fairly tough, but they are proving rather rigid, with many drivers getting injured in high speed impacts. Mondeos are proving more popular than the Sierra and Mk3 Granada.
In Argentina, the Mondeo's design was employing for the manufacturing handcrafted racing cars in reforzed fiberglass, for the racing category Top Race. This model, is the most successful in the category, with 2 championships in the TRV6 and 1 championship in the TR Junior. The racedriver champions in the TRV6, was Omar Martinez (2009) and Jose Maria Lopez (2009) with the Mondeo Mk2, and the racedirver champion in the TR Junior, was '''Gonzalo Perlo''' in 2008. In 2009, was presented the Mondeo Mk3 as an bodywork option, but the Mk2 is still used.
The Mk1 Mondeo has been produced by Majorette, Matchbox, Minichamps, Gama and Siku. The Mk2 and Mk3 have both been produced by Minichamps and Rietze, in Saloon and Estate variants. The Mk4 Mondeo has been produced by Powco Toys.
British sales of the Mondeo began in March 1993, just as the new car market was enjoying a recent rise in popularity following a disappointing 1992. The Vauxhall Cavalier had just completed three years of being Britain's most popular new large family car, though Ford still held top spot in the supermini sector with the Fiesta and in the small family sector with the Escort.
The Mondeo was something new for private buyers as well as the fleet market. It was one of the first cars in its sector to have a driver's airbag as standard, and other standard refinements included power steering, central locking and electric front windows (except basic "Aspen") on all models. Prices were competitive, the ride and handling were excellent, and the quality was at least a match for just about all of its competitors.
In its first year on sale, the Mondeo was Britain's fifth most popular new car, though it didn't quite arrive on time to finish above the Vauxhall Cavalier. In its second year, it was the second most popular new car in Britain with more than 120,000 sales. The 1996 facelift enhanced the Mondeo's popularity, and as the decade drew to a close it was still a hugely popular choice in its sector, though it was now bouncing to and from top spot in the large family car sector with the improved Vauxhall Vectra. Sales of the original Mondeo were still going strong towards the end of 2000 when its successor arrived.
The third generation Ford Mondeo went on sale before the end of 2000, and there was much excitement in anticipation of its launch. Ford had promised a class-leading large family car which set new sector benchmarks for driver appeal, comfort, specification, style and build quality. The new car was indeed a smooth riding, fun to drive, well built and well equipped car which had all the credentials of a class-leader. It was Britain's most popular large family car from its launch in late 2000 until its demise over the summer of 2007, although actual sales figures dipped slightly due to a rise in popularity of more practical Compact People Carriers and SUVs. Many would-be Mondeo buyers also downsized to the smaller Focus, which moved further upmarket on the launch of a second generation model at the end of 2004.
The fourth generation Mondeo was launched in May 2007, and is an even more upmarket effort than its predecessor, but most significantly it is even better value for money, with Ford being careful to ensure that each version of the new Mondeo is cheaper to buy than the equivalent version of the previous Mondeo. However, in 2009 the car was outsold by the slightly cheaper Vauxhall Insignia.
2008 The Caravan Club Tow Car of The Year (Mondeo 2.5t Estate)