 He is of Irish ancestry. The third of four children, Savage was raised as a Roman Catholic and attended Quigley Preparatory Seminary North, which he has described as "a Catholic high school in Chicago for boys thinking of becoming priests." Though Savage has stated that he is now "a wishy-washy agnostic" and an atheist,"If Osama bin Laden were in charge, he would slit my throat; my God, I'm an atheist, a hedonist, and a faggot." ''Skipping Towards Gomorrah: The Seven Deadly Sins and the Pursuit of Happiness in America'' Dan Savage, Plume, 2002, p. 258. he has said that he still considers himself "culturally Catholic."
Savage attended the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, where he studied theater and history. As a theater director, Savage (working under the name "Keenan Hollahan") was a founder of Seattle's Greek Active Theater. Much of the group's work has been queer recontextualizations of classic works, such as a tragicomic ''Macbeth'' with both the title character and Lady Macbeth played by performers of the opposite sex. In March 2001, he directed his own ''Egguus'' at Consolidated Works, a parody of Peter Shaffer's 1973 play ''Equus'' which exchanged a fixation on horses for a fixation on chickens. Savage has not directed, produced, or performed in any productions since a 2003 production of "Letters from the Earth", also at Consolidated Works, his trimmed version of Mark Twain's "The Diary of Adam and Eve", which received scathing reviews, including one from his own paper, "My Boss's Show Stinks".
In 1991, Savage was living in Madison, Wisconsin, and working as a manager at a local video store that specialized in independent film titles. There, Savage befriended Tim Keck, co-founder of ''The Onion'', who announced that he was moving to Seattle to help start an alternative weekly newspaper titled ''The Stranger''. Savage "made the offhand comment that forever altered  life: 'Make sure your paper has an advice column   everybody claims to hate 'em, but everybody seems to read 'em'." Savage typed up a sample column, and to Savage's surprise Keck offered him the job., ''The A.V. Club'', February 8, 2006.Dan Savage, Introduction, ''Savage Love: Straight Answers from America's Most Popular Sex Columnist'', op. cit., pp. 1   5.
Savage stated in a February 2006 interview in ''The Onion'''s ''A.V. Club'' (which publishes his column) that he began the column with the express purpose of providing mocking advice to heterosexuals.  Savage wanted to call the column "Hey Faggot!" His editors at the time refused his choice of column name, but for the first several years of the column, he attached "Hey Faggot!" at the beginning of each printed letter as a salutation. According to Savage: 
In his February 25, 1999 column, Savage announced that he was retiring the phrase: "Lo many columns later, it feels strange to begin every column with a joke about a debate that ended years ago."
He has written in a number of columns about "straight rights" concerns, such as the HPV vaccine and the morning-after pill, stating in his November 9, 2005, column that "he right-wingers and the fundies and the sex-phobes don't just have it in for the queers. They're coming for your asses too."
From 1994 until 1997, he had a weekly three-hour call-in show called ''Savage Love Live'' on Seattle's KCMU (now KEXP). From 1998 to 2000, he ran the biweekly advice column ''Dear Dan'' on the news website abcnews.com.
He is now the editorial director of the weekly Seattle newspaper ''The Stranger'', a promotion from his former position as ''The Stranger'''s editor-in-chief. Savage is currently a contributor to  ''This American Life'', an hour-long radio show on Chicago's WBEZ syndicated by PRI, as well as a frequent contributor to ''Out'' magazine and a "Real Time Real Reporter" on HBO's ''Real Time with Bill Maher''. He has also made multiple appearances on MSNBC's ''Countdown with Keith Olbermann'' and CNN's ''Anderson Cooper 360'' discussing LGBT politcal issues such as same-sex marriage and Don't Ask Don't Tell.
The Savage Lovecast is a weekly audio podcast based on Savage's column ''Savage Love'', available via iTunes and at the ''Stranger'''s website for free download. It features Savage doing a call-in version of his sex advice column.
In 2010, the Savage Love iPhone App was released. The app features a "Question of the Day" pulled from "Slog," the Stranger's blog, as well as archived and indexed advice from Savage Love's archives. The app also provides access to The Savage Lovecast podcast and videos of Savage's speaking appearances, among other features.
On September 21, 2010, Savage started the It Gets Better Project in light of the suicide of 15 year old Billy Lucas, who was bullied for his perceived sexual orientation. The project encourages adults, both LGBT and otherwise, to submit videos assuring gay teenagers that life can improve after bullying in early life. As of January 3, 2011, the project had over 5,000 user created testimonials.
Savage has written about his interest in political matters. His political leanings are primarily liberal, with pronounced contrarian and libertarian streaks.
Savage frequently mentions political issues in his column, particularly issues that affect family planning, birth control, and sexuality. He often encourages readers to get involved and/or voice a positive or negative opinion about a politician or public official. 
After Rick Santorum, then a United States senator from Pennsylvania, made comments to a reporter comparing homosexual sex to bestiality and incest in 2003, Savage assailed Santorum in his column. Later, he sponsored a contest that led to the term ''santorum'' being used to refer to "the frothy mixture of lube and fecal matter that is sometimes a byproduct of anal sex".  Savage set up a website with dual addresses spreadingsantorum.com, and santorum.com, where the word ''santorum'' is defined in those terms.  In 2010, Savage offered to remove his website if Rick Santorum would agree to donate US$5 million to a gay rights group. The organization, Freedom to Marry, advocates on behalf of same-sex marriage in the United States. Savage told ''Mother Jones'' in 2010, "If Rick Santorum wants to make a $5 million donation to  Freedom to Marry, I will take it down. Interest starts accruing now."  Evan Wolfson, executive director of Freedom to Marry, responded in a statement to ''Metro Weekly'': "Support for Freedom to Marry's national campaign would be welcome   and a good way for Rick Santorum to start cleaning up the discriminatory mess he and his companions have made."
Savage continued the tradition in 2009 by having his readers vote to define ''saddlebacking'' as "the phenomenon of Christian teens engaging in unprotected anal sex in order to preserve their virginities", as a protest against the vocal support given to California Proposition 8 by Rick Warren (pastor of Saddleback Church), and President Obama's invitation to Warren to give the invocation at his inauguration. When Savage vowed to boycott Utah due to strong Mormon support for Proposition 8 ("Fuck you, Utah     we   re going to big, blue Colorado"), the ''Salt Lake City Weekly'' dropped Savage's column: "all Utahns aren   t to blame."
Savage strongly supported the war in Iraq in the pages of ''The Stranger'' in October 2002. By the time of the U.S. invasion in March 2003, he had somewhat softened his argument.Dan Savage,  March 13   19, 2003. Accessed online 6 November 2006.
Savage has also been a vocal opponent of state legislation proscribing the sale of sex toys. After an expose by Kandiss Crone from WLBT (Jackson, Mississippi) precipitated the arrest and fining of an adult video store owner, Savage suggested that readers send any sex toys that they needed to dispose of to Crone.
Savage stated in a column that he favors outing in some cases, specifically mentioning anti-gay activist Tyler Whitney. However, in the same column he noted that "I recently talked someone ''out'' of outing a public figure. A ''Savage Love'' reader was contemplating outing an innocuous celebrity back in April. I advised him against it because, as I wrote to him privately, outing is brutal and it should be reserved for brutes."
Savage's editorship of ''The Stranger'' has established him as a voice in local Seattle politics. His most high-profile commentary has been as an outspoken critic of the Teen Dance Ordinance and other crackdowns on all-ages events.
Savage argues that closing down supervised all-ages dance venues drives teens to boredom and reckless activities: "Places like Ground Zero and the Kirkland Teen Center are invaluable from a law enforcement point of view. They keep kids out of, say, 7-Eleven parking lots or the homes of friends whose parents are away."
On December 3, 2002, Savage announced in an article that he had purchased columnist Ann Landers's desk; she died on June 22 of that year.
Savage has facetiously referred to Landers as his "college roommate" and said "I like to think of myself as a gay Ann Landers."
Savage's home state of Washington allows same-sex couples to adopt children and enter civil unions, but does not legally recognize same-sex marriage. In March 2004, Savage wrote about an action that he took to highlight what he saw as being indicative of same-sex couples' lack of legal right to marry. After his co-worker Amy Jenniges was denied a license to marry her girlfriend Sonia, Jenniges and Savage obtained a license to marry one another. He wrote at the time, "We emphasized to the clerk and her manager that Amy and I don't live together, we don't love each other, we don't plan to have kids together, and we're going to go on living and sleeping with our same-sex partners after we get married. So could we still get a marriage license?" According to Savage, the license-department manager replied, "Sure. If you've got $54, you can have a marriage license."Dan Savage, , ''The Stranger'',  March 11   17, 2004. Accessed online 23 September 2008.
Savage and his husband, Terry, have one adopted son, D.J., and were married in Vancouver, BC in 2005.
In addition to his advice column, Savage has written four books, edited one book, and authored various op-ed pieces in ''The New York Times''.