The Hon. '''Linda Jean Burney''' MP, an Australian politician, is a member of the New South Wales Legislative Assembly representing Canterbury for the Australian Labor Party since 2003. Burney is Deputy Leader of the Opposition, Shadow Minister for Planning Infrastructure and Heritage, Shadow Minister for Sport and Recreation, Shadow Minister for the Hunter, and Shadow Minister for the Central Coast. In the Keneally ministry, she was the Minister for the State Plan and Minister for Community Services.
During 2008 and 2009, Burney was National President of the Australian Labor Party.
Linda Burney is of Wiradjuri descent and grew up in Whitton, a small town in South West NSW near Leeton. 
In her inaugural speech to Parliament she said:
Linda Burney grew up in Whitton where she attended the local primary school. She did her first four years of secondary school at Leeton High School and final two at Penrith High School. She was the first Aboriginal graduate from the then Mitchell College of Advanced Education where she obtained a Diploma of Teaching.
She began her career teaching at Lethbridge Park public school in western Sydney in 1979. She has been involved in the New South Wales Aboriginal Education Consultative Group since the mid 1980s and has participated in the development and implementation of the first Aboriginal education policy in Australia.
She has held senior positions in the non-government sector, serving on a number of boards including SBS, the NSW Anti-Discrimination Board and the NSW Board of Studies. Ms Burney was also an executive member of the National Council for Aboriginal Reconciliation, President of the NSW Aboriginal Education Consultative Group and is a former Director-General of the NSW Department of Aboriginal Affairs. Her commitment to Aboriginal rights and issues spans more than 30 years. Linda Burney was the Director-General of the New South Wales Department of Aboriginal Affairs,
Burney was appointed to the Community Services portfolio in December 2008 just prior to the handing down of the report of the Special Commission of Inquiry into Child Protection Services by retired Supreme Court Justice James Wood.
Following the ALP's landslide defeat at the 2011 state election, Burney was elected as Deputy Leader of the Labor Party after former Deputy Premier Carmel Tebbutt chose not stand for the position. She also became the Shadow Minister for Planning, Infrastructure and Heritage, Shadow Minister for the Central Coast and the Hunter and Shadow Minister for Sport and Recreation.
Among her initiatives was the NSW Volunteer of the Year Award. In 2006 she gave the 7th Vincent Lingiari Memorial Lecture, and in 2008 gave the Henry Parkes Oration in Canberra.
Burney has a son and a daughter. Her partner for a number of years until his death was Rick Farley.