Mitchell grew up in the Perth suburb of Bull Creek, Western Australia, forming the band Jebediah in 1994. With Mitchell as the frontman, the band released four studio albums from 1997   2004, the first three of which entered the top ten of the ARIA Albums Chart. The band went on hiatus as Mitchell undertook solo work with the pseudonym of Bob Evans.
Mitchell adopted the stage name of Bob Evans in 1999, so that he could pursue a solo career of acoustic songs, without attracting Jebediah fans who might expect and demand performances of acoustic Jebediah songs. He released a rather unrecognized album in 2003, ''Suburban Kid''. Capital Records signed Mitchell and released the album, ''Suburban Songbook'', in 2006. It debuted at number 15 on the ARIA Albums Chart and featured the successful single, "Don't You Think It's Time". In 2009, he announced a third album, ''Goodnight, Bull Creek!'', named after his hometown of Bull Creek. The album peaked at number 22 on the ARIA Albums Chart.
Kevin Edward Mitchell was born and raised from age five to eighteen in suburban Bull Creek, on the edge of the Western Australian capital city of Perth, Western Australia, in 1977, He later named his third album, ''Goodnight, Bull Creek!''. Mitchell said of his hometown, "It's a very ordinary, plain little suburb with a primary school and a shopping centre and a BMX track," while speaking about the title of the album in 2009.  Mitchell attended Bull Creek Primary and Leeming Senior High School, dropping out of university to sign a record deal with Jebediah. His older brother Brett is also a member of Jebediah.
Kevin Mitchell formed Jebediah in Perth, Australia in 1995. He undertook vocal and guitar duties, as the band played cover songs by bands such as Green Day and the Smashing Pumpkins. As the popularity of the band grew they competed in the Australian National Campus Band Competition, winning the national final in Lismore, New South Wales. This led to an opening slot on the 1996 Australian music festival, run by renowned promoter Steve Pavlovic, Summersault. They performed in Perth before groups such as the Beastie Boys, Foo Fighters and Sonic Youth.
Jebediah signed with Murmur, a part of Sony Music, in 1996, with the band also winning its first WAMi award for Best Stage Presence, a credit to Mitchell's on stage energy. The band's first single, "Jerks of Attention", earned the band a WAMi award in 1997 for Most Popular Song, with the band also taking out Most Popular Band. High profile work on Homebake and the Big Day Out as well as support slots for Soundgarden, Everclear, The Presidents of the United States of America, Silverchair and You Am I further raised the band's profile.
 with it being certified double platinum in 1998, by ARIA. They recorded ''Of Someday Shambles'' in 1999, with the first single, "Animal", peaking at number 16 on the ARIA Singles Chart. The album peaked at number two, earning a platinum certification from ARIA.
Jebediah released the single "Fall Down", in 2001. The song peaked at number 24 on the ARIA Singles Chart. It was followed by the self-titled album, ''Jebediah'' (2002), which reached number eight on the ARIA Albums Chart. The band released their fourth and final album to date in 2004, titled ''Braxton Hicks''. Following the album, Jebediah went on hiatus, with Mitchell moving onto his own solo work.
Mitchell has confirmed that he is still very much involved with his band, Jebediah.
Mitchell further insists there will be a new album at some point, saying, "Jebediah has become more of a part-time thing... But a great deal of that was a natural occurrence, regardless of Bob (Evans). We are still together and I have ambitions to make another Jebs record."
Jebediah returned to the studio in 2010 to rehearse old hits and write new music for their next album, which was originally tentatively due out for release sometime in 2010, eventually released in April 2011, debuting at #6 on the ARIA top 50 album chart.
Kevin Mitchell performs his solo work under the pseudonym of Bob Evans. He created the name in 1999, coming up with it to play incognito solo shows in Perth. Mitchell has said he chose Bob Evans, "because it was written on a T-shirt I was wearing". Evans' first solo effort, ''Suburban Kid'', (2003) on Redline Records, was a relatively indistinguishable album, and has been described as "an album of youthful introspection, love and loss". All songs were written by Kevin Mitchell, however, he shares writing credit on one song, "The Hermit", with Luke Steele from The Sleepy Jackson. Katy Steele, from Little Birdy also performed backup vocals on the album.
Evans' next studio album, ''Suburban Songbook'', was released in 2006. Originally a collection of demos he recorded as Kevin Mitchell, and not intended for public release, they were nonetheless discovered while recording his sophomore effort with Capitol Records, who integrated the songs into the new album, and set him on the road to commercial success. Mitchell sent out the demos to his favorite record producers around the world and was surprised by the immediate response by American producer, Brad Jones (Josh Rouse, Yo La Tengo, Sheryl Crow).   Jones took Mitchell   s wide-eyed-and-gritty vision for the album and suggested a more refined, listener-friendly approach. ''Suburban Songbook'' was released on 10 June 2006 and debuted at #15 on the ARIA album charts.
Mitchell supported Evermore on their "Welcome to the Real Life" tour of Australia and New Zealand under the Bob Evans stage name, and also performed on the 2007 Big Day Out tour, Homebake, West Coast Blues & Roots Festival and The Great Escape.
At the 2007 Western Australian Music Industry (WAMi) Awards he was nominated for two awards, Most Popular Album and Best Commercial Pop Act. Mitchell was voted Best Male Artist in the 2007 ''Rolling Stone'' annual readers poll. He also played showcases in London, New York and Johannesburg before undertaking a national tour with Machine Translations and South African band Farryl Purkiss.
When later asked what 'reverse alter-ego' means to Kevin, he said    I've no idea, that's one of those quotes that I've been haunted by.    
Mitchell has been recording a new album with Jebediah and has also recorded some new songs for his third album, ''Goodnight, Bull Creek!'' in Nashville, with producer Brad Jones (Sheryl Crowe, Josh Rouse). According to Mitchell the album will be the final piece in his suburban musical trilogy.
In April 2009 Mitchell undertook a national tour to promote the release of the album and was joined by Malcolm Clark (Sleepy Jackson), Hugh Jennings (End of Fashion), Ben Witt (The Chemist), Louis Macklin (67 Special) and Steve Poltz (The Rugburns) from the United States.  In July he played the Splendour in the Grass festival in Byron Bay, following which he was the support act for Eskimo Joe on their ''Inshalla'' national tour.
With the original intention of Mitchell's Bob Evans persona to record a trilogy of suburban themed solo albums now complete he admits that this era of his life is coming to an end. 
In March 2010 Mitchell expanded his media career as a guest presenter on Australian Radio's Triple J morning show, in Zan Rowe's absence.
Mitchell married girlfriend Kristen in November 2006 and in December 2008 they moved from Perth to Seddon, Victoria, an inner west suburb of Melbourne.