Beth Raymond (Shannyn Sossamon) is terrified by the deaths of four friends(Taylor, Brian, Leann, and Shelley), three of which she personally witnessed, after they received chilling phone calls apparently from themselves in the future, showing the exact time of their deaths. In the beginning, Shelley is alone in her backyard and sees something suspicious in the lake, looking over when a hand pulls her in the water drowning her along with her cat. Beth's friend Leann gets the exact same call, and later falls onto some tracks, and is hit by a train. Then Beth's other friend Brian can't take any more of this, and leaves. Minutes later, he shows Beth that he got a call too, and a gas explosion forces a pipe through his chest seconds later. Beth's best friend, Taylor gets the same call, and later she is strangled by an invisible force. After every death, a small red candy is found in the victim's mouth. In all the cases, the people who are going to die will see strange apparitions shortly before being killed, such as the woman seen on the theatrical poster with a baby carriage. Beth reports these strange occurrences to the police; however, they think she is delirious. Detective Jack Andrews (Edward Burns) believes her, stating that his sister died in a similar way. Together, they begin to unravel the mystery of the chain of calls, but are unsure if they can figure it out when Beth's phone starts to ring the same eerie tune, with a call dated 7:55 of that day.
They eventually trace the series of calls back to a woman named Marie Layton, who was apparently abusing her children, Ellie (Ariel Winter) and Laurel, for attention, as in cases of Munchausen by Proxy. They learn that Ellie later died of an asthma attack, and that Laurel is in a foster home after her mother went missing.
Believing that Marie is the source behind the murders, Beth travels to the recently burned-down St. Luke's hospital, where Marie was last seen, bringing Laurel in for a cut on her arm. After searching the hospital, Beth finds the body of Marie in the hospital ducting, where she apparently burned to death, clutching a cell phone. Marie's corpse moves and assaults Beth while weeping. She collapses when Detective Andrews makes his way into the ducting to help Beth. As Beth is fighting off Marie's corpse, 7:55 passes, but Beth does not die. It is later revealed that Marie's spirit was actually protecting Beth, not trying to hurt her.
After contacting authorities, who arrive to collect the body, Beth returns home and Andrews goes to tell Laurel that her mother is dead. While visiting, Andrews sees a drawing that was drawn by Laurel on the wall. He realizes the drawing is a teddy bear and the baby carriage. Previously, it was shown that the jar of bugs and the baby carriage (all mysterious occurrences seen by the victims before their deaths) were in the area where the nanny cam might be.  He goes back to Laurel's room to get the teddy bear to see if there might be a nanny cam on the back. He finds a video disc in the back of Laurel's teddy bear. The disc is a video of a camera Marie hid in her children's room to monitor Laurel and Ellie. Ellie, clothed in a black hoodie, cuts Laurel's arm with a large butcher knife. Marie comes in and finds the children, realizing that the abuse she has been blamed for has been Ellie all along, and leaves to take Laurel to the hospital, locking Ellie in the bedroom.
Ellie, frantic, tries to force open the door, and suffers an asthma attack. Reaching for her inhaler, she finds it empty, and dies while dialing her mother's cell phone, making Marie the first real victim of the curse, dying in the fire. Laurel enters the room and Andrews says that it was Ellie who hurt her all the time, not her mother. Laurel nods, and speaking for the first time since the death of her mother, says, "But she always gave me candy," and holds out one of the red hard candies found in the mouths of all the victims.
The cellphone that Andrews gave Beth receives a voicemail, implying that Beth will soon be in danger again. Andrews realizes that the force behind the murders is Ellie, and races to Beth. Finding her unharmed, Andrews and Beth hear a knock on the door. Andrews looks through the spyhole. However, as Beth screams (as in her second voicemail message), a knife stabs through the spyhole and kills Andrews. After an explosion outside, Ellie's spirit appears and reaches out to strangle Beth. The spirit of Marie appears and grabs Ellie, saving Beth again. Marie's ghost vanishes, leaving Beth to stare bewildered into the distance. A red candy spills out of Andrews' mouth and his cell phone begins to dial a number on its own, revealing that Ellie's ghost is still out there, and more people will die.
On June 14, 2007 the film was rated PG-13 by the MPAA for intense sequences of violence and terror, frightening images, some sexual material and thematic elements. In television advertisements, the theme song is called "Life is Beautiful" by   The film was intended for release on August 24, 2007, however was later pushed back to January 4, 2008. On August 30, 2007, the film's trailer premiered on Yahoo! Movies and late September/October 2007 the film's poster was released
Sound designers used the voice of Skid Row front man Sebastian Bach in the hospital basement scene. The exact clip comes from Bach's scream at the beginning of "Midnight Tornado" - a song from the bands 1989 debut album, Skid Row.
The film opened in 2,240 theaters on January 4, 2008, and was not screened for critics. The film earned $ 5.2 Million on its opening day and as of April 16, 2008, the film has received extremely negative reviews, garnering a 0% "Rotten" approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes, based on 73 reviews, and gave it their moldy tomato award for worst movie of 2008; the site's consensus states "One of the weakest entries in the J-horror remake sweepstakes, One Missed Call is undone by bland performances and shopworn shocks." It's rated the second worst movie of the decade. Metacritic reported the film had an aggregate score of 24 out of 100, based on 14 reviews. The film has since made $26,890,041 in the United States and $15,892,778 overseas for a worldwide total of $42,782,819 - including $3.4 million in Mexico,$2.3 million in the United Kingdom and Ireland, $2.1 million in Spain, $1.4 million in Russia and $948,072 in Venezuela - and was not screened for critics. Although the film is a remake of ''Chakushin Ari'', the film has been strongly criticised of borrowing plot elements and being similar to ''The Grudge'', ''Final Destination'', ''The Ring'', ''The Echo'', ''The Eye'', ''Dark Water'', ''Shutter and ''Pulse''.
The DVD and Blu-ray was released on April 22, 2008 with no special features. It's included in both widescreen and fullscreen format on each side of the disc. Also, the movie has been released on iTunes and on the Xbox Live Marketplace.