In 2004, Rogers partnered with Yahoo! to offer Rogers Yahoo! Hi-Speed Internet to its members. This included service offers unlimited e-mail storage, plus access to Premium Yahoo! Services at no charge, including a Flickr PRO account. Customers with websites previously hosted by Rogers were offered the option of transferring to ca.geocities.com addresses.  (Unike regular GeoCities websites, these were ad-free for existing accounts, although those for new customers had drop-down ads.)  All such websites were discontinued with the closure of GeoCities on 27 October 2009. Although still partnered with Yahoo!, Rogers dropped Yahoo! from its services name in 2008.
In mid-2009, Rogers discontinued giving free Flickr Pro accounts to all Rogers customers and switched all accounts to the free version while allowing old pictures and videos to be stored even though it was over the allowed limit.
Rogers has been reducing monthly data transfer limits for their lower-tier services. The Ultra-Lite package has gone from a 60 GB limit to 2 GB, and the Lite package has gone from a 60 GB limit to 25 GB, then (as of July 21, 2010) capped to a 15 GB limit.
Rogers Yahoo! Hi-Speed Internet users are now sometimes being warned through their browser via Rogers-injected code that they have reached 75% of their limit and again at 100% of their limit and will be charged for additional usage at the time of the 100% warning. If the limit is exceeded, the customer will be subject to additional charges. The overcharge fees are charged on a per-gigabyte basis (rounded down to the nearest gigabyte) at a high rate for cheaper plans, and a lower rate per additional overdraft gigabyte for the more expensive plans. The Portable Internet bandwidth cap is not enforced.
While previously offering Norton Internet Security, Rogers switched to offering Rogers Online Protection. It contains anti-virus/spyware, parent/privacy control and firewall features. A cutoff time of June 30, 2009 was set for people to switch from their previous protections to this new one.
The security suite is distributed for free with basic services, such as antivirus, antispyware, firewall, and parental controls, while premium services, at an additional cost, include PC optimizing tools, identity theft protection, wireless security services, and backup services. The security suite only supports Microsoft Windows operating systems.
Rogers has been criticised for traffic redirection and inspection.   They use deep packet inspection to identify and throttle BitTorrent traffic. and use website address errors (failed DNS lookups) to redirect traffic to their search portal. They have also made a controversial move to display advertisements in webmail even though users pay for the service. on TheStar.com
Internet service providers Bell, Bell Aliant, MTS Allstream, Rogers, Shaw, SaskTel, Telus, and Videotron announced "Project Cleanfeed Canada" in November 2006; this involves the blocking of access to a blacklist of sites suspected to contain child pornography. The blacklist is compiled from reports by Internet users and investigated by the independent organization Cybertip.ca.
BitTorrent traffic is restricted through bandwidth throttling using equipment from Sandvine Inc, which has caused complaints as users feel Rogers is overstepping their bounds as a service provider and despite Rogers advertising their service    for sharing large files and much more   . Rogers has previously denied such allegations, despite widespread reports of the issue.  Further controversy arose when in May 2007, Rogers began throttling all encrypted file transfers allegedly to combat BitTorrent traffic, but affecting all encrypted transfers regardless if they are BitTorrent traffic or not.
In January 2011, the CRTC issued a letter to Rogers stating it was breaking CRTC policy by actively throttling download speeds while Peer-2-Peer (P2P) was active without notifying users 30 days in advance of the change, and without updating its Network Management policies page on their website. 
Since early December, 2007, Rogers has been injecting their own content into other companies' websites without permission. Rogers users who are close to the maximum download limit are seeing red text appear above the content of every website they visit. The notice continues to appear on every page until the user either clicks a link acknowledging that they have seen the message or chooses to opt out of the notification.
In late July, 2008, all "server not found" pages are redirected to a webpage with Rogers advertisements, those similar to the page the user was trying to access. Those who decide to "opt-out" are still redirected to an Internet Explorer "server not found" page, regardless of the user's web browser.