Reverse telephone directories are used by law enforcement and other emergency services in order to determine the origin of any request for assistance, however these systems include both publicly accessible (listed) and private (unlisted) services. As such, these directories are restricted to internal use only.
Publicly accessible reverse telephone directories may be provided as part of the standard directory services from the telecommunications carrier in some countries. In other countries these directories are often created by phone phreakers by collecting the information available via the publicly accessible directories and then providing a search function which allows users to search by the telephone service details.
Printed reverse phone directories have been produced by the telephone companies (in the United States) for decades, and were distributed to the phone companies, law enforcement, and public libraries.  In the early 1990s, businesses started offering reverse telephone lookups for fees, and by the early 2000s advertising-based reverse directories were available online, prompting occasional alarms about privacy concerns.
On 29 June 2001, a legal case ''Telstra Corporation Ltd v Desktop Marketing Systems Pty Ltd'' was heard in the Australian Federal Court. ''Telstra protects privacy against reverse directories''  The case was lodged following the release of a product called "PhoneDisc" created by Desktop Marketing Systems Pty Ltd. The investigation found that the content of that product, which allowed the user to search by service number, was almost identical in content to the publicly listed directories, even if some of the content was listed in a different fashion. The court's findings gave Telstra, the predominant carrier within Australia and the maintainer of the publicly accessible White Pages (residential) and Yellow Pages (commercial) directories, copyright over the content of these directories.
As a result, that product was removed from sale. Further, a web-based reverse directory, called "Blackpages", created by 2600 Australia, also terminated its service.
In February 2010 a Federal Court of Australia case ''Telstra Corporation Ltd v Phone Directories Company Pty Ltd'' determined that Telstra does not hold copyright in the White Pages or the Yellow Pages.  Telstra appealed the judgement but in a unanimous rejection of Telstra's application by the full bench of the Federal Court in December 2010, the February 2010 verdict was upheld.  Justice Gordon, in her February 2010 judgement, stated: "You must identify authors, and those authors must direct their contribution (assessed as either an    independent intellectual effort    or a    sufficient effort of a literary nature   ) to the particular form of expression of the work. Start with the work. Find its authors. They must have done something, howsoever defined, that can be considered original. The Applicants have failed to satisfy these conditions. Whether originality be the product of some    independent intellectual effort    and / or the exercise of    sufficient effort of a literary nature   , or involve a    creative spark    or the exercise of    skill and judgement   , it is not evident in the claim made by the Applicants."  Justice Gordon was particularly concerned that most of the White Pages and Yellow Pages works are produced by computer systems, not by humans, and hence significant independent intellectual effort is not involved in their production.  She was also concerned that Telstra could not clearly identify all of the authors involved with the production of the Yellow Pages and White Pages.
In United States, landline phone subscribers can pay a small fee to exclude their number from the directory. This service is usually called "Your Listing Not Published" and the cost ranges between $0.80 to $1.50 for residential customers.  However, it is a myth that delisting is possible for cellular numbers, because each cellular carrier has a separate database.
As cellular phones become more popular, there has been debate about releasing cell phone numbers into public 411 and reverse number directories. (S. 1963, the "Wireless 411 Privacy Act" 9/2004). However, opposition led by leading consumer-protection organization Consumers Union presented several privacy concerns in their congressional . Right now, cell phone numbers are not available in any public 411 or reverse-number directories. However, several information companies provide reverse cell phone lookups that are obtained from utility resources, and are available online. Because there is no central database of cell phone numbers, reverse phone directories that claim to be free cannot return information on those numbers.
In recent years community web based services offer a reverse telephone directory of known telemarketers, fund raisers, and other companies which contact consumers by telephone.  Users of these services can perform a search of the telephone number which showed up on their caller ID and read through user comments to find the identity of the calling company or individual.
There are several websites available which provide results such as the owner information, address and even the providing carrier of a landline number. Many of these websites charge a fee for this service.
In the United Kingdom proper, reverse directory information is not publicly available.  However, in the Channel Islands it is provided in the printed telephone directories. 
Although the information is, of necessity, available to emergency services, for other agencies it is treated as 'communication data' in the RIPA regime and subject to the same controls as requests for lists of and content of calls.