Born in Palo Alto, California, Buckingham was the third and youngest child of Rutheda (nee Elliott) and Morris Buckingham. He had two older brothers, Jeff and Greg. Growing up in the San Francisco Bay Area community of Atherton, Buckingham and his brothers were encouraged to swim competitively. Though Buckingham dropped out of athletics to pursue music, his brother Greg went on to win a silver medal at the 1968 Olympics in Mexico City.
Buckingham's first forays into guitar playing took place on a toy Mickey Mouse guitar, playing along to his brother Jeff's extensive collection of 45s. Noticing his talent, Buckingham's parents bought their son a $35 Harmony guitar.
Buckingham never took guitar lessons and does not read music.  By age 13, he became interested in folk music and, influenced by banjo methods, practiced the fingerpicking styles of The Kingston Trio. At 15 he joined a small folk group, Fritz, providing vocals and guitar work.
Buckingham and his then-girlfriend Stevie Nicks recorded seven demos in 1972 on an analog 4-track machine, and drove to Los Angeles to pursue a record deal. In 1973, Polydor Records signed the pair. Their album, ''Buckingham Nicks'', was released in September 1973; soon after its release, however, Polydor dropped the duo due to poor sales.
Despite Polydor's measure, though, ''Buckingham Nicks'' has been championed by rock critics since its release. It features fine two-part harmonies backed by notable LA session musicians, including superstar drummer Jim Keltner. According to the album notes, other session musicians include: Ron Tutt (Elvis Presley TCB Band), drums; Peggy Sandvig, keyboards; Waddy Wachtel, guitar; Jorge Calderon, percussion; Jerry Scheff (Elvis Presley TCB Band), bass; Monty Stark, synthesizer; Gary Hodges, drums; and Mark Tulin, bass.
Although money was tight, the hardworking duo caught the attention of many budding musicians, including Warren Zevon, who is rumored to have been a roommate of Nicks and Buckingham in a Fairfax district apartment.
A short tour promoting the ''Buckingham Nicks'' album commenced shortly after the joining of Buckingham and Nicks with Fleetwood Mac.  Bootlegs of two concerts in Mobile and Tuscaloosa exist and are widely distributed on peer-to-peer networks and fansites. The touring band included drummers Bob Aguirre (from Fritz) and Gary Hodges playing simultaneously and bassist Tom Moncrieff, who later played bass on Stevie Nicks' 1981 album ''Bella Donna''.
To help make ends meet, Buckingham toured with Don Everly's back-up band, singing Phil Everly's parts. Buckingham and Nicks were eventually forced to move in with record producer Keith Olsen, who helped the pair work on several demos for the next Buckingham Nicks album, including "I'm So Afraid", "Monday Morning" and "Rhiannon".
While checking out the Sound City recording studio in California, Mick Fleetwood heard the song "Frozen Love" from the ''Buckingham Nicks'' album. He asked who the guitarist was, and immediately stated that he wanted him to fill a recent vacancy. Buckingham insisted to Fleetwood that he and Nicks were a package deal   if Fleetwood didn't want Nicks, he wouldn't get Buckingham.  The duo was quickly asked to join Fleetwood Mac on New Year's Eve, 1974.
Fleetwood Mac released their eponymously titled album in 1975, which became a hit. However it was the second album of this new line-up, ''Rumours'', that propelled the band to superstar status when it became one of the best-selling albums of all time. Buckingham's "Go Your Own Way" was the lead-off single, soaring into the US Top Ten. After the resounding commercial success of ''Rumours'' (during the making of which Buckingham and Nicks famously split), Buckingham was determined to avoid falling into repeating the same musical pattern. The result was ''Tusk'' (1979), a double album that Buckingham primarily directed. Once again, Buckingham wrote the lead-off single, the title track that would peak at #8 on Billboard's Hot 100. It was during this time that Buckingham moved in with record company secretary and aspiring model, Carol Ann Harris, with whom he lived until 1984. Though by most standards a hit, ''Tusk'' failed to come close to ''Rumours'' record sales, and the album would ultimately precede a hiatus in the band's studio recording efforts.
After a large world tour that ended in 1980, Fleetwood Mac took a year-long break before reconvening to record their next album ''Mirage'', a more pop-friendly work that returned the band to the top of the US album chart. However, by this time various members of the band were enjoying success as solo artists (particularly Nicks) and it would be five years before the release of the next Fleetwood Mac album. By the time ''Tango in the Night'' was released in 1987, Buckingham had already released two solo albums and had given up much of the material for what would have been his third solo album for the project, including "Big Love", "Tango in the Night", "Family Man", "You and I" and "Caroline". On several of these tracks Buckingham played every instrument . "Big Love", released as the first single from the album, became a top ten hit in the US and the UK.
Propelled by a string of hit singles, ''Tango in the Night'' became the band's biggest album since ''Rumours'' a decade earlier. However, following its release, Buckingham left Fleetwood Mac largely due to his desire not to tour and the strain he was feeling within the band. Fleetwood Mac continued without him, and Buckingham was replaced by guitarists Rick Vito and Billy Burnette.
During the time he worked on ''Tusk'', Buckingham also produced albums for Walter Egan and John Stewart in the late 1970s as well as beginning work on his own solo album.
In 1981, Buckingham released his first solo album ''Law and Order'', playing nearly every instrument and featuring guest appearances by bandmates Mick Fleetwood and Christine McVie. The album pursued the quirky, eclectic, often lo-fi and new-wave-influences of ''Tusk'', and spawned the hit single ''Trouble'' which reached #9 on the US Charts and #1 in Australia (for three weeks). Two years later, he wrote and performed the songs "Holiday Road" and "Dancin' Across the U.S.A." for the film ''National Lampoon's Vacation''. "Holiday Road" was released as a single, and reached #82 on the ''Billboard'''s Hot 100. He did other soundtrack work, including the song "Time Bomb Town" from ''Back to the Future'' (1985).
In 1984, after ending his 7-year relationship with Carol Ann Harris, he released his second solo album, ''Go Insane''.  The title track was a modest hit, reaching #23 on the Hot 100. The last track of the album, D.W. Suite, was a tribute to the late Beach Boys drummer Dennis Wilson. The next year, Buckingham performed on USA for Africa's fundraising single, "We Are the World".
Following his split with Fleetwood Mac in 1987, Buckingham spent much of the next five years in the studio, working on his third solo album, ''Out of the Cradle'', which was released in 1992. Many of the songs seem to deal with the death of his father and the sudden death of his brother Greg in 1990. "Wrong" was a gentle rebuke of former bandmate Mick Fleetwood's tell-all biography. ''Out of the Cradle'' received some favorable reviews but did not achieve the sales levels associated with Fleetwood Mac. However, Buckingham toured throughout 1992   93 for the first time as a solo artist; his band included an army of seven other guitarists (Buckingham himself calls them "the crazy band" on his ''Soundstage'' DVD), each of whom he individually taught the entire two-and-a-half hours of music from the concert (''Lindsey Buckingham: Behind the Music'' documentary for VH-1, 2001).
A subsequent solo album, entitled ''Gift of Screws'', was recorded between 1995   2001 and presented to Warner Bros./Reprise for release. Executives at the label managed to persuade Buckingham to hold the album back and instead take several tracks from ''Gift of Screws'' and re-record them with Fleetwood Mac. Thus, seven songs from ''Gift of Screws'' appear on the Fleetwood Mac album ''Say You Will'', in substantially the same form as Buckingham had recorded them for his solo release. Excellent bootleg copies of ''Gift of Screws''   taken from an original CD-R presented to Warner Bros/Reprise   are known to exist, and have been widely distributed among fans through the use of torrent sites and other peer-to-peer networks.
In 2008, the ''Gift of Screws'' album was finally released, containing three tracks from the originally planned album, as well as seven new recordings. Buckingham then commenced a short tour to promote ''Gift of Screws'' in September and October, opening in Saratoga, California and closing in New York, New York.
On November 3, 2010 it was announced on Buckingham's website that he is currently working on an untitled album for release in early 2011. As of April 2011, Buckingham had finished recording the album, titled ''Seeds We Sow'', and it will be released in September 6, 2011. On April 22, 2011, a concert of Buckingham's was filmed for a DVD release to support the forthcoming album.
In 1992, newly-elected president Bill Clinton asked Fleetwood Mac to come together to perform the song he had chosen for his campaign, "Don't Stop", at his inaugural ceremony. Buckingham agreed to be part of the performance, but the experience was something of a one-off for the band, who were still very much at odds with one another and had no plans to reunite officially.
While assembling material for a planned fourth solo album in the mid 1990s, Buckingham contacted Mick Fleetwood for assistance on a song.  Their collaboration lasted much longer than anticipated, and the two eventually decided to call upon Stevie Nicks, John and Christine McVie. The band's old chemistry was clearly still there, and plans for a reunion tour were soon in the works. In 1997, Buckingham and all four of his bandmates from the original ''Rumours'' line-up of Fleetwood Mac went on the road for the first time together since 1982 in a reunion tour titled ''The Dance''. The tour was hugely successful and did much to heal the damage that had been done between Buckingham and his bandmates. However, Christine McVie had opted to leave the band in 1998, essentially now making the band a foursome.  In 2003, the reformed band released the first studio album involving Buckingham and Nicks in 15 years, ''Say You Will''.  Buckingham's song "Peacekeeper" was the first single from the album, and the band went on a world concert tour that would last almost a year and a half.
The band toured in 2009, rehearsals began in January 2009, with the first date of the "UNLEASHED" Tour as March 1, 2009, in Mellon Arena (Pittsburgh). Christine McVie was not involved with this project.
Unlike most rock guitarists, Buckingham does not play with a pick; instead, he picks the strings with his fingers and fingernails. Initially after joining Fleetwood Mac, Buckingham used a Gibson Les Paul. Before the band, a Fender Telecaster was his main guitar, and was used on his first Fleetwood Mac album. In 1979, he worked with Rick Turner, owner of Renaissance Guitars to create the Model One. He has used it extensively since, both with Fleetwood Mac and for his solo efforts. He uses a Taylor Guitar 814ce for most of his acoustic performances and has also used an Ovation Celebrity in the past. 
His influences include The Beach Boys and The Kingston Trio.
On July 8, 1998, Buckingham's girlfriend, Kristen Messner, gave birth to their son, William Gregory Buckingham. Buckingham and Messner subsequently married in 2000, and she gave birth to a daughter, Leelee, the same year. Their third child, Stella, was born on April 20, 2004.
The song "It Was You" from his ''Under the Skin'' album pays homage to all three children by using all their names.
Lindsey Buckingham has been portrayed by Bill Hader in a recurring sketch titled "What Up With That" on NBC's ''Saturday Night Live''.  He appeared as himself on the May 14, 2011, episode during this sketch.