The '''McMaster Marauders''' are the athletic teams that represent McMaster University in Hamilton, Ontario, Canada. Athletics at McMaster is currently managed by the university's student affairs, under their athletics & recreation department. The university's varsity teams compete in the Ontario University Athletics conference of the Canadian Interuniversity Sport. The Marauder's official colours are maroon and grey.
The men's water polo team has won the Ontario University Athletics championship 25 times, making it the most successful team at the provincial level. The men's wrestling team has been the most successful team at the national level, winning the Canadian Interuniversity Sport championship four times.
Soccer was the university's first major sport. In 1889, a group of alumni from the Toronto Baptist College and Woodstock College played a exhibition game against one another, sparking an early intercity rivalry (when McMaster University was based in Toronto). A full fledged hockey club was later organized during the winter of 1896-1897. In 1897, the university had made all athletics, physical activity and sports under the jurisdiction of a central executive committee. 
In 1906 McMaster University, along with the University of Ottawa, Royal Military College and University of Trinity College had joined the Canadian Intercollegiate Athletic Union (CIAU), the first formal organization of intercollegiate athletics in Canada and the forerunner of the present day Canadian Interuniversity Sport. The varsity teams have been known as the McMaster Marauders since 1948. The name, the Marauders had been credited to Bill Cline, who in 26 November 1948, had his suggestion for the nickname of the university's men's basketball team published on the school's student newspaper, The Silhouette.
The Marauders currently use the sports facilities located in the northeast corner of the main campus of McMaster. The university has a number of sports facilities including the Ron Joyce Stadium for football, the Ivor Wynne Centre for indoor sports, and Back Tens Field for soccer and rugby. Ron Joyce Stadium fields a full sized Canadian football field and FIFA sized soccer pitch. The stadium is also equipped with permanent seating for 5,500. The David Braley Athletic Centre, another sports venue at McMaster, is also used by the Marauders.
The Marauder's football team has on occasion used the Ivor Wynne Stadium, home to the Hamilton Tiger-Cats.
The earliest reference of the sport of football at McMaster was during a meeting on November 30, 1898, when the university's athletic association's debated about expanding into the sport of football. The association had reached a consensus two days later that the lateness of the season made it pointless to start the sport for that year. The university would form a football team in the following year.
The McMaster Marauder's football team played their first football game in an exhibition game against the University of Toronto Faculty of Dentistry in 1901, losing 1-0. The Marauders would win their first game in an exhibition match against Royal Military College of Canada with a score of 17-5. The Marauders would play their first regular season game in 1902, losing their first game to the University of Toronto in a one game season. The Marauders would not win their first game in the regular season the next season, in which they would also make their first playoff appearance. The early football team at McMaster would not have a head coach until the end of World War I, with most of the coaching duties taken up by the team captains.
The Yates Cup, which is awarded annually to the victorious team in the OUA football playoffs, has been awarded to the Marauders football team four four times since they began playing. The Marauders have made twelve consecutive OUA post-season appearances, having not missed the playoffs since the 1998 playoffs. Despite this however, the Marauders have only made seven Vanier Cup semi-final appearances (the Mitchell Bowl and Uteck Bowl) since the Marauders football team first began to play. 
The Marauders football team had made an appearance at the Mitchell Bowl three times, in 2000, 2001 and 2003. The Marauders have yet to win a game at the Mitchell Bowl to advance to the Vanier Cup. As for the Uteck Bowl, the Marauders had made an appearance at the Uteck Bowl a total of four times, in 1961, 1964, 1967 and 2002. Of those four times however, the Marauders had only won once, in 1967, advancing to the Vanier Cup championships. The Marauders would eventually lose to the Alberta Golden Bears 10-9  on November 25, 1967.
The following is the record of the McMaster Marauders football team in the last ten seasons of play:
The Marauders currently hold a number of Ontario University Athletics records, both in terms of the team, as well as individuals who had played for the Marauders. Current records held by the Marauders are:
As of the end of the 2010 CFL season, 12 players are on CFL teams' active rosters:
The Marauders have won several championships since they began competitive play in their provincial conference, as well as within the national league they are in. The following is a table of the number of championships won by the Marauders men's teams and individual competitors since the Canadian Interuniversity Athletic Union was formed in 1961 as well as the number of championships won by Marauders women's teams and individual competitors since the Ontario Women's Interuniversity Athletic Association was formed in 1971.