Mitchell was born in Stoke Newington, London. His father was a glass and china merchant. He is of Russian Jewish descent, but describes himself in interviews as an atheist who sometimes believes in God.
He was interested in acting from an early age, and attended the ''Gladys Gordon's Academy of Dramatic Arts'' in Walthamstow from the age of seven. He did well at school and read physical chemistry at University College, Oxford, for six months. There he met his contemporary Richard Burton, and together they joined the RAF in 1944. He completed his navigator training in Canada just as the war ended. accessed 27 Jun 2007
His cinema debut came in 1957 in Guy Hamilton's ''Manuela'', and he began a career of minor roles as sinister foreign agents, assisted by his premature baldness and facility with eastern European accents. He appeared in ''The Roman Spring of Mrs Stone'' (Jose Quintero, 1961), Carry On Cleo, 1964, and ''Help!'' (Richard Lester, 1965) and played leads in ''All The Way Up'' (James MacTaggart, 1970), ''The Chain'' (Jack Gold, 1984), ''The Dunera Boys'' (Ben Lewin, 1985) and ''Foreign Body'' (Ronald Neame, 1986).
In 1965, he was cast as Alf Garnett in a play for the BBC ''Comedy Playhouse'' series, broadcast on 22 July 1965. This was the pilot edition of the long-running series ''Till Death Us Do Part'' with Gretchen Franklin, Una Stubbs and Anthony Booth. The part of Mum, played by Gretchen Franklin, was taken by Dandy Nichols when the programme was commissioned as a series. Mitchell may be best known for his role as the bigoted cockney West Ham United F.C. supporter, Alf Garnett, but ironically, his real life persona is quite different, being a left-winger, Jewish, and a staunch supporter of Tottenham Hotspur F.C. The show ran from 1966 to 1975, in seven series, making a total of 53 30-minute episodes.
He has a long and distinguished career on stage and television. Other small screen roles include performances in ''The Sweeney'' (Thames Television for ITV, 1978), ''Lovejoy'' (BBC), ''Waking the Dead'' (BBC), ''Kavanagh QC'' (Carlton Television for ITV), ''The Merchant of Venice'' (BBC, 1980) and ''Gormenghast''. In 2001, he appeared in a Christmas Special episode of ''Last of the Summer Wine'', "Potts in Pole Position".
On stage he received extensive critical acclaim for his performances in Arthur Miller's ''Death of a Salesman'' and Harold Pinter's ''The Caretaker'' at the National Theatre; and Pinter's ''The Homecoming'' and Miller's ''The Price'' in the West End, also appearing in ''Visiting Mr. Green'' in 2007 and 2008.
After the cancellation of the Alf Garnett sequel series ''In Sickness And In Health'', Mitchell returned to the role of Alf on a number of occasions. ITV aired a series of mini episodes called ''A Word With Alf'' featuring Alf and his friends. When Johnny Speight died in 1998, the series was cancelled at Mitchell's request.
 In 1982, he received an Australian Film Institute Award for best supporting actor in the film ''Norman Loves Rose''. He has received two Laurence Olivier Theatre Awards   for playing Willie Loman in Arthur Miller's ''Death of a Salesman'' (National Theatre, 1979) and as best supporting actor in a 2003 performance of  ''The Price'', also by Miller.
Mitchell is a Distinguished Supporter of the British Humanist Association. He has been married since 1950 to Connie (Constance Wake), an actress who appeared in early 1960s television dramas such as ''Maigret''. They have three children; Rebecca, Daniel (also an actor) and Anna (also known as Georgia Mitchell). For over twenty years, Mitchell has suffered pain from nerve damage, caused by Transverse myelitis,  and is a supporter of the Neuropathy Trust. He suffered a mild stroke in August 2004.