On June 1, 2006, Prince Albert II admitted that he did in fact father Jazmin with Tamara Rotolo.  The Prince noted that he had wanted to protect her identity until she was an adult.  Prince Albert's other out-of-wedlock child is Alexandre Coste.
Fordham University, New York, New York 2010-Present 
JSerra High School, Orange County, California 2006-2010, Alumna 
St. Mary's Episcopal School, Palm Desert, California. 2001-2006, Alumna
In February 2006, the French magazine ''Voici'' published photographs of mother and daughter during a visit to Monaco. The Prince has hired the services of Gavin de Becker to protect her.
Jazmin Grace is described to the press as a    mature, sweet and intelligent" girl. At 14 years of age, she graduated from St. Margaret   s Episcopal School in Palm Desert, California, and entered JSerra High School in Orange County, California.
In November 2006, Jazmin Grace visited eight islands in Fijion a humanitarian mission to help bring the local children assistance in education, medicine, and community development. One of her stops was at a school for the disabled and she donated 30,000 prenatal vitamins to the Savusavu Hospital on the island of Vanua Levu. She has also established a humanitarian fund for the region called .
In June 2010, Jazmin graduated JSerra High School in Orange County, California, where she was an honor student and a soloist in a school choir that performed with singer Barry Manilow.  
Upon graduation, she received The JSerra Senior Faculty Award and the Fine Arts Award. She was also selected to be a lifetime member of The California Scholarship Federation, and has been since she was a sophomore, entitling her to the distinction of Sealbearer. 
She is now attending Fordham University.
Illegitimate children are nothing new in Monaco     in every generation for the last 100 years a Grimaldi has had an acknowledged illegitimate child. Some of these have obtained succession rights through legitimation or adoption, including Princess Charlotte, an illegitimate child who was adopted by her own father, and who then ceded her succession rights to her son Rainier, May 30, 1944. Prince Rainier III made obtaining succession rights in this manner impossible for the illegitimate children of his son Albert by adopting a new constitution in 2002, which limited the succession to direct, legitimate issue.
On 26 October, 2006, Albert II gave an interview to US television personality Larry King. Albert said his children would not be in line for the Monegasque throne but that they would be taken care of financially. They are also an heir to Prince Albert's personal fortune, estimated at more than one billion dollars. Due to the accession of Monaco to the Council of Europe on 5 October 2004, the European Convention on Human Rights regulates inheritance rights, in addition to the laws of Monaco, which also guarantees familial inheritance for children born out of wedlock