Suntech Power has supplied or installed solar modules for numerous solar power plants and systems around the world. Notable installations include:
The company's Suntech Energy Solutions division completed Google's 1.6 MW solar installation in June 2007.
Suntech Power joined with Israeli company Solarit Doral to build Israel's largest solar power station, a 50&nbsp;kW rooftop project in the Israeli settlement of Katzrin in the Golan Heights, which was connected to the electricity grid in December 2008., ''Xinhua'', December 9, 2008.
Suntech Power has representative offices in China, Australia, the United States, Switzerland, Spain, Italy, Germany, Japan, and Dubai, as well as production facilities in Wuxi, Luoyang, Qinghai, Shanghai, Germany, Japan, and Goodyear, Arizona.
Suntech America is based in San Francisco, California, and the company has plans to start a production facility in Phoenix, Arizona in 2010. Suntech also has executives of their US operations in top posts in American solar panel industry groups.
Suntech Power was recognized as the 2008 Frost & Sullivan Solar Energy Development Company of the Year. Frost & Sullivan Research Analyst Mary John commented on the recognition, "The company's pioneering success in developing energy-efficient, cost-effective and customizable building integrated photovoltaic (BIPV) systems and crystalline PV cells, and modules for solar energy conversion into electricity are highly commendable. It has gone beyond just meeting global energy needs to anticipating them as well and highly satisfied customers testify that the BIPV systems and other energy-efficient products are customized precisely to their needs."http://www.redorbit.com/news/business/1342480/frost__sullivan_recognizes_suntech_power_for_its_technical_expertise/index.html
The Andalay AC Solar PV Panel was awarded one on MSN   s most brilliant products of 2009 because of innovations that advanced their ease of installation and use.  Suntech Power is one of the main manufacturers of components for the Andalay Solar Panel sold by Akeena Solar (AKNS).
Dr Shi Zhengrong (         , born c. 1963) is the founder , chairman and chief executive officer of Suntech Power. 
He is a graduate of the University of NSW's School of Photovoltaic and Renewable Energy Engineering. At UNSW, Dr. Shi studied under Professor Martin Green and met Stuart Wenham, now Suntech's Chief Technology Officer. 
Dr. Zhengrong Shi was honored in January 2010 as a finalist for the Zayed Future Energy Prize. In 2007, Dr. Shi was named one of Time Magazine's Heros of the Environment.He is often referred to as the world's first 'green billionaire'.
Before going public on the NYSE in 2005, Suntech was funded by a consortium of private equity firms, including Actis Capital and Goldman Sachs.  The consolidated private equity investment into Suntech is generally considered to be one of China's most profitable private equity investments ever, as each firm is thought to have made gains well over 10x on their original investments. 