Frank Mitchell was born on August 18, 1921, in Indian Gap, Texas, and was a 1938 graduate of Roaring Springs High School. He enlisted in the Marine Corps in 1939, and was commissioned a second lieutenant in 1945, following World War II service aboard the aircraft carrier  at Wake Island, and additional service in the Marshall Islands, and occupation duty in China. He was also attached to Fleet Marine Force Pacific as a member of its rifle and pistol team.
He attended Colorado College under the Navy V-12 program, and also attended Southwestern University and North Texas Agricultural and Mechanical College. He played varsity football in college for two years.
During the Korean War, First Lieutenant Mitchell was a member of Company A, 1st Battalion, 7th Marines when he displayed extraordinary heroism in waging a single-handed battle against the enemy on November 26, 1950, near Hansan-ni, to cover the withdrawal of wounded Marines, despite multiple wounds to himself. For this action in which he sacrificed his own life to save the lives of his fellow wounded, he was posthumously awarded the Medal of Honor.  His body was never recovered.
The Medal of Honor was presented August 6, 1952 to 1stLt Mitchell's widow and daughter by Lieutenant Colonel Henry D. Strunk, the acting director of the 6th Marine Corps Reserve District, at their home in Atlanta, Georgia.
In addition to the Medal of Honor, 1stLt Mitchell was awarded the Silver Star; Bronze Star with Combat "V;" the Purple Heart with a Gold Star in lieu of a second award; Presidential Unit Citation with two bronze stars; the Good Conduct Medal with one bar; the American Defense Service Medal with Fleet Clasp; the Asiatic-Pacific Campaign Medal; the American Campaign Medal; the World War II Victory Medal; the China Service Medal; the Korean Service Medal with two bronze stars; and the United Nations Service Medal. 
The President of the United States in the name of the Congress takes pride in presenting the MEDAL OF HONOR posthumously to
The following have been named in honor of 1stLt Mitchell: