The '''map   territory relation''' describes the relationship between an object and a representation of that object, as in the relation between a geographical territory and a map of it. Polish-American scientist and philosopher Alfred Korzybski remarked that "the map is not the territory," encapsulating his view that an abstraction derived from something, or a reaction to it, is not the thing itself. For example, the pain from a stone falling on one's foot is not the actual stone, it's one's perception of the stone; one's opinion of a politician, favorable or unfavorable, is ''not'' that person; and so on. A specific abstraction or reaction does not capture ''all'' facets of its source     e.g. the pain in one's foot does not convey the internal structure of the stone, you don't know ''everything'' that is going on in the life of a politician, etc.     and thus may limit an individual's understanding and cognitive abilities unless the two are distinguished. Korzybski held that many people do confuse maps with territories   that is, confuse models of reality with reality itself   in this sense.
Elsewhere in that same volume, Bateson points out that the usefulness of a map (a representation of reality) is not necessarily a matter of its literal truthfulness, but its having a structure analogous, for the purpose at hand, to the territory. Bateson argues this case at some length in the essay "The Theology of Alcoholics Anonymous".
To paraphrase Bateson's argument, a culture that believes that common colds are transmitted by evil spirits, that those spirits fly out of you when you sneeze, can pass from one person to another when they are inhaled or when both handle the same objects, etc., could have just as effective a "map" for public health as one that substituted microbes for spirits.
Another basic quandary is the problem of accuracy.
In  "On Exactitude in Science", Jorge Luis Borges describes the tragic uselessness of the perfectly accurate, one-to-one map:
A more extreme literary example, the fictional diary of Tristram Shandy is so detailed that it takes the author one ''year'' to set down the events of a single ''day''     because the map (diary) is more detailed than the territory (life), yet must fit into the territory (diary written in the course of his life), it can never be finished. Such tasks are referred to as supertasks.
An alternative reason why we are bothered by the conundrum of infinite regress or the conundrum of maps within maps is that we fail to see that the concept of a "map of a map" is the same thing as the concept of a "map of a map of a map." In both cases, the concept is a metaphor for the faculty of reflection. We fail to distinguish that one's capability of reflecting is an enduring perspective and not simply a fleeting act of examining something. Each time I examine myself examining something (or in turn reflect upon my examination of myself examining my examination) I am exercising the same enduring ability. Husserl referred to this ability as the "transcendental ego," the mind's eye or the capability of a human to reflect and abstract. Standing between two mirrors, you will not be fooled by the infinite regress of the reflection of yourself in a mirror within a mirror within a mirror (ad infinitum) precisely because you are able to see (understand) that you are looking at mirrors facing each other and are not looking at an infinite queue of doppelgangers. Likewise characters of a fictional work can be readers or spectators or any other fiction that can be imagined precisely because they are fictions, but the fact that you can reflect upon your ability to examine yourself and your thoughts means you are capable of abstraction and need not suggest that you too are a fictional character in a fictional work.
Neil Gaiman retells the parable in reference to storytelling in ''Fragile Things'' (it was originally to appear in American Gods):
The development of electronic media blurs the line between map and territory by allowing for the simulation of ideas as encoded in electronic signals, as Baudrillard argues in ''Simulacra and Simulation'':
Philosopher David Schmidtz draws on this distinction in his book "Elements of Justice," apparently deriving it from Wittgenstein's private language argument.
The expression "the map is not the territory" first appeared in print in a paper that Alfred Korzybski gave at a meeting of the  American Association for the Advancement of Science in New Orleans, Louisiana in 1931:
It is used as a premise in Korzybski's General semantics, and in neuro-linguistic programming.
Korzybski's dictum "the map is not the territory" is also cited as an underlying principle used in neuro-linguistic programming, where it is used to signify that individual people in fact do not in general have access to absolute knowledge of reality, but in fact only have access to a set of beliefs they have built up over time, about reality. So it is considered important to be aware that people's beliefs about reality and their awareness of things (the "map") are not reality itself or everything they could be aware of ("the territory"). The originators of NLP have been explicit that they owe this insight to General semantics.
The Belgian surrealist artist Rene Magritte illustrated the concept of "perception always intercedes between reality and ourselves" in a number of paintings including a famous work entitled ''The Treachery of Images'', which consists of a drawing of a pipe with the caption, ''Ceci n'est pas une pipe'' ("This is not a pipe").
This concept occurs in the discussion of exoteric and esoteric religions. Exoteric concepts are concepts which can be fully conveyed using descriptors and language constructs, such as mathematics. Esoteric concepts are concepts which cannot be fully conveyed except by direct experience. For example, a person who has never tasted an apple will never fully understand through language what the taste of an apple is. Only through direct experience (eating an apple) can that experience be fully understood.
Lewis Carroll, in ''Sylvie and Bruno Concluded'' (1893), made the point humorously with his description of a fictional map that had "the scale of a mile to the mile." A character notes some practical difficulties with such a map and states that "we now use the country itself, as its own map, and I assure you it does nearly as well."
In a sort of counterpoint to Lewis Carroll, the University of Cambridge economist Joan Robinson (1962) emphasized the disutility of 1:1 maps and other overly detailed models: "A model which took account of all the variegation of reality would be of no more use than a map at the scale of one to one."
Korzybski's argument about the map and the territory also influenced the Belgian surrealist writer of comics Jan Bucquoy for a storyline  in his comic ''Labyrinthe'': a map can never guarantee that one will find the way out, because the accumulation of events can change the way one looks at reality.
Historian of religions J. Z. Smith wrote a book entitled ''Map is not Territory: Studies in the History of Religions'' (1978, University Of Chicago Press 1993 paperback: ISBN 0-226-76357-9).
Author Robert M. Pirsig uses the idea both theoretically and literally in his book '' '' when the main character/author becomes temporarily lost due to an over reliance on a map, rather than the territory that the map describes.