Status as a '''natural born citizen''' of the United States is one of the eligibility requirements established in the United States Constitution for election to the office of President or Vice President. 
Section 1 of Article Two of the United States Constitution sets forth the eligibility requirements for serving as President of the United States:
The first several Presidents prior to Martin van Buren, as well as potential Presidential candidates, were born as British subjects in British America before the American Revolution.
The Twelfth Amendment states that, "No person constitutionally ineligible to the office of President shall be eligible to that of Vice-President of the United States." The Fourteenth Amendment does not use the phrase "natural born citizen". It does provide that "All persons born or naturalized in the United States, and subject to the jurisdiction thereof, are citizens of the United States and of the State wherein they reside."
Representatives and Senators are only required to be citizens.
The Constitution does not explain the meaning of    natural born   . On June 18, 1787, Alexander Hamilton submitted to the Convention a sketch of a plan of government. Article IX, section 1 of Hamilton's plan provided:
The Hamilton plan called for an executive to be voted into office for life by electors, who themselves were elected by people of individual districts. Hamilton's plan was never formally considered by the convention.
On July 25, 1787, John Jay wrote to George Washington, presiding officer of the Convention:
Permit me to hint whether it would not be wise and seasonable to provide a strong check to the admission of Foreigners into the administration of our national Government, and to declare expressly that the Command in chief of the American army shall not be given to, nor devolve on, any but a natural born Citizen.
There is no proof that deliberations took place at the convention on the subject of the letter. The Committee of Eleven, without explanation, changed the wording to "natural born citizen," and the Convention as a whole ultimately adopted the modified provision without further debate.
After the original Constitution was ratified, various people opined about the meaning of this clause.
In a speech before the House of Representatives in May 1789, James Madison said:
John Bingham stated in the House of Representatives in 1862:
He reiterated his statement in 1866:
In 1862, Secretary of the Treasury Salmon P. Chase sent a query to Attorney General Edward Bates asking whether or not "colored men" can be citizens of the United States. Bates responded on November 29, 1862, with a 27-page opinion concluding, "I conclude that the ''free man of color'', mentioned in your letter, if born in the ''United States'', is a citizen of the United States, ... .
A memorandum to Congress dated April 3, 2009, written by the Congressional Research Service, states:
In an 1829 treatise on the U.S. Constitution, William Rawle wrote that "every person born within the United States, its territories or districts, whether the parents are citizens or aliens, is a natural born citizen in the sense of the Constitution, and entitled to all the rights and privileges appertaining to that capacity." During an 1866 House debate James F. Wilson quoted Rawle's opinion, and also referred to the "general law relating to subjects and citizens recognized by all nations" saying ...and that must lead us to the conclusion that every person born in the United States is a natural-born citizen of such States, except it may be that children born on our soil to temporary sojourners or representatives of foreign Governments, are native-born citizens of the United States.
An English-language translation of Emerich de Vattel's treatise ''The Law of Nations'' (original French title: ''Le Droit du gens''), stating that "The natives, or natural-born citizens, are those born in the country of parents who are citizens", was quoted in 1857 by Supreme Court justice Peter Vivian Daniel in a concurring opinion in ''Dred Scott v. Sandford'', as well as by Chief Justice Melville Fuller in 1898 in his dissenting opinion in ''United States v. Wong Kim Ark''.
In a 2008 article published by the ''Michigan Law Review'' Lawrence Solum, Professor of Law at the University of Illinois, stated that "here is general agreement on the core of  meaning . Anyone born on American soil whose parents are citizens of the United States is a 'natural born citizen'". In April 2010 Solum republished the same article as an online draft, in which he changed his opinion on the meaning of ''natural born citizen'' to include persons born in the United States of one American citizen parent. In a footnote he explained that "ased on my reading of the historical sources, there is no credible case that a person born on American soil with one American parent was clearly not a 'natural born citizen. He further extended natural born citizenship to all cases of ''jus soli'' as the "conventional view".
The Constitution having recognized that persons born within the several States are citizens of the United States, one of four things must be true:
If there is such a thing as Citizenship of the United States acquired by birth within the States, which the Constitution expressly recognizes, and no one denies, then those four alternatives embrace the entire subject, and it only remains to select that one which is true.
The answer is obvious. The Constitution has left to the States the determination what person, born within their respective limits, shall acquire by birth citizenship of the United States; 
However, ''Dred Scott'' pre-dates the Fourteenth amendment, which added to the constitution an explicit description of who shall be citizens, "making all persons born within the United States and subject to its jurisdiction citizens of the United States".
This ruling was rendered moot when native Americans were granted citizenship in the Indian Citizenship Act of 1924.
The Court stated that: The constitution nowhere defines the meaning of these words , either by way of inclusion or of exclusion, except in so far as this is done by the affirmative declaration that 'all persons born or naturalized in the United States, and subject to the jurisdiction thereof, are citizens of the United States.'''United States v. Wong Kim Ark'' 
Since the Constitution does not specify what the requirements are to be a "citizen" or a "natural born citizen", the majority adopted the common law of England:
The court ruled: 
It thus clearly appears that by the law of England for the last three centuries, beginning before the settlement of this country, and continuing to the present day, aliens, while residing in the dominions possessed by the crown of England, were within the allegiance, the obedience, the faith or loyalty, the protection, the power, and the jurisdiction of the English sovereign; and therefore every child born in England of alien parents was a natural-born subject, unless the child of an ambassador or other diplomatic agent of a foreign state, or of an alien enemy in hostile occupation of the place where the child was born. 
III. The same rule was in force in all the English colonies upon this continent down to the time of the Declaration of Independence, and in the United States afterwards, and continued to prevail under the constitution as originally established.
The dissent argued that the meaning of the "subject to the jurisdiction" language found in 14th Amendment was the same as that found in the 1866 Civil Rights Act, which provides: "All persons born in the United States, and not subject to any foreign power, excluding Indians not taxed, are hereby declared to be citizens of the United States."  The dissenters in ''Wong Kim Ark'' also argued that birth on the soil was not sufficient to grant citizenship at birth, that:
The requirements for citizenship, and its definition in American statute law, have changed since the Constitution was ratified in 1788. Congress first recognized the citizenship of children born to U.S. parents overseas on March 26, 1790, stating that "the children of citizens of the United States, that may be born beyond sea, or out of the limits of the United States, shall be considered as natural born citizens: Provided, That the right of citizenship shall not descend to persons whose fathers have never been resident in the United States."
Additionally, under sections 301   309 of the Immigration and Nationality Act (restated in sections 1401   1409 of Title 8 of the United States Code), current U.S. law defines numerous other categories of individuals born abroad, as well as people born in most U.S. territories and possessions, as being "nationals and citizens of the United States at birth". The phrase "natural born citizen," however, does not appear in the current statutes dealing with citizenship at birth.
 Current U.S. statutes define various categories of individuals born overseas as citizens at birth, including (for example) all persons "born outside of the United States and its outlying possessions of parents both of whom are citizens of the United States and one of whom has had a residence in the United States or one of its outlying possessions, prior to the birth of such person."
Regarding people born at U.S. military bases in foreign countries, current U.S. State Department policy, as codified in the department's ''Foreign Affairs Manual'', reads:Despite widespread popular belief, U.S. military installations abroad and U.S. diplomatic or consular facilities are not part of the United States within the meaning of the 14th Amendment. A child born on the premises of such a facility is not subject to the jurisdiction of the United States and does not acquire U.S. citizenship by reason of birth.
The foregoing section of the FAM only addresses citizenship by ''jus soli'': In short, what is the geographic scope of the "United States"? This does not affect citizenship via ''jus sanguinis'', i.e. those who are born abroad to U.S. citizens and who otherwise meet the qualifications for statutory citizenship. The State Department also asserts that "the fact that someone is a natural born citizen pursuant to a statute does not necessarily imply that he or she is such a citizen for Constitutional purposes."  This position seems to be at odds with the fact that Congress in 1790 felt it could confer natural born citizenship on those born abroad to American parents.  
According to an April 2000 report by the Congressional Research Service (CRS), most constitutional scholars interpret Article II, Section 1 of the Constitution as including citizens born outside the United States to parents who are U.S. citizens under the "natural born" requirement. This same CRS report also asserts that citizens born in the District of Columbia, Guam, Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands are legally defined as "natural born" citizens and are, therefore, also eligible to be elected President.
 Alternatively, there is a statutory method by which the eligibility of the President-elect to take office may be challenged in Congress.
Some legal scholars assert that, even if eligibility challenges are nonjusticiable in federal courts, and are not undertaken in Congress, there are other avenues for adjudication, such as an action in state court in regard to ballot access.Tokaji, Daniel.  ''Michigan Law Review, First Impressions,'' Volume 107, page 31 (2008).
More than two dozen proposed constitutional amendments have been introduced in Congress to relax the restriction.
Two of the more well known were introduced by Representative Jonathan Bingham in 1974, to allow for Secretary of State Henry Kissinger to become eligible, and the Equal Opportunity to Govern Amendment by Senator Orrin Hatch in 2003, to allow eligibility for Governor of California Arnold Schwarzenegger. The Bingham amendment would have also made clear the eligibility of those born abroad to U.S. parents, while the Hatch one would have allowed those who have been naturalized citizens for twenty years to be eligible.
All proposals to relax the restriction have failed.