WAT operates 8 regular routes within the city and 2 counties, using a "hub and spokes" system based at the intermodal Williamsburg Transportation Center. Additionally, a connection to the City of Newport News and the Hampton Roads Transit (HRT) public transit bus system is provided on the Grey Line serving U.S. Route 60 east by traveling into the western edge of Newport News and meeting HRT's Route 116 Mall-Hall Loop at Lee Hall, Virginia.
WAT also operates replica (rubber-tired) Trolley service at  along the riverfront area at Yorktown, Virginia.
Williamsburg Area Transport (WAT) is the successor to '''James City County Transit''', which was also governmentally-operated by James City County in the community for many years. In the early 21st century, by changing from being known as James City County Transit to the newer name of "Williamsburg Area Transport", the scope and area of the current services were more accurately described as part of a new organizational structure authorized by the Virginia General Assembly. 
WAT services are almost entirely operated within the City of Williamsburg and the two adjacent counties, and serve citizens and visitors to all three localities. Historic sites and extensive tourism form the basis for an unusual operating environment in comparison to similar sized localities elsewhere in Virginia and the United States.     
James City County and York County are each one of the eight original shires of Virginia formed in 1634, and are two of the oldest counties in Virginia as well as the present United States. The City of Williamsburg, long-located along the border of the two counties, was originally founded in 1623 as Middle Plantation, initially a fortified community midway across the Virginia Peninsula on high ground. It was selected as the site of the new College of William and Mary, a long-desired effort of the colonists which was established by a Royal Charter issued in 1693 by King William III and Queen Mary II, joint sovereigns of England, Scotland and Ireland. Several years later, partially due a persuasive presentation to the House of Burgesses by the Reverend Dr. James Blair and a group of his students, the tiny community was selected to replace the harsh weather and other environmental conditions at Jamestown and became the capital of the Colony of Virginia in 1698, renamed the following year in honor of King William. Williamsburg became the first chartered city in Virginia in 1722 during colonial times, and became an independent city under a change in Virginia's state constitution in 1871. The first mental health facility in the United States was established at Williamsburg in 1770, and its successor, Eastern State Hospital, a state-owned facility, continues to operate nearby in modern times. 
Beginning in 1926, the extensive restoration of a central part of Williamsburg to the era of the pre-American Revolutionary War era of the late 1780s was initially funded and led by John D. Rockefeller Jr. and his wife, Abby Aldrich Rockefeller. Their efforts and generous contributions and those of their descendants and many others resulted in the creation and initial endowment of Colonial Williamsburg. Rather than simply an effort to preserve the antiquity, the combination of extensive restoration and thoughtful recreation of the entire colonial town facilitates envisioning the atmosphere and embracing the ideals of the 18th century patriots. As a tangible birthplace of democracy, Colonial Williamsburg and the surrounding area developed into one of the most popular tourist destinations in the world. 
Other major historical points of the WAT service area include Historic Jamestowne and Jamestown Settlement, and Yorktown Battlefield and Yorktown Victory Center, all joined by the National Park Service's bucolic Colonial Parkway, a scenic byway which is itself a National Historical Landmark as well.      
Additionally, the WAT service area encompasses several prominent museums and other attractions including two major theme parks, hospitality businesses which include dozens of hotels and restaurants, and several shopping outlet complexes. The area has grown popular for resort complexes and as a choice for relocating retirees from other areas. The area also has large U.S. military complexes at Camp Peary, the Yorktown Naval Weapons Station, and is adjacent to the U.S. Army base at Fort Eustis. Rounding out the community are as residential areas, schools, retail and industrial enterprises. 
Specific unincorporated communities within the WAT service area generally include:
The services of Williamsburg Area Transport are partially-funded through rider fares, a form of user fees. The system is also subsidized by the local governments of the City of Williamsburg, James City County and York County, as well as purchases of services by the College of William and Mary, Colonial Williamsburg, and other community organizations. 
WAT also receives state and federal financial and technical assistance from the Virginia Department of Rail and Public Transportation (VDRPT) and the Federal Transit Administration (FTA), which is an agency within the U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT).
WAT operates what is often called a "hub and spokes" bus routing system. At designated intervals, the transit buses all meet at a coordinated time at a central location (in this instance the Williamsburg Transportation Center), and then serve various outlying areas in many directions on eight color-codes routes. 
The "hub and spokes" route system does not include:
The regular route buses all meet at the Williamsburg Transportation Center at the start of the hour. Located at a restored Chesapeake and Ohio Railway station owned by Colonial Williamsburg in downtown Williamsburg, the Transportation Center not only serves WAT's regular routes, but also service:
The WAT system serves eight route lines, all of which are color coded:
To help mitigate rush hour traffic and new delays due to heightened security measures on the Jamestown Ferry, in October 2007, WAT began a Park and Ride transit bus service from 3 stops in Surry County across the James River to limited stops at several major points in James City County and Williamsburg, terminating at the Williamsburg Transportation Center, where connections are available with other WAT routes, HRT, and intercity services. 
Surry County stops include Lebanon Apartments, Surry Apartments, Surry Government Center, Surry Community Center, and the VDOT Park and Ride lot near Scotland Wharf. 
1. '''Newport News Connection (Grey Line)''' - In October, 2006, WAT was in the process of updating their website to reflect a recent service change.  All Grey Line buses now continue to Lee Hall and connect to Hampton Roads Transit Route 116 (Mall-Hall loop). Riders should refer to the trips coming from Newport News for the correct times.  
At that time, WAT and HRT '''would not''' accept each others' transfers fare wise.   This is accurate as of August 24th, 2008.
2. '''Colonial Williamsburg''' - All WAT lines serve the Colonial Williamsburg (CW) area.  For service to the CW Visitors Center, riders should use WAT's Orange line (or the Yellow line during the peak spring-summer months).
3. '''Possible Grey Line confusion''' - It is notable that Colonial Williamsburg, which operates its own fleet of grey and white colored transit buses and minibuses, also has a "Grey Line" route. This is not to be confused with WAT's Grey Line route for US Route 60 East which ends at Lee Hall. The WAT buses on that route are normally painted beige, white and burgundy in color, and clearly marked for WAT with the words "Williamsburg Area Transport"
All buses are ADA accessible. Also, Paratransit service is provided to eligible individuals.
WAT bus services operates Monday - Saturday, reduced service on Sundays, and no service on some holidays. 
All WAT buses are equipped with two-way radio communications. 
Recent changes to routes include the Marquis shopping center that opened in October, 2008.  This shopping center can be reached on the Orange Line.  Other changes to follow include more frequently (every half-hour instead of every hour) at certain times on some routes. 
Additionally, in May 2008, Williamsburg Area Transport announced that it had recently received a grant for three trolley-replica type buses that will serve the local shopping areas of New Town, High Street and Merchants Square in Colonial Williamsburg. According to WAT officials, they could start running as early as spring of 2009.