According to NASA's current account for the public:
What NASA's website describes as "improper operation of the Atlas airborne beacon equipment" caused the booster to lose contact with one of the guidance systems on the ground, setting the stage for an apparent software-related guidance system failure.  The role of software error in the launch failure remains somewhat mysterious in nature, shrouded in the ambiguities and conflicts among (and in some accounts, even within) the various accounts, official and otherwise.
The probe's mission was later completed by Mariner 2.  However, the cryptic nature of the problems that led to the decision to abort Mariner 1, as well as the confusion in various reports on the incident, gave rise to an urban legend of sorts.  Indirectly, this confusion also contributed to some software engineering folklore about the role of supposed Fortran code in the guidance systems.  This folklore has persisted at least as late as 2006, despite a lack of evidence that Fortran was even in use for real-time guidance computations for the Mariner missions.
The most consistent account was that the error was in hand-transcription of a mathematical symbol in the program specification, in particular a missing overbar.  Yet the story persists of a "missing hyphen" &nbsp;&nbsp; in the data or in the computer instructions, even somehow in the equations.  No doubt several factors contributed to the "missing hyphen" narrative and its longevity, even in official accounts from technical cognoscenti at JPL and NASA.  Among the factors cited (or obvious enough):
Regardless of whatever may have given rise to initial reports of a "missing hyphen", the simplest and most consistent-''sounding'' explanation that the public and Congress would accept would probably have been preferable to those who simply wanted to get on with the job of a Venus fly-by mission. The stories had contradictions, perhaps, but they were so technical that nobody who could have interfered with Mariner program progress was likely to care about them or even notice. (After all, even in one later NASA account, the supposed "hyphen" is reported as missing from instructions at one point in the text, and from equations at another).
However, the same report also said the hyphen was
This sort of inconsistency or ambiguity was seen in many subsequent variations on the story, official and otherwise.  "Missing hyphen" versions of the story gained from official support before the month was out.  NASA official Richard B. Morrison testified before Congress that the supposed hyphen
However, in the same 1963 report to Congress, Morrison's testimony from the previous year is recounted differently:
JPL's Mariner Venus Final Project Report in 1965 noted that, at 4 minutes and 25 seconds into the flight there was an "nscheduled yaw-lift maneuver":
Arthur C. Clarke wrote several years later that Mariner 1 was "wrecked by the most expensive hyphen in history".
In a NASA report published in 1985, Oran Nicks offered yet another slightly differing account, but with software-related error still identified as a missing "hyphen":
NASA's website now says the problem was:
It is sometimes claimed that the bug consisted a period typed in place of a comma, causing a FORTRAN statement of the form
The error had occurred when a symbol was being transcribed by hand in the specification for the guidance program. The writer missed the superscript bar (or overline) in
The Mariner 1 spacecraft was identical to Mariner 2, launched 27 August 1962. Mariner 1 consisted of a hexagonal base, 1.04 meters across and 0.36 meters thick, which contained six magnesium chassis housing the electronics for the science experiments, communications, data encoding, computing, timing, and attitude control and the power control, battery, and battery charger, as well as the attitude control gas bottles and the rocket engine. On top of the base was a tall pyramid-shaped mast on which the science experiments were mounted which brought the total height of the spacecraft to 3.66 meters. Attached to either side of the base were rectangular solar panel wings with a total span of 5.05 meters and width of 0.76 meters. Attached by an arm to one side of the base and extending below the spacecraft was a large directional dish antenna.
The Mariner 1 power system consisted of the two solar cell wings, one 183&nbsp;cm by 76&nbsp;cm and the other 152&nbsp;cm by 76&nbsp;cm (with a 31&nbsp;cm dacron extension (a solar sail) to balance the solar pressure on the panels) which powered the craft directly or recharged a 1000 Watt-hour sealed silver-zinc cell battery, which was to be used before the panels were deployed, when the panels were not illuminated by the Sun, and when loads were heavy. A power-switching and booster regulator device controlled the power flow. Communications consisted of a 3 Watt transmitter capable of continuous telemetry operation, the large high gain directional dish antenna, a cylindrical omnidirectional antenna at the top of the instrument mast, and two command antennas, one on the end of either solar panel, which received instructions for midcourse maneuvers and other functions.
Propulsion for midcourse maneuvers was supplied by a monopropellant (anhydrous hydrazine) 225 N retro-rocket. The hydrazine was ignited using nitrogen tetroxide and aluminum oxide pellets, and thrust direction was controlled by four jet vanes situated below the thrust chamber. Attitude control with a 1 degree pointing error was maintained by a system of nitrogen gas jets. The Sun and Earth were used as references for attitude stabilization. Overall timing and control was performed by a digital Central Computer and Sequencer. Thermal control was achieved through the use of passive reflecting and absorbing surfaces, thermal shields, and movable louvers.
The scientific experiments were mounted on the instrument mast and base. A magnetometer was attached to the top of the mast below the omnidirectional antenna. Particle detectors were mounted halfway up the mast, along with the cosmic ray detector. A cosmic dust detector and solar plasma spectrometer detector were attached to the top edges of the spacecraft base. A microwave radiometer and an infrared radiometer and the radiometer reference horns were rigidly mounted to a 48&nbsp;cm diameter parabolic radiometer antenna mounted near the bottom of the mast.
In addition, a small 91&nbsp;cm&nbsp;  &nbsp;150&nbsp;cm (3&nbsp;feet&nbsp;  &nbsp;5 feet) United States flag was folded and stowed on board Mariner 1 (and Mariner 2) before it was mated to the Agena.