Hillsong senior pastor Brian Houston says, "The vision and heartbeat has never changed. The Conference exists to 'champion the cause of the local church' and make  name known around the earth".
The first Hillsong Conference was held in 1986 in Baulkham Hills, with a humble 150 delegates in attendance. The conference was initiated by Geoff Bullock and Mark Zschech, and was originally worship and creative arts focused. Brian Houston began running a leadership stream that was added to the conference program in the early years. By 1990, the conference grew to over 500 delegates and expanded to several venues across the Hills district of Sydney. In the early 1990s, night rallies were held in the Hills Centre where Hillsong Church was holding services. By 1994, the conference had expanded to over 1,000 delegates.
From 1995, night rallies were held at the State Sports Centre in Sydney Olympic Park, to accommodate the large growth in numbers. The amount of international delegates grew significantly at this time due to the influence of Hillsong albums and teaching around the world. To accommodate the large growth, two identical conferences were held in 1999 and 2000 across two weeks. By 2000, the conference had grown to 10,000 delegates.
Hillsong Conference was first held in the Acer Arena (formerly Sydney SuperDome) and various venues throughout Sydney Olympic Park from 2001. To date, Hillsong Conference 2006 was the largest conference with 30,000 delegates.
Hillsong Conference will be held at the Sydney Entertainment Centre, Darling Harbour, in the heart of the city of Sydney for one year only in celebration of the 25th Anniversary of Hillsong Conference. In the lead up One-Day conferences will be held in Perth, Adelaide, Melbourne and Brisbane in May 2011 with Brian and Bobbie Houston and special guest Casey Treat, with worship led by Darlene Zschech and the Hillsong Team.
Hillsong Conference will return to the Acer Arena (formerly Sydney SuperDome) and various venues throughout Sydney Olympic Park in order to accommodate the large crowds that attend each year.
For the first time, ticked seating was implemented for the night programs, guaranteeing seats and reducing the frustrating queues experienced during the 2005 conference.
The conference is capped for the first time. This conference also featured major program changes that include a shorter conference (-1 day), only 1 night meeting and revised streams and electives. There is an appearance on the Thursday night by the Lakewood worship Team and Senior Pastors of Lakewood Church, Joel and Victoria Osteen.
Changes were made since the 2009 conference to reflect previous conferences, most notably, the conference is once again 5 nights and 4 days and is not capped. The Night Rallies are also not ticketed.
Hillsong Conference has had a wide range of preachers, teachers, leaders & worship leaders grace platform. Below are the contributors in years gone by:
A.R Bernard, Adrian Ross, Alvin Slaughter, Bayless Conley, Bill Hybels, Bishop T.D Jakes, Casey Treat, Cece Winans, Charlotte Scanlon Gambill, Chris Tomlin, Cindy Cruse Ratcliff, Craig Groeschel, Delirious?, Ed Young Jnr, Frank Damazio, Gary and Marilyn Skinner, Graham Kendrick, Israel Houghton, Jack Hayford, Jentezen Franklin, Joel and Victoria Osteen & the Lakewood Team, John Bevere, John Maxwell, Joseph Prince,Joyce Meyer, Judah Smith, Kevin Gerald, Kong Hee, Leeland, Louie Giglio, Marcos Witt, Matt Redman, Matthew Barnett, Michael Gungor, Michael W. Smith, Mike Pilavachi, Nancy Alcorn, Nancy Beach, Paul Baloche, Paul De Jong, Paul Scanlon, Phil Driscoll, Ray Bevan, Ray McCauley, Reinhard Bonnke, Rick Godwin, Rick Warren, Robert Barriger, Ron Kenoly, Steven Curtis Chapman, Tommy Barnett, Watoto Children's Choir, Wayne Alcorn.