In 2001, Stagecoach sold its former Ribble operations in Blackburn, Hyndburn, Clitheroe and Bolton to the Blazefield Group after a series of reasonably high-profile industrial disputes. The resultant company was named ''Lancashire United'' for buses operating in the Ribble Valley, Hyndburn, Bolton and Blackburn and a separate operating company, ''Burnley & Pendle Travel'' was set up to operate buses in that area (see Burnley & Pendle). Investment commenced in new vehicles almost immediately, with over 30 brand new single-decker buses arriving in the September of that year, displacing Stagecoach's much older models.
A number of service revisions followed with many marginal services withdrawn and a number of school contracts were terminated. Much of this work, mainly contracted to Lancashire County Council, was picked up by Northern Blue. A focus was then made on developing high quality trunk routes, namely the 152, 225 & Hyndburn Circulars. Also later the X1.
Later, in 2002, the Bolton garage was sold on to independent operator Blue Bus run by Roger Jarvis, who eventually sold out to Arriva in 2005. The contracted services in the Clitheroe area were given up and the garage was sold to a housing developer. Most of the Clitheroe contracted work passed into the hands of the Northern Blue bus company. The Blazefield Group became part of the multi-national transport Transdev group in 2006.
The Clitheroe services were operated by LUL for a second time through the Northern Blue takeover, however these passed out of LUL's service profile in June 2008. The original Blackburn garage acquired from Ribble remains in use.
On 26 March the former Ribble depot on Manor Sutton Street ceased operation with the fleet moving into the former Blackburn Transport depot at Intack, two of the former tram sheds at Intack were demolished in spring 2011 and the site will be resurfaced to accommodate the extra fleet, although the Mannor Sutton St depot will remain open for a few months for fleet refurbishment.
On 22 January 2007, Lancashire United acquired the business of Blackburn Transport from Blackburn with Darwen Borough Council, a move that was anticipated for months. The company stated that all drivers from Blackburn Transport would remain, as would all fare deals and passes. The buyout increased Lancashire United's fleet size by over 130 buses.
Initially, the appearance of the Blackburn Transport buses remained the same. The company now operates from two depots in Blackburn. The former Blackburn Transport Depot at Intack is only to be rented for a short period and it is likely that a new site will be found to base all buses from both constituent fleets, as the original depot at Manner Sutton Street is too small to house them all.
On 5 August 2007, Blazefield acquired the businesses of Northern Blue of Burnley and Accrington Transport, the company inherited a further batch of 65 buses to their fleet. Transdev Accrington Transport moved to Lancashire United's depot at Intack. On 16 March 2008, Lancashire United took over the Accrington local bus network from Accrington Transport.
Following the acquisition of Blackburn Transport, both its services and Lancashire United's Hyndburn Circular routes were combined and branded as 'Spot On', the service was launched on 14 May 2007 with a fleet of 25 brand new single deck buses.
The company operates interurban routes to Bolton, Clitheroe, Chorley, Burnley, Preston & Skipton & its  separately marketed, high quality services into Manchester branded as '''The Lancashire Way'''. On 2 April 2011 Transdev lost the contract to Routes C1 and 241.
The Blackburn Outer Circle is a circular service that connects schools, hospitals, and leisure opportunities around the edge of the town.  It was started by Blackburn Borough Transport in 1980 as the 50 (clockwise) and the 51 (anticlockwise).  The Transport Department did not register the service for commercial operation, and after deregulation, it became one of several routes in the area won by GM buses on a nil tender basis.  GM buses found out that these services were not as profitable as they had imagined and pulled out of the area entirely, on 26 January 1987 the route was returned to Blackburn Transport, who re-instated Leyland Atlanteans double-deckers to operate the service.
At the next round of tenders, the services passed to Ribble, who operated it using Leyland Olympians from Preston's Frenchwood garage, The route again reverted to Blackburn Transport using Optare Metroriders, the route was then renumbered as Track 5 with an A or C suffix denoting direction of travel.
In March 2006 the route became The OC and used Volvo Olympians which received a purple and orange livery with route branding, the vehicles and branding were retained on takeover by Lancashire united.
On both Boxing Day and New Years Day 2010 bus services in Blackburn and Darwen returned to operation after a three-year gap, with financial support from Blackburn With Darwen Borough Council, special reduced single fares were also introduced.
This was a circular service that connected Blackburn with the towns of Rishton, Clayton le Moors, Great Harwood, Oswaldtwistle and accrington in the district of Hyndburn, the service was taken over from Stagecoach Ribble's Blackburn depot in 2001 and shortly after a brand new fleet were purchased and carried branding for this service, as of May 2007 the service is now part of the '''Spot On''' network.
This service was introduced in late 2009 following customer requests after two years of the Whalley Range area being unserved by bus, the route used specially branded buses and operated every 10 minutes with a flat single fare of   1, on 14 June 2010 the service was extended to serve Openshaw Drive to replace '''Spot On''' route 24, with the frequency reduced to every 15 minutes and period tickets became valid.
It was announced on 16 November that this service was to be withdrawn due to low patronage, the last service operated on 24 December 2010
The X1 was a semi-express route linking Clitheroe, Whalley and Accrington with Manchester. The route was for a time operated by a fleet of route branded Volvo Olympians and won a number of awards. The X1 and associated X2 were replaced with the X40/X41 service running between Blackburn, Accrington & Manchester. Route 241 was created for passengers between Clitheroe and Accrington, however this route has since passed in and out of the company's control a number of times. A very limited number of journey's still commence at Whalley or Great Harwood.
The company sell a wide range of tickets besides single and return fares, from day, 7 day and annual travel tickets, which can be purchased on the bus, or from an information office in Blackburn town centre. From 9 July 2010 passengers are able to purchase period and 12 journey tickets online.
Allows one day or seven days unlimited travel within the Blackburn & Darwen and Hyndburn areas.
Allows one day or seven days unlimited travel within the Hyndburn area.
Allows one, seven days or a months unlimited travel as far as Preston, Bolton, Clitheroe, Keighley, Skipton and Rawtenstall.
These tickets are valid on any Burnley & Pendle and Lancashire United service, tickets valid for 1 month, 6 months or a whole year are issued as Goldcards whilst a day ticket is issued as a Day Gold.
These tickets allow 12 single journeys for a month on any Lancashire United or Burnley and Pendle bus Within the Spot On, Silver and Gold zones.
For travel within the Ribble Valley area, and to many places beyond as well. Tickets are valid on bus services run by most bus companies.
When Lancashire United took over Stagecoach Ribble in April 2001, the fleet was predominantly made up of aging buses. These included double-decker models such as Leyland Atlanteans and Bristol VRs and single-decker models such as Leyland Lynxes and Leyland Nationals. The new company also inherited a couple of Mini Pointer Darts and Mercedes minibuses with the Clitheroe depot. Not all of these vehicles were repainted into LUL blue and cream, many just had LUL logos covering the Stagecoach ones retaining their distinctive striped livery. By September 2001, most of these had been replaced by more modern Leyland Olympians, more Leyland Lynxes and some brand new Volvo B10BLEs, bodied by Wrightbus. Over 30 of these were purchased, and are still providing quality low floor service today. They were the company's first buses bought new to them.
Whilst the Leyland Olympians and Volvo B10BLEs remained with the company for years, other models were bought and sold, mainly middle aged versions at the time. Included were Dennis Darts, Volvo Olympians and some other Volvo single-deckers, many cascaded from Blazefield's other operations in Yorkshire.
During 2006 the company had five Volvo B7TL/Plaxton President buses, however one of these buses was badly damaged after a fatal accident in 2006 on the M66 and has now been repaired and transferred to fellow Transdev Blazefield company Harrogate & District. Therefore LUL had only four of these currently in the fleet, In summer 2008 two additional Volvo B7TL/Plaxton Presidents were transferred in from Yorkshire Coastliner, with an additional Wright-bodied double decker in Lancashire Way livery.
In 2007, now under Transdev ownership, Lancashire United gained a batch of 25 Wrightbus-bodied Volvo single-deckers, these were painted in a white and sandy gold livery, with purple '''Spot On''' brandings for routes 6 & 7 and a deeper shade of purple for route 1. Altogether, they cost   3,750,000. These were originally destined for Burnley & Pendle, but due to the acquisition of Blackburn Transport they were diverted to Lancashire United.
In early 2008 Lancashire United gained a second batch of brand new buses in the form of 6 Optare Versas for '''Spot On''' routes 18, 19, 22 and 22A serving the  Mill Hill, Leyburn Road and Feniscowles areas of Blackburn, these were the newest Optares in Blackburn since the Optare MetroRiders were purchased by Blackburn Transport in 1998, however following overhaul of services in Blackburn these buses have now been transferred to Transdev Yorkshire operating on routes between Leeds, Tadcaster, York and Heworth.
In May 2010 two demonstrator buses were trialled on '''Route 225''', one was an Optare Tempo and the other was a Wrightbus Eclipse 2, the company purchased eight Optare Tempo single deck buses and entered service on this route on 26 September, these are the first Optare Tempos in any Blazefield group.
This is a detailed list of the buses operated by Lancashire United (some of which were inherited from Blackburn Transport and Accrington Transport/Northern Blue).
Lancashire United's original livery was a predominant cream with blue and red stripes with a swoop towards the back and a black skirt in standard Blazefield style, many buses in this livery carried route brandings such as Route 152, 225 and the Hyndburn Circular, in recent years the vehicles started to receive various new liveries and the standard blue and cream livery is now gradually disappearing, the majority of Lancashire United's buses can now be recognized in a wear a wide variety of liveries.