The game was conceived by Warren Davis and Jeff Lee. Lee designed the titular character based on childhood influences and gave Q*bert a large nose that shoots projectiles. His original idea involved traversing a pyramid to shoot enemies, but Davis removed the shooting game mechanic to simplify gameplay. ''Q*bert'' was developed under the project name '''''Cubes''''', but was briefly named '''''Snots And Boogers''''' and '''''@!#?@!?''''' during development.
The player is impeded by several enemies: Coily, a purple snake that chases after Q*bert; Ugg and Wrong-Way, purple creatures that run along the sides of the cubes; and Slick and Sam, green gremlins that revert the color changes that have occurred. A collision with purple enemies is fatal to the character. Colored balls occasionally appear at the top of the pyramid and bounce downward; contact with a red ball is lethal to Q*bert, while contact with a green one will immobilize the on-screen enemies. Upon dying, Q*bert emits a sound likened to swearing.When Q*bert swears, the game emits an incoherent phrase and a speech balloon of nonsensical characters appears over his head. A multi-colored disc on either side of the pyramid serves as an escape device from danger, particularly Coily. The disc returns Q*bert to the top of the pyramid, tricking Coily to jump off the pyramid if the snake was in close pursuit.
The game features amplified monaural sound and pixel graphics on a 19&nbsp;inch CRT monitor. It uses an Intel 8086 central processing unit that operates at 5MHz. ''Q*bert'' is Gottlieb's fourth video game. The basic ideas were thought up by Warren Davis and Jeff Lee. The initial concept began when artist Jeff Lee drew a pyramid of cubes inspired by M. C. Escher. Lee felt a game could be derived from the artwork, and created an orange, armless main character. The character jumped along the cubes and shot projectiles from a tubular nose at enemies. Enemies included a blue creature, later changed purple and named Wrong Way, and an orange creature, later changed green and named Sam. Lee had drawn similar characters since childhood, and based them on comics, cartoons, and characters from ''Mad'' magazine and by artist Ed Roth. Q*bert's design later included a speech balloon with a string of nonsensical characters, "@!#?@!?",The original artwork displays the first and fifth character as spirals. The at sign ("@") is used in its place in the text of the references. which Lee originally presented as joke.
Warren Davis, a programmer hired to work on the action game ''Protector'', noticed Lee's ideas, and asked if he could use them to practice programming game mechanics: randomness and gravity. Because Davis was still learning how to program game mechanics, he wanted to keep the design simple. He also felt games with complex control schemes were frustrating and wanted something that could be played with one hand. To accomplish this, Davis removed the shooting and changed the objective to saving the protagonist from danger. He continued to work on the game and added balls that bounced from the pyramid's top to bottom. As Davis worked on the game one night, Gottlieb's Vice President of Engineering, Ron Waxman, noticed him and suggested to change the color of the cubes after the game's character has landed on them. Davis decided to implement a unique control scheme; a four-way joystick was rotated 45   to match the directions of Q*bert's jumping. Staff members felt a more contemporary orientation used in other games would be better, but Davis reasoned that a standard orientation did not make sense.
The Gottlieb staff had difficulty naming the game, and, aside from the project name "''Cubes''", it was untitled for most of the development process. The staff agreed the game should be named after the main character, but could not agree on a name. Lee's title for the initial concept   ''Snots And Boogers''   was rejected, as was a list of suggestions compiled from company employees. Vice president of marketing Howie Rubin favored ''@!#?@!?'', although the rest of the staff felt it was not viable. Staff members argued it was silly and would be impossible to pronounce. A few early test models, however, were produced with ''@!#?@!?'' as the title on the units' artwork. During a meeting, "Hubert" was suggested, and a staff member thought of combining "Cubes" and "Hubert" into "Cubert". Art director Richard Tracy changed the name to "Q-bert", and the dash was later changed to an asterisk. In retrospect, Davis wishes the asterisk was changed to a different character; the asterisk prevented the name from becoming a common crossword term and it is a wildcard character for search engines.
As development neared the production stage, test models were built and placed in local arcades to gauge player responses and see how much the game earned. Gottlieb also conducted focus groups, in which the designers observed players through a two-way mirror. The control scheme received a mixed reaction during play testing; some players adapted quickly while others found it frustrating. Initially, Davis was worried players would not adjust to the different controls; some players would unintentionally jump off the pyramid several times, reaching a game over in about ten&nbsp;seconds. Players, however, became accustomed to the controls after playing several rounds of the games. The different responses to the controls prompted Davis to reduce the game's level of difficulty   something he regretted afterward.
A MOS Technology 6502 chip that operates at 894&nbsp;kHz and a speech synthesizer generates the sound effects and Q*bert's incoherent expressions, respectively. The audio system uses 128B of random-access memory and 4KB of erasable programmable read only memory to store the sound data and code to implement it. Like other Gottlieb games, the sound system was thoroughly tested to ensure it would handle daily usage. In retrospect, audio engineer David Thiel commented that such testing minimized time available for creative designing.
Thiel was tasked with using the synthesizer to produce English phrases for the game. However, he was unable to create coherent phrases and chose to string together random phonemes. Theil also felt the incoherent speech was a good fit for the "@!#?@!?" in Q*bert's speech balloon. Following a suggestion from technician Rick Tighe, a pinball machine component was included to make a loud sound when a character falls off the pyramid. The sound is generated by an internal coil that hits the interior of a cabinet wall. Foam padding was added to the area of contact on the cabinet; the developers felt the softer sound better matched a fall rather than a loud knocking sound. The cost of installing foam, however, was too expensive and the padding was omitted.
Video game critics focused on the gameplay and visuals. Kim Wild of ''Retro Gamer'' magazine described the game as difficult yet addictive. Author John Sellers also called ''Q*bert'' addictive, and praised the sound effects and three-dimensional appearance of the graphics. ''Computer and Video Games'' magazine praised the game's graphics and colors. Cassidy called the game unique and challenging; he attributed the challenge in part to the control scheme. IGN's Jeremy Dunham felt the controls were poorly designed, describing them as "unresponsive" and "a struggle". He commented that despite the controls, the game is addictive. William Brohaugh of ''Creative Computing Video & Arcade Games'' described the game as an "all-round winner" that had many strong points. He praised the variety of sound effects and the graphics, calling the colors vibrant. Brohaugh lauded ''Q*bert''s inventiveness and appeal, stating that the objective was interesting and unique.
The main character also received positive press coverage. ''Edge'' magazine attributed the success of the game to the titular character. They stated that players could easily relate to Q*bert, particularly because he swore. ''Computer and Video Games'', however, considered the swearing a negative, but still felt the character was appealing. Cassidy believed the game's appeal laid in the main character. He described Q*bert as cute and having a personality that made him stand out in comparison to other popular video game characters.
The game has been referenced in episodes of the television series ''Family Guy'', ''Futurama'', and ''The Simpsons''. Obtaining the highest score for the game became a goal for players. Doris Self, credited by Guinness World Records as the "oldest competitive female gamer", set a record score for Q*bert in 1984 at the age of 58. Her record was surpassed, and she continued attempting to regain the record until her death in 2006. Creators Davis and Lee expressed pride at the longevity of the game's legacy; Davis is also surprised people still positively remember the game. In describing ''Q*bert''s legacy, Jeff Gerstmann of GameSpot referred to the game as a "rare arcade success". Despite its success, the two creators did not receive royalties as Gottlieb had no such program in place at the time. The North American video game crash of 1983, however, depressed the market, and, by 1984, the game's popularity began to decline.
A remake with three-dimensional (3D) graphics was released by Hasbro Interactive on the PlayStation in 1999 and on the Dreamcast the following year. It features three modes of play: classic, adventure, and competitive multiplayer. Allgame's Brett Weiss praised all aspects of the game, while Parish called it a poor adaptation. Kevin Rice of ''Next Generation Magazine'' praised the game's graphics, but criticized the new level designs. He further commented that adventure mode was not enjoyable. In February 2007, ''Q*bert'' was released on the PlayStation 3's PlayStation Network, the first classic arcade game to do so. It features updated graphics, an online leaderboard for players to post high-scores, and Sixaxis motion controls. The game received a mild reception. Dunham and Gerstmann did not enjoy the motion controls and felt it was a title only for nostalgic players. In contrast, Parish considered the title worth purchasing, citing its addictive gameplay.
 It was manufactured by Mylstar Electronics,The Coca-Cola Company acquired Columbia Pictures, Gottlieb's owner, in 1982, and transferred assets to a new subsidiary, Mylstar Electronics in 1983. and used the same hardware as the original. The game features Q*bert, but introduces new enemies: Meltniks, Soobops, and Rat-A-Tat-Tat. The player navigates the protagonist around a plane of cubes while avoiding enemies. Jumping on a cube causes it to rotate, changing the color of the visible sides of the cube. The goal is to match the cubes in a row; later levels require multiple rows to match. In 1984, ''Q*Bert's Qubes'' was ported to home consoles like the Colecovision and Atari 2600 by Parker Brothers. Another sequel, ''Q*bert 3'', was released in the early 1990s for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System. It features gameplay similar to the original, but has larger levels of varying shapes. In addition to new enemies (Frogg, Top Hat, and Derby), enemies from the first game attempt to impede the player from changing the cubes' colors.
Gottlieb also released a pinball game, ''Q*berts Quest'', based on the arcade version. It features two pairs of flippers in an "X" formation and audio from the arcade. Gottlieb produced fewer than 900&nbsp;units. Parker Brothers released a tabletop, electronic game adaptation that uses a VFD screen to emulate the arcade's gameplay. It has since become a rare collector's item. Feeling that the original game was too easy, Davis decided to develop ''Faster Harder More Challenging Q*bert'' (also known as ''FHMC Q*bert'') in 1983. The project, however, was canceled and the game never entered production. Davis later released ''FHMC Q*bert''s ROM image for fans to play via MAME, an arcade emulator.