The '''U2 Tower''' was a proposed landmark skyscraper to be constructed in Dublin.  The site was in the South Docklands (SODO) campshires, at the corner of Sir John Rogerson's Quay and Britain Quay, by the confluence of the River Liffey, the River Dodder, and the Grand Canal.
The Dublin Docklands Development Authority (DDDA) was established in 1997 to regenerate the brownfield sites and underused warehouses in the Docklands at the mouth of the River Liffey in Dublin.
The panel initially chose as the winner an entry which was later disqualified after legal advice because the DDDA had lost the details of which firm had submitted the design and so were unable to notify the winner. ''The Sunday Times'' later speculated that it might have been one by London practice 3W, after a campaign by Irish website archiseek.com led to six unidentified designs being located. On 5 August 2003, the winning design announced was by architects Burdon Dunne/Craig Henry (now BCDH Architects) of Blackrock, Dublin.  Felim Dunne, the senior partner in Burdon Dunne, was the brother-in-law of U2's manager Paul McGuinness. 
The tower's stated height was 60 metres to the parapet, but 78 metres to the pinnacle of the glass roof.
In September 2005, the DDDA revised the height of the U2 tower from 60 metres to 120 metres.
The Grand Canal Planning Scheme, (Amending Planning Scheme No.1), went on display in September. The amendment included the revision in height of the U2 tower from 60 metres to 120 metres, creating a landmark on the south side of the river.
An amendment to the Docklands North Lotts Planning Scheme, (Amending Planning Scheme No. 1), in relation to the Point Village went on public display in August.
Both amendments will be submitted to the Minister in the early part of 2006 after formal public
Tenders for construction of the tower were invited and a shortlist of five firms was published on 26 February 2007.  The winning bid  announced on 12 October 2007 was from Geranger, a consortium of property developers and the members of U2.  The design selected was not the original BCDH design, but rather one commissioned by Geranger from Norman Foster.  The bids were assessed by a panel of three architects. The runner-up was also a new design, by Zaha Hadid.
On 31 October 2008, the Dublin Docklands Development Authority announced that they were suspending construction plans indefinitely due to current economic conditions.
Developers Dunloe Ewart (subsequently taken over by Liam Carroll) had secured planning permission in 2000 for a 100-metre building on a site next to that of the U2 tower.  The DDDA objected to this in 2005 as it wanted the U2 tower to be an isolated landmark.  Dublin City Council refused to extend planning permission on Carroll's undeveloped site after it expired. As of September 2007, Carroll was appealing this in the Commercial Court.
Concerns were expressed about a possible conflict of interest for U2 in the building tender process, when it emerged that the band were joint backers of Geranger.
The impact of the 2007 Subprime mortgage financial crisis brought doubts on the viability of the BCDH design.  Journalists speculated that the extra engineering expense of the complicated "twisting tower" design was excessive, and that an alternative design would be used instead.
Delays at all stages of the design and planning phases have been commented upon. The estimated cost and completion date moved from    55m and early 2008 in September 2006 to    200m and late 2011 in October 2007.
The predicted price of a 2-bed apartment in the tower was estimated in October 2006 at    1-1.5 million.
The BCDH design had a 45-degree twist, half the 90-degree twist of the Turning Torso in Malmo.  It had a shoulder height of 100m, to the top floor of apartments, and a pinnacle height of 130m, including a service level and the two-storey penthouse recording studio.  There were a total of 36 storeys. The footprint was a 26.6m square. The building was primarily to consist of one-, two-, and three-bedroom apartments, with commercial premises on the ground and first floors, a two-level basement parking garage, and the penthouse.
The dramatic twisting geometry of the tower posed a significant structural engineering challenge, resolved using a column structure of inclined columns following the twist of the building and the stiff circular core for torsional stability. 26.6 m   floor plates twist by an equal amount per storey about the circular core, housing lifts and services risers as well as a double-deck lift for service/firefighting and penthouse access.
The design chosen on 12 October 2007 was a tilted triangle.  It had mainly luxury apartments, with a public viewing platform at 100m, just below an acoustically-insulated egg-shaped pod containing the U2 recording studio.  Above this was to be an "energy centre" containing wind turbines and a large solar panel.   The east and west facades were crinkled in the manner of fish scales, with concealed balconies.  The north facade would have been sleek, while the south facade had further solar panels.   The building would have straddled the end of Sir John Rogerson's quay, allowing traffic to pass through its base.
A five star hotel was planned to be located adjacent to the tower, with a block of 34 social and affordable apartments.
A bridge for pedestrians and public transport would have crossed the Dodder/Grand Canal mouth outside the tower, as a continuation of Sir John Rogerson's Quay towards the East Link Bridge.  This was designed by UK consultants Flint & Neill.