Born in Bradford, Mitchell was educated at Woodbottom Council School, Bingley Grammar School, the University of Manchester and Nuffield College, Oxford.
He was a journalist at ITV company Yorkshire Television from 1969 to 1977, presenting their regional news show Calendar, although he spent a short period at the BBC in 1972. During his period at Yorkshire Television he chaired the famous debate between Brian Clough and Don Revie on the day Clough had been sacked by Leeds United in 1974.
He was elected to Parliament at a by-election in 1977, following the death of the previous MP, the Foreign Secretary Tony Crosland. At the time Mitchell identified himself as a Gaitskellite.
Mitchell supported the introduction of television cameras to the House of Commons, raising it for discussion in 1983. The move opened the proceedings of the House to the wider public, who previously had only been able to follow via newspapers and, from 1978, radio.
In October 2002 he temporarily changed his name to Austin Haddock as haddock is a staple catch for his constituents that was suffering a decline and it was his wish to promote it.
In 2007 Mitchell wrote a front-page article for ''The Independent'' newspaper in which he criticised the treatment of a family of asylum-seekers in his constituency. This article quoted him as saying that certain correspondents on the subject to the website of the local newspaper, the ''Grimsby Telegraph'', were 'lumpen lunatics'. The ''Grimsby Telegraph'' covered the response in which it stood by the MP but also reported that a number of readers had called for his resignation.
He is a member of the Socialist Campaign Group     although this affiliation did not prevent him from nominating Gordon Brown (rather than John McDonnell) for the 2007 Labour Party leadership election. As a supporter of the Better Off Out campaign, Mitchell could be considered a Eurosceptic and he opposes the Common Fisheries Policy.
Mitchell is also a keen supporter of the Additional Member System, (the electoral system used in elections to the Scottish Parliament and Welsh Assembly), and called a Private Members' Debate on this issue on 1 December 2009.
In 2010, Mitchell took part "Tower Block of Commons", a Channel 4 documentary where MPs live in tower blocks and in with ordinary residents in deprived areas. Mitchell was criticised for his apparent lack of engagement in comparison to his Liberal Democrat and Conservative counterparts. Austin insisted on living in his own flat with his wife instead of living with the local residents. Mitchell claimed he was misled by the production company.
As part of an independent audit conducted after the United Kingdom Parliamentary expenses scandal of 2009 in which expense claims between 2004 and 2008 for second homes were examined, Mitchell was discovered to have wrongly claimed   10,549 for mortgage repayments. He explained that this was as a result of an oversight in 2006; in January 2010 he issued an apology and repaid the funds.
Austin lives with his second wife, the journalist and author Linda McDougal, whom he married in 1976 in Rochdale and with whom he has a son and daughter. He was previously married to Patricia, with whom he had two daughters.
Mitchell has taken photographs for and co-authored the book ''Parliament in Pictures: Inside the House of Commons and the House of Lords'' (ISBN 9780500019597).