In the U.S. state of New York, county routes exist in all 62 counties except those in the five boroughs of  New York City. Most are maintained locally by county highway departments. Although county route designations occasionally cross from one county to the next, such as County Route 36 in Ontario County and County Route 36A in Livingston County, such cases are rare in New York due to the lack of a statewide numbering system. Instead, county routes are assigned on the county level, resulting in numbering systems that vary by county. Some counties, such as Dutchess County, use a system in which county route numbers are assigned by town in alphabetical order while others like Monroe County assign numbers in a general west-to-east fashion. Still others, for instance Livingston County, have no defined pattern.
The method that each county employs to sign its routes varies from one county to the next. The majority of counties in New York use the  MUTCD-standard blue pentagonal shield with yellow lettering. Others tweak this shield slightly, using white lettering instead of yellow (particularly in areas near the Capital District) or using shapes similar to a pentagon. Additionally, Orange County employs a wide assortment of signage, ranging from the standard blue pentagonal shield to a blue diamond with white lettering. On the other hand, some counties, such as Orleans County, do not post signage along their routes.
Like the numbering system and the choice of signage, the complexity of the county highway system varies by county as well. Erie County, for example, one of the most urbanized counties in Upstate New York, maintains a system of nearly 400 routes. In contrast, the Southern Tier county of Tioga manages only 29 roads.
The highest-numbered posted county route and the only four-digit county route signed as such in the state, County Route 1345, resides in Saratoga County.
Westchester County routes are typically unmarked, as the county government only loosely enforces the signage of county roads.
Circa 1974, most of New York switched to the MUTCD-standard blue pentagon shield. Signs that predate this transition can still be found in certain areas of the state.