Established in 1954 as a Canberra to Yass omnibus service by the Williams family, the company has expanded to provide services to most of South Eastern New South Wales. In 2008 the company was taken over by Deane's Transit Group which also operates Deane's Buslines. 
Transborder Express operates services under contract to CountryLink, commuter services between Canberra and Yass, services to the NSW snowfields and South Coast and charter operations.
Transborder operates the CountryLink coach services between Canberra and Eden and Canberra and Bombala.
Transborder Express operates 8 daily services between Canberra and Yass to cater to the commuter market. 
Between May and October, Transborder runs daily services from Canberra to the ski resort village of Thredbo, passing by Queanbeyan, Michelago, Bredbo, Cooma and Jindabyne.
Transborder also operates school bus services under contract to the NSW and ACT Governments. These bring children from the various rural communities on the western side of Canberra, including Hall, Wallaroo, Murrumbateman and Yass.
Transborder Express has a fleet of 23 buses, and has been undertaking a fleet modernisation programme since 2005, replacing older school buses and coaches with modern German and Swedish equipment. 
Countrylink services are operated with 2 Volvo B12B 3-axle coaches purchased in 2003 with Autobus bodies.
On other coach services, Transborder use a fleet of 1 Scania K124IB 3 axle coaches, and 5 recently purchased Mercedes-Benz O500 coaches.
On commuter and school services, Transborder Express make use of 7 Volvo B7R buses with Custom Coaches CB50 bodies, 2 Iveco powered Irisbus Delta with Express bodies, 3 MotorCoach Australia Marathon, 2 Scania K82 with Custom Coaches Mk85 bodies. The Scania K82s (which are 23 years old now) have recently been overhauled with their manual transmissions being replaced by autos, better adapted to the stop start conditions of school services.
Finally, Transborder Express operates 1 minibus: a Mercedes-Benz Sprinter.