Niihau is located about  west of Kauai, and the tiny, uninhabited island of Lehua lies  north of Niihau. Niihau's dimensions are 6.2 miles by 18.6 miles (10&nbsp;km x 30&nbsp;km). The maximum elevation (Paniau) is .  The island is about 4.9 million years old, making it geologically younger than the 5 million year old neighboring island of Kauai to the northeast.  Niihau was formed by a secondary vent that formed after the Kauai volcano began erupting.  Niihau consists of one extinct volcano that had a large landslide to the east.
The island is relatively arid because it lies in the rain shadow of Kauai, and lacks the elevation needed to catch significant amounts of trade wind rainfall. Niihau therefore, depends for its rain on winter Kona storms, when more northerly weather systems intrude into the region.  As such, the island is subject to long periods of drought.
As an arid island, Niihau was barren of trees for centuries     Captain James Cook reported it treeless in 1778. Aubrey Robinson, grandfather of current owners Bruce and Keith Robinson, planted 10,000 trees per year during much of his ownership of the island; Robinson's afforestation efforts increased rainfall in the dry climate. Island co-owner  Keith Robinson,  a noted conservationist,  preserved and documented many of Niihau's natural plant resources. The island is designated as a critical habitat for the ''olulu'', an endemic and endangered species of Hawaiian lobelioid. ''Aylmer robinsonii'', a Pritchardia palm tree named for Keith Robinson's uncle Aylmer Robinson, is an endangered species native to Niihau.
Several bird species thrive on Niihau. Intermittent playa lakes on the island provide wetland habitats for the ''alae keokeo'' (Hawaiian Coot), the ''aeo'' (Black-winged Stilt), and the ''koloa maoli'' (Hawaiian Duck). The critically endangered Hawaiian monk seal (''Monachus schauinslandi'') is found in high numbers on Niihau's shores. Robinson states that Niihau's secluded shoreline  offers them a safe haven from habitat encroachments. According to Robinson, conditions there are better than the government refuges of the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands. When the Robinsons originally purchased Niihau, no monk seals were present, because the Native Hawaiians had exterminated them to preserve fishing stocks.  
Big game herds, imported from stock on Molokai Ranch in recent years, roam Niihau's forests and flatlands. Eland and aoudad are abundant, along with oryxes, wild boars and feral sheep. These big game herds provide income from hunting safari tourism.
Kamehameha managed to unify all of the islands by 1795, except for Kauai and Niihau:
This era marked the end of the art of Hawaiian mat&ndash;weaving made famous by the people of Niihau. ''Makaloa'' (''Cyperus laevigatus''), a native sedge, used to grow on the edges of Niihau's three intermittent lakes.
 The stems were harvested and used to weave ''moena makaloa'' (mats), considered the "finest sleeping mats in Polynesia". The mats were valued by ''alii'' and foreign visitors alike, but by the end of the 19th century, Hawaiians had stopped weaving ''makaloa'' due to changes in population, culture, economics, and the environment.
In 1915, Sinclair's grandson Aubrey Robinson closed the island to most visitors. Even relatives of the inhabitants could visit only by special permission. Upon Aubrey's death in 1939 the island passed to his son Aylmer, and in 1968 to Aylmer's youngest brother Lester. Upon Lester's wife Helen's death, the island passed to his sons Bruce and Keith Robinson, the current co-owners. (See Owners' family tree)
Niihau played a small role during the attack on Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941.  In what has come to be called the Niihau Incident, or the Battle of Niihau, an off-course Japanese pilot crash-landed on the island and was captured by locals. The pilot escaped with the assistance of local Japanese residents, but was later recaptured and killed.
Despite its self-imposed isolation, Niihau has a long-standing relationship with the U.S. military dating from 1924. There is a small Navy installation on the island. No military personnel are permanently stationed there, but the U.S. military has used the island for training special operations units, which included hiring Hawaiians that live on Ni'ihau as "enemy" trackers.
Sommer, Anthony.  ''Honolulu Star-Bulletin''. May 14, 1999.
  Under Cordell Hull, Roosevelt's Secretary of State, the State Department seriously studied the proposal.
In 2004 President George W. Bush received all but one of the 40 votes cast on the island. The remaining vote was cast for Green Party nominee David Cobb. 51 registered voters did not cast ballots.  In 2006 Dan Akaka received 33 votes in the 2006 Senate election to Cynthia Thielen's 3.  In 2008, Niihau's precinct was one of only 3 of Hawaii's 538 precincts to vote for John McCain over Barack Obama. McCain received 35 votes, Obama received 4, and Cynthia McKinney received 1. Hawaii was Obama's strongest state in the nation, with only Washington, D.C. voting more strongly for him.
Approximately 80% of Niihau's income comes from a small Navy installation atop 1,300-foot-high cliffs.  Remote-controlled tracking devices are used for testing and training with Kaua'i's Pacific Missile Range Facility.  Modern missile defense tests are conducted at the site for the U.S. and its allies. The installation brings in millions of dollars a year, and provides the island with a stable economic base without the complexity of tourism or industrial development. The sale of shells and shell jewelry is an additional source of income.
Niihau's owners have offered half-day helicopter and beach tours of the island since 1987,
Bruce Robinson, Niihau's co-owner, is seeking and considering new forms of non-invasive income generation. Depending on feasibility, impact, and ecological footprint on the ecosystem and culture, possibilities include: JP-4 or JP8 generation by the lignocellulose process; military, including a possible runway; and windmill energy production. Robinson has declined offers to purchase sand from Niihau's beaches, because of adverse environmental effects.
The Hawaii Department of Education operates the Niihau School, a K-12 school. Academic subjects and computer literacy are combined with teaching students to "thrive from the land."  The school is powered entirely by solar power.
Niihau has approximately 130 permanent inhabitants, nearly all of whom are Native Hawaiians who live in the island's main settlement of Puuwai. Some support themselves largely by subsistence fishing and farming, others depend on welfare,
Langlas, Charles and Kehaulani Shintani.  . ''CRM: The Journal of Heritage Stewardship.'' Vol. 3 No. 1 (Winter 2006). and generally lead a rural, low-tech life. All residents live rent-free, and meat is free.  Niihau has no telephones and no automobiles.  The residents are not allowed to own radios, televisions or mobile phones and visitors are not allowed to bring them to the island, even for personal use. Horses are the main form of transportation; bicycles are also used. There are no power lines; solar power provides all electricity. Water comes from rainwater catchment. The Robinson family established most of these conditions.  There is no hotel or general store; barges deliver groceries from Kauai, often purchased by relatives, with free shipping.
Residents speak the Hawaiian language, in part encouraged by terms in the original purchase contract which obligated the new owners to help preserve Hawaiian culture and tradition. The Niihau dialect differs from modern Hawaiian in that, for example,  and  are the most common realizations of the phonemes  and . Niihau is the only island where Hawaiian is spoken as a primary language;
Residents are functionally isolated from the outside world. Visitors are not allowed to bring cell phones or radios to the island, and the residents are not allowed to own them.  While many residents are aware of these restrictions, they accept the situation as the "cost" of a rent free existence.  For the majority of time since the Robinson family obtained ownership of the island, the residents were not allowed to have newspapers, and most books were banned by the Robinsons.  Niihau is subject to regular droughts that occasionally force the population to evacuate to Kauai temporarily, until rainfall replenishes their water supply. Residents commonly also commute to Kauai for work, medical care, or school, and many of them call both islands home. To avoid a long boat ride, the island's owners maintain an Agusta A109 helicopter for emergencies and for transporting Navy contractors and residents to and from Kauai. Helicopter tours and safaris help offset the costs of this service.
A form of ipu art is known to have developed solely on the island of Niihau.