Born in Cleveland, Ohio, Gricar received his Juris Doctor degree from Case Western Reserve University School of Law and began his career as a prosecutor for Cuyahoga County. He moved to State College, Pennsylvania in 1985 and after a brief stint as an assistant district attorney, Gricar was elected district attorney of Centre County later that year. He was re-elected four times before announcing that he would not run for re-election in the 2005 campaign.
Gricar was reported missing to authorities after failing to return home from a road trip. His car was found in Lewisburg with his cell phone inside, and his laptop computer was found in the adjacent Susquehanna River; other than that, very little trace of Gricar has been found. Authorities have not conclusively ruled whether he is alive or deceased. 
Gricar was born in Cleveland, Ohio, and grew up in the city's Collinwood neighborhood. He attended high school at the Gilmour Academy, a prestigious Catholic school in Gates Mills. Gricar went on to attend the University of Dayton, where he became interested in studying law after working as an intern for the prosecutor's office. After graduating, he moved back to Cleveland to study law at Case Western Reserve University School of Law. He obtained his Juris Doctor and subsequently took a job as a prosecutor for Cuyahoga County, specializing in prosecuting cases of rape and murder. 
Gricar moved to State College, Pennsylvania around 1980, when his wife took a job at Pennsylvania State University. He opted to become a stay-at-home dad to his young daughter following the move; however, when news spread that a prosecutor was living in the area, Centre County District Attorney David E. Grine offered Gricar an assistant position, which he accepted. The DA position was vacated later that year when Grine became a judge, and Gricar ran for the open position; he won the election by a margin of 600 votes. 
A part-time job when he was first elected, Gricar successfully campaigned to make the Centre County DA job a full-time one in 1996. He was re-elected as DA in 1989, 1993, 1997, and 2001. During his tenure as DA, Gricar prosecuted the perpetrator of the 1996 Hetzel Union Building shooting at Penn State. In 2004, Gricar announced he would not run for re-election and would retire from both the DA job and as a practicing attorney in December 2005, shortly after his 60th birthday.
Gricar met Barbara Gray during his undergraduate study at the University of Dayton. She moved to Cleveland with him after graduation and they married in 1969. They adopted a baby girl, Lara, in 1978. Ray and Barbara Gricar divorced in 1991; Ray married again in 1996, but divorced his second wife in 2001. In 2002 or 2003 Gricar moved in with his girlfriend, Patty Fornicola, an employee of the Centre County District Attorney's office.  He was living with Fornicola in her childhood home in Bellefonte at the time of his disappearance. 
Ray Gricar's older brother, Roy, disappeared from his West Chester, Ohio home in May 1996. His body was found a week later in the Great Miami River; authorities ruled his death a suicide.
At 11:30 a.m. (EDT) on April 15, 2005, Gricar called Patty Fornicola, his live-in girlfriend, to inform her that he was driving through the Brush Valley area northeast of Centre Hall. Fornicola reported Gricar missing 12 hours later when he failed to return home. 
Gricar's car, a red MINI Cooper, was discovered the following day in an antique store parking lot in Lewisburg. His county-issued cell phone was inside, but his laptop computer, keys, and wallet were missing, and there were no signs of foul play. Police and family members noted that the location where the vehicle was found     adjacent to two bridges over the Susquehanna River     bore some similarities to the location where the vehicle of Roy Gricar, Ray Gricar's older brother, was located before his body was found in the Great Miami River in Ohio in 1996. 
Authorities searched the river and its banks in the days following the vehicle's discovery, but found no sign of Gricar. Pennsylvania authorities asked the FBI to analyze Gricar's bank accounts, credit card records, and cell phone records, but found no clues as to where he may have been. 
 A Pennsylvania State Police computer expert analyzed the computer and found that its hard drive was missing. Divers searched the area of the river near where the laptop was found over the next several days, but found nothing else. Two months later, a hard drive was recovered on the banks of the Susquehanna River about  from where the laptop was found and is believed to be Gricar's; however, it was badly damaged and analysis by the FBI, U.S. Secret Service, and the firm Kroll Ontrack     which had successfully recovered data from a hard drive recovered from the Space Shuttle ''Columbia'' disaster     were all unable to recover any data from the hard drive. In April 2009 Bellefonte police revealed that before his disappearance, Gricar used his home computer to perform internet searches on topics such as "how to wreck a hard drive", "how to fry a hard drive", and "water damage to a notebook computer". 
Gricar's disappearance has been the subject of at least two television documentaries: an episode of ''Haunting Evidence'' first aired on Court TV in June 2006, and an episode of ''Disappeared'' first aired on Investigation Discovery in February 2011. Additionally, an episode of CBS' ''Without a Trace'' featured Gricar's missing person information.