Maclure was born at Ayr in Scotland. After a brief visit to New York in 1782 he began active life as a partner in a London firm of American merchants. In 1796 business affairs took him to Virginia, U.S.A., which he thereafter made his home. In 1803 he visited France as one of the commissioners appointed to settle the claims of American citizens on the French government; and during the few years then spent in Europe he applied himself with enthusiasm to the study of geology.
On his return home in 1807 he commenced the self-imposed task of making a geological survey of the United States. Almost every state in the Union was traversed and mapped by him, the Allegheny Mountains being crossed and recrossed some fifty times. The results of his unaided labours were submitted to the American Philosophical Society in a memoir entitled ''Observations on the Geology of the United States explanatory of a Geological Map'', and published in the Society's Transactions (vol. iv. 1809, p.&nbsp;91) together with the first geological map of that country. This antedates William Smith's geological map of England by six years.
In 1812, while in France, Maclure became a member of the newly founded Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia (ANSP). In 1817 Maclure became president of the ANSP, a post he held for the next twenty-two years. 
In 1817 Maclure, resident in Europe,  brought before the same society a revised edition of his map, and his great geological memoir was issued separately, with some additional matter, under the title ''Observations on the Geology of the United States of America''. Subsequent survey has corroborated the general accuracy of Maclure's observations.
In 1819 he visited Spain, and attempted, unsuccessfully, to establish an agricultural college near the city of Alicante. Returning to America in 1824, he settled for some years at New Harmony, Indiana, and sought to develop his scheme of the agricultural college. In 1826, he was the President of the Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia. Failing health ultimately constrained him to relinquish the attempt, and to seek (in 1827) a more congenial climate in Mexico. There, at San Angel, he died, aged 77, 1840.
Mount Maclure in Yosemite National Park is named after Maclure.
The New Harmony commune in Indiana produced a number of geologists, naturalists, and botanists which were influenced by Maclure, such as: Robert Dale Owen (1801   1877) social reformer; William Owen (1802   1842) citizen of New Harmony; David Dale Owen (1807   1860), geologist, artist; Jane Dale Owen Fauntleroy (1806   1861), educator and Richard Owen (1810   1890) geologist, first president of Purdue University, Lafayette, Indiana.  They interacted there with the best contemporary crop of geologists, social reformers, botanists, paleobotanists, etnologists, civil engineers, etc.
William Maclure, geology, Benjamin Silliman. '''A rearranged transcription of some words to be found in the original book:'''
Samuel George Morton, Charles Alexandre Lesueur, Julian Ursyn Niemcewicz
Diagrams and Sketches
David Dale Owen, Cosne, Riom
Current of lava at the Puy de la Nugere
Lempdes, Clermont, Le Puy
Line of basalt and granite peaks
Vizille, Grenoble, Vivarais
Sketch of the stratification of St Gotthard
Clos de Vougeot, Magnac-Bourg, Camisards
Coal seams at Lapleau
Chaudes-Aigues, Lapleau, Aurillac
Vein of galenite near Alliac
Le Bleymard, cupel, Quissac
Sketch of the chambers used for making
Montpellier, Montferrier, Bessan
Stone found in volcanic breccia near
Le Boulou, Perpignan, La Junquera
Mountain of freestone or greywacke southwest
Montserrat, Barcelona, Tordera
Stratification from Cardona to Barcelona
Torredembarra, Tarragona, Charles IV
Sketch of the terrain around Darro
Swedish sleigh on dual sleds
Device for showing pressure on a steam
Chaptals plan of chambers for making
Outline of the hills near Docksta
Russian still for making brandy
Arrangement for Argand lamps
Sketch of a Russian plough
Outline of the mountains south of Lemberg
Transition formation at Miedziana Gora
Example of stratification from Geneva to
Rough sketch of the relative situation of
Alternation of Tofo and basalt near
Strata in the mountains near Brentonico
No 49B Geological profile of the country from Lavis
Chamber for condensing mercury at Idria
Strata of trap and calcaire at Castel
Steatitic rock or serpentine at a hill called
Grinding mills found at Pompeii
System of supporting grapevines on trees
Detail of pise construction at Les Echelles
Bed of flints overlaying a bed of Gryphytes
Maps of Routes Traveled by Maclure
France and Switzerland
France and Spain
Spain
Sweden
Sweden Finland and Russia
Russia
Grand Duchy of Warsaw
Switzerland and Italy
Italy and the Illyrian Provinces
Italy and the Illyrian Provinces
Italy and the Illyrian Provinces
Italy and France
France
Ireland Scotland and England