The rover completed its planned 90-sol mission. Aided by cleaning events that resulted in higher power from its solar panels, Spirit went on to function effectively over twenty times longer than NASA planners expected following mission completion.  Spirit also logged  of driving instead of the planned , allowing more extensive geological analysis of Martian rocks and planetary surface features. Initial scientific results from the first phase of the mission (the 90-sol prime mission) were published in a special issue of the journal ''Science''.
On May 1, 2009 (5 years, 3 months, 27 Earth days after landing; 21.6 times the planned mission duration), Spirit became stuck in soft soil. This was not the first of the mission's "embedding events" and for the following eight months NASA carefully analyzed the situation, running Earth-based theoretical and practical simulations, and finally programming the rover to make extrication drives in an attempt to free itself.  These efforts continued until January 26, 2010 when NASA officials announced that the rover was likely irrecoverably obstructed by its location in soft soil, 
  JPL continued to attempt to regain contact until May 24, 2011, when NASA announced that efforts to communicate with the unresponsive rover had ended. A formal farewell is planned at NASA headquarters after the Memorial Day holiday and will be televised on NASA TV.
The Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), a division of the California Institute of Technology in Pasadena, manages the
Mars Exploration Rover project for NASA's Office of Space Science, Washington.
The scientific objectives of the Mars Exploration Rover mission were to:
During the next two decades, NASA would continue to conduct missions to address whether life ever arose on Mars. The search began with determining whether the Martian environment was ever suitable for life. Life, as we understand it, requires water, so the history of water on Mars is critical to finding out if the Martian environment was ever conducive to life. Although the Mars Exploration Rovers did not have the ability to detect life directly, they offered very important information on the habitability of the environment during the planet's history.
Solar arrays generate about 140 watts for up to four hours per Martian day (sol) while rechargeable lithium ion batteries store energy for use at night. ''Spirit's'' onboard computer uses a 20&nbsp;MHz RAD6000 CPU with 128 MB of DRAM, 3 MB of EEPROM, and 256 MB of flash memory. The rover's operating temperature ranges from    40   C to +40   C (   40   F to 104   F) and radioisotope heater units provide a base level of heating, assisted by electrical heaters when necessary. A gold film and a layer of silica aerogel provide insulation.
Communications depends on an omnidirectional low-gain antenna communicating at a low data rate and a steerable high-gain antenna, both in direct contact with Earth. A low gain antenna is also used to relay data to spacecraft orbiting Mars.
Fixed science instruments include
The rover arm holds the following instruments
The cameras produce 1024-pixel by 1024-pixel images, the data is compressed, stored, and transmitted later.
The primary surface mission for ''Spirit'' was planned to last at least 90 sols. The mission has received several extensions and  had passed 1,800 sols.  On August 11, 2007, ''Spirit'' obtained the second longest operational duration on the surface of Mars for a lander or rover at 1282 Sols, one Sol longer than the Viking 2 lander. Viking 2 was powered by a nuclear cell whereas ''Spirit'' is powered by solar arrays. Currently the Mars probe with longest operational period is Viking 1 which lasted for 2245 Sols on the surface of Mars. Should ''Spirit'' still be operational on April 29, 2010, at 2246 Sols it would surpass Viking 1 as having longest operational duration on the surface of Mars for a lander or rover.  However, due to a low power fault, it is unclear if the rover is still operational.  An archive of weekly updates on the rover's status can be found at the ''Spirit'' Update Archive.
The ''Spirit'' Mars rover and lander arrived successfully on the surface of Mars on 04:35 Ground UTC on January 4, 2004. This was the start of its 90-sol mission, but solar cell cleaning events would mean it was the start of a much longer mission, lasting at least until 2010.
After the airbag-protected landing craft settled onto the surface, the rover rolled out to take panoramic images. These give scientists the information they need to select promising geological targets and drive to those locations to perform on-site scientific investigations.
The panoramic image below shows a slightly rolling surface, littered with small rocks, with hills on the horizon up to 27&nbsp;km away. The MER team named the landing site "Columbia Memorial Station," in honor of the seven astronauts killed in the Space Shuttle ''Columbia'' disaster.
To the right is the first color image derived from images taken by the panoramic camera on the Mars Exploration Rover ''Spirit''. It was the highest resolution image taken on the surface of another planet. "We're seeing a panoramic mosaic of four pancam images high by three wide," said camera designer Jim Bell of Cornell University. The picture shown originally had a full size of 4,000 by 3,000 pixels. However, a complete pancam panorama is even 8 times larger than that, and could be taken in stereo (i.e., two complete pictures, making the resolution twice as large again.) The colors are fairly accurate. (For a technical explanation, see .)
The MER pancams are black-and-white instruments. Thirteen rotating filter wheels produce multiple images of the same scene at different wavelengths. Once received on earth, these images can be combined to produce color images.
The leading theory at the time was that the rover was stuck in a "reboot loop".  The rover was programmed to reboot if there was a fault aboard.  However, if there was a fault that occurred during reboot, it would continue to reboot forever.  The fact that the problem persisted through reboot suggested that the error was not in RAM, but in either the flash memory, the EEPROM, or a hardware fault.  The last case would likely doom the rover.  Anticipating the potential for errors in the flash memory and EEPROM, the designers had made it so that the rover could be booted without ever touching the flash memory.  The radio itself could decode a limited command set     enough to tell the rover to reboot without using flash.  Without access to flash memory the reboot cycle was broken.  
On January 24, 2004 the rover repair team announced that the problem was with ''Spirit'''s flash memory and the software that wrote to it. The flash hardware was believed to be working correctly but the file management module in the software was "not robust enough" for the operations the ''Spirit'' was engaged in when the problem occurred, indicating that the problem was caused by a software bug as opposed to faulty hardware.  NASA engineers finally came to the conclusion that there were too many files on the file system, which was a relatively minor problem.  Most of these files contained unneeded in-flight data. After realizing what the problem was, the engineers deleted some files, and eventually reformatted the entire flash memory system. On February 6 (Sol 33), the rover was restored to its original working condition, and science activities resumed..
The round, shallow depression in this image resulted from the first intentional grinding of a rock on Mars. The Rock Abrasion Tool (aka "RAT") on NASA's ''Spirit'' rover ground off the surface of a patch 45.5 millimeters (1.895 inches) in diameter on a rock called Adirondack during ''Spirit's'' 34th sol on Mars, February 6, 2004. The hole is 2.65 millimeters (0.1&nbsp;inch) deep, exposing fresh interior material of the rock for close inspection with the rover's microscopic imager and two spectrometers on the robotic arm. This image was taken by ''Spirit's'' panoramic camera, providing a quick visual check of the success of the grinding.
This color image taken by the Mars Exploration Rover ''Spirit'''s panoramic camera on Sol 40 (February 13, 2004) is centered on an unusually flaky rock called Mimi. Mimi is only one of many features in the area known as "Stone Council", but looks very different from any rock that scientists have seen at the Gusev crater site so far. Mimi's flaky appearance leads scientists to a number of hypotheses. Mimi could have been subjected to pressure either through burial or impact, or may have once been a dune that was cemented into flaky layers, a process that sometimes involves the action of water.
On March 5, 2004, NASA announced that ''Spirit'' had found hints of water history on Mars in a rock dubbed "Humphrey". Dr. Raymond Arvidson, Ph.D., the McDonnell University Professor and chair of Earth and planetary sciences at Washington University in St. Louis, reported during a NASA press conference: "If we found this rock on Earth, we would say it is a volcanic rock that had a little fluid moving through it." In contrast to the rocks found by the twin rover ''Opportunity'', this one was formed from magma and then acquired bright material in small crevices, which look like crystallized minerals. If this interpretation holds true, the minerals were most likely dissolved in water, which was either carried inside the rock or interacted with it at a later stage, after it formed.
On March 11, 2004, the ''Spirit'' rover reached Bonneville crater after a  journey. This crater is about  across with a floor about  below the surface. JPL decided that it would be a bad idea to send the rover down into the crater, as they saw no targets of interest inside.  ''Spirit'' drove along the southern rim and continued to the southwest towards the Columbia Hills.
It then reached Lahontan crater on Sol 118, and drove along the rim until Sol 120. Lahontan is about  across and about  deep. A long, snaking sand dune stretches away from its southwestern side, and ''Spirit'' went around it, because loose sand dunes present an unknown risk to the ability of the rover wheels to get traction.
On Sol 159, ''Spirit'' reached the first of many targets at the base of the Columbia Hills called West Spur. Hank's Hollow was studied for 23 sols. Within Hank's Hollow was the strange looking rock dubbed "Pot of Gold". 
From here, ''Spirit'' took a northerly path along the base of the hill towards the target Wooly Patch, which was studied from Sol 192 to Sol 199. By Sol 203, ''Spirit'' had driven southward up the hill and arrived at the rock dubbed "Clovis". Clovis was ground and analyzed from Sol 210 to Sol 225. Following Clovis came the targets of Ebenezer (Sols 226   235), Tetl (Sol 270), Uchben and Palinque (Sols 281   295), and Lutefisk (Sols 296   303). From Sols 239 to 262, ''Spirit'' powered down for solar conjunction, when communications with the Earth are blocked.
Slowly, ''Spirit'' has made its way around the summit of Husband Hill, and at Sol 344 was ready to climb over the newly designated "Cumberland Ridge" and into "Larry's Lookout" and "Tennessee Valley".
For an overview of Spirit rover events in 2005 by NASA see 
On Sol 371, ''Spirit'' arrived at a rock named "Peace" near the top of Cumberland Ridge. ''Spirit'' ground it with the RAT on Sol 373.
By Sol 390 (mid-February 2005), ''Spirit'' was advancing towards "Larry's Lookout", by driving up the hill in reverse. The scientists at this time were trying to conserve as much energy as possible for the climb.
Image:Pot of gold-Close-med.jpg|Pot of Gold rock
Image:Gusev_-_Colina_Husband.jpg|''Spirit'''s traverse up Husband Hill
Image:Spirit PIA03230.jpg|''Spirit'' artificially added to image (taken by itself) of Larry's Lookout
Image:MarsSunset.jpg|Martian sunset by ''Spirit'' at Gusev crater, May 19, 2005.
On March 9, 2005 (probably during the Martian night), the rover's solar panel efficiency jumped from around 60% of what it had originally been to 93%, followed on 10 March by the sighting of dust devils.  NASA scientists speculate a dust devil must have swept the solar panels clean, possibly significantly extending the duration of the mission.  This also marks the first time dust devils had been spotted by either ''Spirit'' or ''Opportunity'', easily one of the top highlights of the mission to date.  Dust devils had previously been photographed by only the ''Pathfinder'' probe.
Mission members monitoring the Spirit rover on Mars reported on March 12, 2005, that a lucky encounter with a dust devil had cleaned the solar panels of that robot. Power levels dramatically increased and daily science work was anticipated to be expanded. 
On Sol 582, August 21, 2005, ''Spirit'' reached the summit of Husband Hill and acquired a 360 degree panorama picture.
In 2006 ''Spirit'' drove towards an area dubbed "Home Plate", and reached it in February. For events in 2006 by NASA see 
During 2007 ''Spirit'' spent several months near the base of the Home Plate plateau. On sol 1306 ''Spirit'' climbed onto the eastern edge of the plateau. In September and October it examined rocks and soils at several locations on the southern half of the plateau. On November 6, Spirit had reached the western edge of Home Plate, and started taking pictures for a panoramic overview of the western valley, with Grissom Hill and Husband Hill visible. The panorama image was published on NASA's website on January 3, 2008 to little attention, until January 23, when an independent website () published a magnified detail of the left side of the original image in which is visible what looks much like a dark green humanoid sitting on a rock or walking down a hill with the right arm raised. This strange formation is also visible when viewing the image in full resolution on the NASA website. The presence of the feature in all separate images which were combined to make the color image as well as NavCam images from several days earlier, conclusively show that it is a permanent feature.
Reaching the ridge on April 9, 2006 and parking on the ridge with an 11   incline to the north, ''Spirit'' spent the next eight months on the ridge during which time undertaking observations of changes in the surrounding area.  No drives were attempted because of the low power levels the rover was experiencing during the Martian winter. The rover made its first drive, a short turn to position targets of interest within reach of the robotic arm, in early November 2006, following the shortest days of winter and solar conjunction when communications with Earth were severely limited. 
While at Low Ridge, Spirit imaged two rocks of similar chemical nature to that of ''Opportunity'''s Heat Shield Rock, a meteorite on the surface of Mars. Named "Zhong Shan" for Sun Yat-sen and "Allan Hills" for the location in Antarctica where several Martian meteorites have been found, they stood out against the background rocks which were darker. Further spectrographic testing is being done to determine the exact composition of these rocks, which may turn out to also be meteorites.
On January 4, 2007, both rovers received new flight software to the onboard computers. The update was received just in time for the third anniversary of their landing. The new systems let the rovers decide whether or not to transmit an image, and whether or not to extend their arms to examine rocks, which would save much time for scientists as they would not have to sift through hundreds of images to find the one they want, or examine the surroundings to decide to extend the arms and examine the rocks.
Spirit's dead wheel turned out to be a mixed blessing.  As it was traveling in December 2007, pulling the dead wheel behind, the wheel scraped off the upper layer of the Martian soil, uncovering a patch of ground that scientists say shows evidence of a past environment that would have been perfect for microbial life. It is similar to areas on Earth where water or steam from hot springs came into contact with volcanic rocks. On Earth, these are locations that tend to teem with bacteria, said rover chief scientist Steve Squyres. "We're really excited about this," he told a meeting of the American Geophysical Union (AGU). The area is extremely rich in silica   the main ingredient of window glass. The researchers have now concluded that the bright material must have been produced in one of two ways. One: hot-spring deposits produced when water dissolved silica at one location and then carried it to another (i.e. a geyser).  Two: acidic steam rising through cracks in rocks  stripped them of their mineral components, leaving silica behind. "The important thing is that whether it is one hypothesis or the other, the implications for the former habitability of Mars are pretty much the same," Squyres explained to BBC News. Hot water provides an environment in which microbes can thrive and the precipitation of that silica entombs and preserves them. Squyres added, "You can go to hot springs and you can go to fumaroles and at either place on Earth it is teeming with life     microbial life."
Towards the end of June 2007, a series of dust storms began clouding the Martian atmosphere with dust. The storms intensified and by July 20, both Spirit and Opportunity were facing the real possibility of system failure due to lack of power. NASA released a statement to the press which said (in part) "We're rooting for our rovers to survive these storms, but they were never designed for conditions this intense". The key problem caused by the dust storms was a dramatic reduction in solar power caused by there being so much dust in the atmosphere that it was blocking 99 percent of direct sunlight to the rover Opportunity, and slightly more to the rover Spirit.
Normally the solar arrays on the rovers are able to generate up to  of power per Martian day. After the storms, the amount of power generated was greatly reduced to . If the rovers generate less than  per day they must start draining their batteries to run survival heaters. If the batteries run dry, key electrical elements are likely to fail due to the intense cold. Both rovers were put into the lowest-power setting in order to wait out the storms. In early August the storms began to clear slightly, allowing the rovers to successfully charge their batteries. They were kept in hibernation in order to wait out the remainder of the storm.
On November 10, 2008, a large dust storm further reduced the output of the solar panels to  per day   a critically low level. NASA officials were hopeful that Spirit would survive the storm, and that the power level would rise once the storm had passed and the skies started clearing. They attempted to conserve power by shutting down systems for extended periods of time, including the heaters. On November 13, 2008 the rover awoke and communicated with mission control as scheduled.
From November 14, 2008 to November 20, 2008 Spirit averaged  per day. The heaters for the thermal emission spectrometer, which uses about  per day, have been disabled since November 11, 2008. Tests on the thermal emission spectrometer indicate that it was undamaged, and the heaters would be enabled with sufficient power. The solar conjunction, where the Sun is between Earth and Mars, started on November 29, 2008 and communication with the rovers was not possible until December 13, 2008.
For an overview of Spirit rover events in 2009 by NASA see 
On February 6, 2009, a beneficial wind blew off some of the dust accumulated on the panels. This led to an increase in power output to 240 watt hours per day. NASA officials have said that this increase in energy will be used predominantly for driving.
On April 18, 2009 and April 28, 2009 power output of the solar arrays were increased by cleaning events. The power output of ''Spirit's'' solar arrays climbed from 223 watt hours per day on March 31, 2009 to 372 watt hours per day on April 29, 2009.
On May 1, 2009 troubles in driving began. The rover's wheels appeared to be stuck in soft soil with the rover itself resting on a spot of iron(III) sulfate (jarosite in fact) hidden under a veneer of normal-looking soil. For the rover's mobility, iron sulfate is an insidious material with very little cohesion, so that it was very tough for the rover wheels to get a grip on it. JPL team members simulated the situation by means of a rover mock-up and computer models to attempt to get the rover back on track, while it sat immobilized.
 Preliminary extrication drives began on November 17, 2009.
On December 17, 2009, the right-front wheel suddenly began to operate normally for the first three out of four rotations attempts.  It was unknown what effect it would have on freeing the rover if the wheel became fully operational again.  The right rear wheel had also stalled on November 28 and has not been working since, leaving the rover with only four fully operational wheels. If the team could not gain movement and adjust the tilt of the solar panels, or gain a beneficial wind to clean the panels, the rover would only be able to sustain operations until May 2010.
On January 26, 2010, after several months attempting to free the rover, NASA decided to redefine the mobile robot mission by calling it a stationary research platform. Efforts were directed in preparing a more suitable orientation of the platform in relation to the Sun in an attempt to allow a more efficient recharge of the platform's batteries. This was needed to keep some systems operational during the Martian winter. On March 30, 2010, Spirit skipped a planned communication session and as anticipated from recent power-supply projections, had probably entered a low-power hibernation mode.
The last communication with the rover was on sol 2210 (March 22, 2010) and there is a strong possibility the rover   s batteries lost so much power at some point that the mission clock stopped. In previous winters the rover was able to park on a Sun-facing slope and keep its internal temperature above -40 Celsius, but since the rover was stuck on flat ground it is estimated that its internal temperature dropped to &minus;55 Celsius. If ''Spirit'' had survived these conditions and there had been a cleaning event, there was a possibility that with the southern summer solstice in March 2011, solar energy would increase to a level that would wake up the rover.
JPL continued to attempt to regain contact until May 24, 2011, when NASA announced the end of efforts to communicate with Spirit, with the last attempt scheduled to take place on May 25, 2011, at 07:00 UTC.    Assets that had been needed to support ''Spirit'' are being transitioned to support NASA's next-generation Mars rover Curiosity. Two NASA Mars orbiters and the Deep Space Network of antennas will be prepared for November's ''Curiosity'' launch.
In late 2005, ''Spirit'' took advantage of a favorable energy situation to make multiple nighttime observations of both of Mars' moons Phobos and Deimos.Jim Bell (Cornell University) et al. . Retrieved 2008-10-21 These observations included a "lunar" (or rather phobal) eclipse as ''Spirit'' watched Phobos disappear into Mars's shadow.  Some of ''Spirit'''s star gazing was designed to look for a predicted meteor shower caused by Halley's Comet, and although at least four imaged streaks were suspect meteors, they could not be unambiguously differentiated from those caused by cosmic rays.
A transit of Mercury from Mars took place on January 12, 2005 from about 14:45 UTC to 23:05 UTC.  Theoretically, this could have been observed by both ''Spirit'' and ''Opportunity''; however, camera resolution did not permit seeing Mercury's 6.1" angular diameter. They were able to observe transits of Deimos across the Sun, but at 2' angular diameter, Deimos is about 20 times larger than Mercury's 6.1" angular diameter. Ephemeris data generated by JPL Horizons indicates that ''Opportunity'' would have been able to observe the transit from the start until local sunset at about 19:23 UTC Earth time, while ''Spirit'' would have been able to observe it from local sunrise at about 19:38 UTC until the end of the transit.
Both rovers have passed their original mission time of 90 sols many times over and the extended time on the surface, and therefore additional stress on components, has resulted in some issues developing.  
On sol 779 (March 13, 2006), the right front wheel ceased working after having covered  on Mars. Engineers began driving the rover backwards, dragging the dead wheel.  Although this has resulted in changes to driving techniques, the dragging effect has become a useful tool. The wheel dragging has partially cleared soil away on the surface as the rover travels and allows for imaging areas that would normally be inaccessible.
But in mid-December 2009, to the surprise of the engineers, the right front wheel showed slight movement in a wheel-test on Sol 2113 and clearly rotated with normal resistance on three of four wheel-tests on Sol 2117, but stalled on the fourth.
On sols 2100   2101, the right rear wheel also stalled and has not been working since. 
The diamond in resin grinding surface of the Rock Abrasion Tool has worn down, and the device can only be used to brush targets.
All of the other science instruments and engineering cameras continue to function. The MIMOS II Mossbauer spectrometer takes much longer to produce results than it did earlier in the mission because of the decay of its Cobalt 57 gamma ray source which has a half life of 271 days.
To commemorate ''Spirit'''s great contribution to the exploration of Mars, an asteroid, 37452 Spirit, has been named after it. The name was proposed by Ingrid van Houten-Groeneveld who along with Cornelis Johannes van Houten and Tom Gehrels discovered the asteroid on September 24, 1960.
Ruben H. Fleet Museum and the Liberty Science Center also has an IMAX show called Roving Mars that documents the journey of both Spirit and Opportunity, using both CG and actual imagery.
On January 27, 2004 NASA memorialized the crew of Apollo 1 by naming three hills to the north of "Columbia Memorial Station" as the Apollo 1 Hills. On February 2, 2004 the astronauts on Columbia's final mission were further memorialized when NASA named a set of hills to the east of the landing site the Columbia Hills Complex, denoting seven peaks in that area as "Anderson", "Brown", "Chawla", "Clark", "Husband", "McCool", and "Ramon"; NASA has submitted these geographical feature names to the IAU for approval.