The '''University of Minnesota Solar Vehicle Project''', or '''UMNSVP''', is a team of undergraduate students from the University of Minnesota that designs and constructs solar cars.  In its 19 years, it has established itself as one of the world's top solar racing teams, with top two finishes in ten of eighteen events entered.
The University of Minnesota Solar Vehicle Project was founded following the GM Sunrayce USA in 1990.  With little to no prior knowledge, the team successfully built and raced ''Aurora I'' in Sunrayce `93.
The ''Aurora'' generation of UMNSVP cars, starting with ''Aurora II'', mostly followed the "cutout" design that was typical of the 1990s, with a relatively flat body and a bubble canopy.  Over three cars, the design was refined more and more.  All three of the ''Aurora'' vehicles had successful trips to international races, culminating in a 4th place finish in the World Solar Challenge in Australia.
The ''Borealis'' series of cars represents the newer generation of solar cars: exotic, aerodynamic "manta-style" bodies with unlimited array area, able to (under ideal conditions) travel as fast as, or faster than, the flow of traffic on any road.  All three of the ''Borealis'' cars have been extremely successful.
The new ''Centaurus'' series of cars takes the project to a whole new level by allowing the driver to sit upright while driving.  Two cars have been built so far, and it is clear that the cars are quickly improving to achieve the levels of success the team enjoyed with the earlier Aurora and Borealis series cars.
In 17 years of competition, UMNSVP has built and raced 9 different cars, assembling one of the best records in solar car racing.  In those 17 years:
UMNSVP takes great pride in being one of the very few collegiate solar car teams that researches, assembles, encapsulates, and attaches its own solar array.  In fact, almost everything electrical on the car is designed, built, and programmed by team members.
On July 21, 2005, during the North American Solar Challenge, ''Borealis III'' passed from the United States to Canada to become the first solar car to cross an international boundary during a race.
The U of M Centaurus solar car won the 2009 Formula Sun Grand Prix on June 8th, 2009 completing 487 1.7 mile laps at Cresson, Texas.  This was 94 laps more than the nearest competitor.  It is the second straight victory for the U of M Solar car team at this event.
Team members have finished their latest vehicle ''Centaurus II''.  Its completion culminated in the 2010 American Solar Challenge, in which team team placed 2nd overall.  Next fall, a new group of young engineers will take the reins and begin design of a new vehicle.
The UMNSVP team is composed exclusively of undergraduate students from the Twin Cities Campus of the University of Minnesota.  Most of the participants are studying some sort of engineering in the University's Institute of Technology, but students of any major are welcome to join the team.  The team is usually composed of 40 to 60 students.
The team is composed of four main design teams.  Each team is responsible for designing certain components of the car, although all the systems must eventually be integrated with one another.
In addition to the four design teams, there is also an executive team.  This team composed of students from the four design teams; it is responsible for taking on the duties of the team that are not directly associated with the vehicle, such as acquiring sponsors and setting meeting times.
As with any student group at the University of Minnesota, UMNSVP must have a faculty advisor.  The faculty advisor is not directly involved with the design or construction of the car, but performs executive duties and serves as a contact to the University.  Prof. Jeff Hammer (Aerospace Engineering) is the current faculty advisor for the team.  Dr. Patrick Starr (Mechanical Engineering) was the faculty advisor for the team since its inception in 1990 until transferring his position to Prof. Hammer in the summer of 2006.
The University of Minnesota Solar Vehicle Project has built 9 cars in its history:
In early 2005, ''Borealis I'' was sold to the , where it was refitted with new electronics and solar panels. ISU raced it as ''Mercury I'' in the 2005 North American Solar Challenge, where they finished 18th.  Its chassis was re-used for their 2008 car ''Mercury II'', but unfortunately, troubles with their motor prevented them from qualifying.  In 2009, ''Mercury II'' finished 5th out of 11 entered vehicles in the 2009 Formula Sun Grand Prix.
During June and July 2006, ''Borealis III'' underwent slight modifications in order to race in the World Solar Rally in Taiwan in September 2006.