The simulator was first released on 27 November 2000 and several new versions have been released, with the most recent version ''100830'' released for free download on 30 August 2010. 
The simulator is realistic enough to re-enact historical space flights, however the ability to fly fictional ships allows the player to reach areas of the solar system that cannot be reached by manned spaceflight at the present time. A spacecraft's engines are defined only by the amount of thrust they put out and amount of fuel they use, allowing anything from solar sails to conventional rocket engines to futuristic nuclear fission and fusion drives to be simulated. Orbital, sub-orbital, and interplanetary travel are all supported. Docking and attachment systems allow the user to simulate docking with a space station or other spacecraft and rendezvous with and retrieval of satellite. The user can also attempt to build a space station in orbit.
The solar system presented in ''Orbiter'' consists of the sun, the eight planets and their major moons. Dwarf planets, asteroids, and comets are not included in the solar system included with the simulator but exist as add-ons. Although ''Orbiter'' contains a database of over 100,000 stars, these are for display purposes only and interstellar travel is currently not possible in the simulator. The simulator also includes a planetarium mode that allows ecliptic and celestial grids to be overlaid onto the star map, along with labels of the constellations and other celestial markers. The planetarium mode can also display labels indicating the location and identity of objects in the solar system, such as planets, moons, or vessels, that appear within a certain proximity based on their type. This mode can also display labels on the celestial bodies in the solar system at certain coordinates on their surface for indicating cities, historical markers, geological formations, and other interesting sites.
The traditional simulated control interface in ''Orbiter'' consists of two Multi-function displays and a Head-Up Display. Each features several modes of operation, with all commands given via the keyboard or mouse. The simulator also supports customized control panels and instruments, including 3D virtual cockpits and 2D instrument panels. These allow the player to use the mouse to interact with the panels, and allows more complex systems and instruments that are customized for each ship. The addition of a virtual cockpit also allows the player to freely look around from the perspective of the pilot. From patch ''060929'' onwards, ''Orbiter'' has supported TrackIR, which allows the simulator to track the head-movements of the player and adjust the view accordingly.
The default version of ''Orbiter'' has no sound, however a popular add-on called "OrbiterSound" is available. It provides engine noises, ambient sounds in the cabin, radio chatter and other sounds including mp3 playlists. Options enable the user to maintain a realistic silence when the craft is viewed externally during space flight.
 Another popular category of add-ons are modifications of the standard spacecraft of ''Orbiter'', ranging from simple visual changes to complex simulations of the internal subsystems of these fictional crafts. Examples of these more advanced default spacecraft include the DeltaGlider IV and the XR Series of vessels.Doug's Orbiter Page--XR Series of Vessels
Add-ons are also available for new bases, MFD modes, extensions of the simulation menu, space stations, planets, and even other solar systems. Since ''Orbiter'' 2006, a scenario editor is included, which can also be extended for supporting the special attributes of add-on vessels.