Cascade Bicycle Club was formed by Mike and Rick Quam in 1970. The membership fee was $2; meetings were at Luther Burbank Park on Mercer Island. The first newsletter, The Freewheeler, was produced that year. In 1972, Cascade began lobbying for Burke-Gilman Trail. In 1975, Cascade hosted the third annual Chilly Hilly ride on Bainbridge Island. In 1979, the club established the Seattle to Portland Bicycle Classic. The next year, when the eruption of Mount St. Helens canceled STP, it created a ride to Vancouver, B.C. - later renamed from STV to Ride from Seattle to Vancouver and Party!. The 185-mile ride is limited to 900 riders.
In 1981, the club produced its first logo. The Bicycle Bill was passed by state legislature in 1983 to establish the bicycle's role as vehicle and cyclists' rights to the road. The first Seattle Bicycle Expo took place in 1987. While previously an all volunteer club, a person was hired to direct the education committee.  By 1990, the club moved into its first office, on Ravenna Boulevard, and took on a paid director. 
In 1991, the Seattle to Portland ride had a record 10,000 participants. The club started producing the Flying Wheels Summer Century in 1993 and the Kitsap Color Classic in October 1994. By February 1995, the Bike Expo had its highest attendance at 12,871. In January 1999, Cascade moved to Warren G. Magnuson Park. That year, the Ride Around Washington began its inaugural tour. By 2000, the club turned toward becoming a professional organization, representing bicyclists to elected officials, community leaders, and business owners. Cascade partnerships extend across greater Seattle.
Cascade volunteers lead more than 1,000 free club rides a year. The club also leads multiple-day tours and Cascade Affiliated International Tours. Cascade rides are open to anyone wearing a helmet. Cascade Bicycle Club Education Foundation staff organize adult classes, youth camps, rodeos, festivals and bicycle activities in Seattle.
In addition to producing material for the public on cycling the Cascade Bicycle Club lobbies local government on behalf of cyclists. Advocacy staff produced a paper titled "Left by the Side of the Road" asserting the shortfall of safe, effective bicycle routes in the region. The club maintains paid political lobbyists to petition for changes in state and municipal laws and budget. 
In 2010 the club, with the Sierra Club and Futurewise, sued Puget Sound Regional Council over its transportation planning. They said the plan did too little to reduce global warming. They petitioned for a judge to rewrite the law to reduce road construction and increase bicycle, pedestrian and transit programs. In the same year Cascade lobbyist David Hiller, referring to careless drivers who kill cyclists,  told The Stranger, that he would "love to hang these people up by their toenails at the edge of town and paint 'killer' across their chest and let them hang there until the buzzards peck their eyes out." The club's directors called for him to be fired. The executive director, Chuck Ayers, refused. The board then fired him, rehiring him later. 
In 2010 the club again lobbied for tougher mandatory sentencing for negligent drivers who injured or killed "vulnerable users" including bicyclists and pedestrians. It failed to pass.
The Cascade Bicycle lobbies have petitioned for extending and building trails along the Burke-Gilman Trail through the industrial waterfront of Ballard. After local businesses objected due to fears of increased insurance costs of operating industrial machinery and vehicles along a bike trail and that they would be driven out of business, the club sued.
Cascade fundraising rides include the 200-mile Seattle to Portland Bicycle Classic (STP).