Many of the Long Win Bus routes pass over the famous Tsing Ma Bridge.
Prior to the opening of the Tsing Ma Bridge, the buses of Long Win were used during rush hour to provide additional buses. Long Win Bus Company started operation in May 1997 after the opening of the Tsing Ma Bridge. The first route operated by Long Win Bus was route E31 (Tung Chung <> Tsuen Wan Ferry when newly introduced), served by Volvo Olympians. But later on, Volvo Olympians have been retired from the bus fleet, and were transferred to its parent company, KMB.
It is a rival to the Cityflyer service provided by Citybus (Hong Kong). It operates Airbus routes to the Airport. Long Win Bus is also operating Disneyland routes and in 2005 LWB introduced 3 new TransBus Enviro500s for the Hong Kong Disneyland routes.
In 2002, there were an average of 56,000 passengers per day. The company's franchise has been extended from 1 June 2003 to 1 May 2013.
Similar to Kowloon Motor Bus, Long Win Bus also has a bus numbering system. Initial alphabets indicate the type of the route.  
Initial with '''A''' shows one of the terminal of the routes end in Airport and do not have a stop in Tung Chung.
Initial with '''E''' represents a route that serves the Airport, Tung Chung, and areas outside Lantau Island.
Now Long Win Bus operates 20 routes with a fleet of 166 double-deck air-conditioned buses.
Buses in the Long Win fleet includes:
Long Win Bus has only one Duple Metsec-bodied Trident which serves the route A41P, along with other Dennis Tridents. It was the only Long Wins bus with an exterior electronic destination display until the advent of the TransBus Enviro500s.
Although this is rare, Long Win's buses also serve some KMB routes during times of bus shortages. Once a Long Win Dennis Trident catered Kowloon Motor Bus' route 960 for a day. Some of the Long Win's buses also have been used for serve KMB routes includes 271 and 1A during 1997-1998, where the buses are ready in service while Chek Lap Kok airport is not opened yet.
Long Win's buses for Airbus routes are generally alike compared to Cityflyer buses, but there are differences.
First, the buses used are the Alexander ALX500-bodied Trident, instead of the Duple Metsec Trident for Cityflyer. Second, the seats are similar to those on the Cityflyer buses, but with no foot rests provided. Third, the luggage racks are not as wide as those in Cityflyer buses, but still sturdy. Lastly, there is no security camera.
Both Cityflyer and Long Win Bus feature a destination screen which provides information of the next stop and Hong Kong scenery sites.