ADNEC was established in August 2005 under a decree issued by His Highness Sheikh Khalifa Bin Zayed Al Nahyan, President of the UAE and Ruler of Abu Dhabi.  ADNEC's initial task was to develop a venue that would replace the old Abu Dhabi International Exhibition Center and attract more meetings, incentives, conferences and events into the emirate . It had the broader goal of enhancing Abu Dhabi's image as a business, leisure and lifestyle destination.
Four international exhibition organizing companies, namely, IIR Middle East, Reed Exhibitions, CMP Information, and dmg world media, have signed up for long-term agreements for shows at ADNEC's Exhibition Centre. This Foundation Partner strategy helps maintain a mutual commitment to developing trade events and expanding Abu Dhabi's exhibition sector.
ADNEC's venue portfolio includes the following:
Located in the UAE's capital city, the Abu Dhabi National Exhibition Centre was inaugurated in February 2007 by His Highness Sheikh Khalifa Bin Zayed Al Nahyan, President of the UAE and Ruler of Abu Dhabi. The venue's flexible and interconnected halls allow for a diverse yearly calendar of over 100 events, such as the International Defense Exhibition & Conference (IDEX) and the World Future Energy Summit (WFES), the Abu Dhabi International Petroleum Exhibition & Conference (ADIPEC), Cityscape Abu Dhabi, and the Abu Dhabi International Hunting and Equestrian Exhibition, just to name a few.
In October 2009, the  multi-purpose Hall 12 was fitted with a retractable tiered seating system, which when activated can seat almost 6,000 spectators and transforms the area into the UAE's largest indoor auditorium.
Enabling works to double the capacity of the existing venue to  are ongoing and construction will commence in late 2009 or early 2010.
It is part of the Al Ain Convention Centre district, which covers an area of , and is estimated to cost AED 3.5 billion. The project will feature three main public parks, a cultural centre, a four star hotel and conference centre, with a retail link to the existing venue. Work is also underway to link the overall development to the Al Ain road grid, via a boulevard.
Capital Centre is a mixed-use business and residential micro-city being masterplanned by ADNEC and constructed around the Abu Dhabi National Exhibition Centre. Upon its completion, Capital Centre will comprise twenty-three towers, including six branded hotels, four commercial buildings, eight residential and serviced apartment complexes, and 5 mixed-use developments. It will be back-dropped by waterfront views and will become a fully integrated exhibition-lifestyle destination.
In October 2009, the 408-room Aloft Abu Dhabi opened, which is connected to the Abu Dhabi National Exhibition Centre and part of the Capital Centre development. It is the first Aloft in Europe, Africa and the Middle East. Aloft is owned by ADNEC and operated by Starwood Hotels and Resorts Worldwide.  A total of 560 solar panels, covering a total area of , have been installed on the roof of ADNEC Car Park A, to provide 90 per cent of the hot water at Aloft Abu Dhabi. These panels heat water for the hotel's 408 bedrooms, 2 production kitchens, food & beverage outlets, hotel offices and the swimming pool saving an estimated 870 mega watt hours of electricity every year by making use of the infra-red component of sun light to generate energy.  Aloft is the first hotel in Abu Dhabi to make use of such solar energy panels.
Capital Gate, part of the Capital Centre complex, is a 160 metre, 35-storey tower being built next to the Abu Dhabi National Exhibition Centre which incorporates a slanting-core concept to feature an 18-degree westward lean. It will include  of office space and house Abu Dhabi's first Hyatt hotel. The tower will link directly to the exhibition venue as well as a 2.4&nbsp;km Marina Zone currently under development.
In November 2009, the tower topped out its central core and reached its final height of . When complete, Capital Gate will house Abu Dhabi's first Hyatt hotel &ndash; Hyatt at Capital Centre, a presidential style luxury five-star hotel, which will provide 189 rooms.
In June 2010, the Guinness World Records certified Capital Gate as the    World   s furthest leaning man-made tower.    The new record shows that the Capital Gate tower has been built to lean 18 degrees westwards; more than four times that of the world famous Leaning Tower of Pisa. Investigation and evaluation, which was made by a Guinness appointed awards committee, started in January 2010, when the exterior of the 160-metre (524.9&nbsp;ft), 35 storey tower was completed. 
The Capital Gate project was able to achieve its record inclination through a special engineering breakthrough that allows floor plates to be stacked vertically up to the 12th storey and staggered over each other by between 300mm to 1400mm, which allows for the towers dramatic lean. 
The tower features other innovative construction techniques including the world   s first known use of a    pre-cambered    core. The technique utilizes 15,000 cubic metres of concrete reinforced with 10,000 tons of steel. The core, deliberately built slightly off centre, has straightened as the building has risen, compressing the concrete and giving it strength, and moving into (vertical) position as the weight of the floors has been added. 
Capital Gate was designed by international architectural firm RMJM and is due for completion by the end of 2010. Upon completion, Capital Gate will house the 5-star Hyatt Capital Gate hotel as well as approximately 20,000sqm of premium office space. 
Aside from its gravity-defying lean and pre-cambered core, Capital Gate has several other elements that enhance its reputation as one of the world   s most distinctive projects: