Mitchell is also heard as the only English-language voice on 50,000 watt WWFE-AM in Miami, a Spanish-language station with emphasis on Cuban news and music.  Mitchell has been heard since 1995 48 times a day on the hour and half-hour giving WWFE's legal station identification (The Federal Communications Commission mandates that all American radio stations legally identify (call letters and city of license) in English, regardless of whatever language their programming is in).
The son of Roi Carter Mitchell, a banker and Dorothy Catherine Mitchell, a teacher and musician, Mitchell, grew up in the Texas cities of Chillicothe, Garland, Dallas and Lewisville.  Mitchell graduated in 1966 from Lewisville High School and in 1967 from the Elkins Institute of Radio and Electronics in Dallas, where Rush Limbaugh was a schoolmate. Mitchell is an alumnus of Tarleton State University but did not study broadcasting there.  
A "jack-of-all-trades" in broadcasting, he began his broadcasting career at KEIR-FM (now KDMX-FM) 102.9 in Dallas.  He served as a disc jockey, news anchor, news reporter, sportscaster, talk show host, broadcast executive and broadcast engineer at various stations during the first 18 years of his 45-year career (as of December 2010).  Mitchell currently works as a program producer and voice-over talent at Salem Communications' stations in Miami, Florida WZAB-AM, WKAT-AM and WHIM-AM.
In 1984 he became an airborne traffic reporter for Traffic Patrol Broadcasting, giving live traffic reports on over two dozen stations in the Dallas-Fort Worth market.  During the 
1980s and 90s he also broadcast on over a dozen stations in Charlotte, North Carolina. 
He has also been heard doing airborne and ground-based traffic reports on all 40 English-language stations in Miami-Fort Lauderdale, Florida, the only known person to have done this.  For 11 years he was part of the number-one rated ''James T. Morning Show'' on WEDR-FM 99.1 in Miami. This was following Traffic Patrol Broadcasting's purchase by Metro Traffic Control in 1990.  In 1991, Metro Traffic Control became Metro Networks which later became part of Westwood One in 1997. 
In addition to his broadcasting duties, Mitchell worked as an audio production engineer for Zig Ziglar Corporation from 1980   82.  Mitchell served from 1986 to 1987 as National Director of Operations for Traffic Patrol Broadcasting, overseeing broadcast operations in Charlotte, Miami, West Palm Beach, Raleigh, Mobile, New Orleans, Dallas and Greensboro-Winston-Salem, North Carolina. Married with three children and four grandchildren, Mitchell currently resides in West Palm Beach, Florida.
In 1977, while serving as News Director for KROZ-FM and KZEY-AM in Tyler, Texas, he covered the famous capital murder trial of Kerry Max Cook, reporting from the Smith County courthouse, sitting in on the trial.  In 1984 Mitchell reported from the floor of the Republican National Convention in Dallas, specifically covering the South Carolina delegation for WGCA-AM in Charleston, South Carolina. One of Mitchell's well-known bloopers happened at the convention in a pre-recorded interview.  Mitchell told South Carolina U.S. Senator Strom Thurman that some were calling the convention dull and boring, then asked Thurman if he "was dull." 
He has also reported from the midst of two of America's most historic hurricanes, Hugo in 1989 and Andrew in 1992.  While in Charlotte in the late 1980s Mitchell broadcast dozens of reports for CBS radio on the collapse of Jim and Tammy Bakker's PTL empire. He reported for CBS on the expansion of the National Basketball Association in 1988.  He has also served as a voice-over and public address announcer for various projects including film narration for the Texas Department of Health and the city of Pembroke Pines, Florida.
Mitchell broadcast ten seasons of football play-by-play and three seasons of 
NCAA Division-I basketball.  He also has done NAIA college baseball play-by-play and auto racing public address announcing.  He spent several seasons announcing play-by-play for high school basketball.  From 1988 to 1990 he covered the NBA Charlotte Hornets for CBS radio and also covered the NBA Miami Heat for WQAM-AM 560.  He worked as a sideline reporter for Boston-based TalkAmerica, covering the NFL Miami Dolphins in the early 1990s.  He also reported daily from the Dolphin's training camp for WQAM-AM.  In 1975 he covered Major League Baseball's Texas Rangers for KEAN-AM.
Between 2000 and 2008 Mitchell also served as a news anchor for KLIF-AM, KAAM-AM, WRR-FM and KVCE-AM in the Dallas-Fort Worth market, before returning to the Miami-Fort Lauderdale market in 2009.
Mitchell is a federally-licensed broadcast engineer and has served as Director of Engineering for Metro Networks bureaus in Miami, Charlotte, West Palm Beach and Dallas, and has also been an engineer at numerous radio and television stations in Texas.  He is an Extra 
Class amateur radio operator with the call sign AJ5F.
Besides broadcasting, Mitchell is a licensed and ordained evangelical minister and has served as a bi-vocational pastor and associate pastor at several churches.  He has authored two theological books: ''Challenged to Investigate'' and ''The Beginner's End''.  He studied theology at International Bible College in San Antonio, Texas, Moody Bible Institute of Chicago, Howard Payne University, New Covenant International (NCIU) and Southwestern Baptist Theological Seminary. Mitchell also was a teacher for NCIU, teaching courses in apologetics, church history, and Old Testament.
Mitchell has also had several business interests over the years, including part ownership of 
Mitchell was diagnosed with trigeminal neuralgia which was possibly the result of a dental accident in 2002. Mitchell has suffered pain when speaking for extended periods, which can make doing his jobs as broadcaster and a minister quite difficult. He is currently being treated with tegretol (carbamazepine), and has responded well to treatment.