Joel Carl Hunter was born April 18, 1948 in the town of Shelby, Ohio. His parents were Wilbur Hunter, a decorated World War II veteran, and Jean Hunter, a homemaker. When his father died in 1952 from bronchogenic carcinoma of the lungs, Jean went to school to become a beautician and then opened a salon in a room built onto the back of the house.  From there she was able to work and keep a close eye on her two children, Joel and older sister Michele. For the next several years as his mother developed alcoholism that would later claim her life, Hunter spent much of his time with his maternal grandparents, Lena and Carl Bashore. It was from his grandmother that he was introduced to Christian life as she made him attend church each Sunday where he first heard from pastor Stanley Shoemaker, "Nothing will ever come right in the world until you take care of the sin in your own heart." In 1954, Jean married Herb Ovens, a factory worker in a carbon paper mill. For the remainder of his youth, Hunter had a stable home life, doing well in school and excelling in sports. He graduated from Shelby High School in 1966 the president of his class and captain of the football team.
After high school, he attended Ohio University and majored in history and government. While there, he became involved in many of the movements on campus. More substantially, he put much of his energy into the civil rights movement after he was impassioned for the cause by the words and actions of Martin Luther King, Jr.. In April 1968, after the assassination of King, he had a crisis of faith and wandered into Galbraith Chapel on campus.  He knelt at the altar and dedicated his life to Jesus, remembering the words of his childhood pastor. From that point onward, he felt called into ministry. He graduated from Ohio University with a Bachelor of Science degree in education.
From college, he pursued his calling in the ministry by going to Christian Theological Seminary in Indianapolis, Indiana in 1970. He chose the Christian Church (Disciples of Christ) seminary because his childhood friend Mike Armstrong was planning to study there. Hunter received his Master of Divinity in 1973. After starting towards his Doctor of Ministry degree, he took his first church appointment as a youth minister at Bradley United Methodist Church in Greenfield, Indiana. There he met his wife, Becky. He stayed at Bradley for one year, but was let go after the church board could find room in the budget only for new carpet or a youth minister and opted for the former. Hunter then became a minister at Southport United Methodist and remained there until obtaining his Doctor of Ministry degree in 1974. His thesis, in the field of culture and personality, was about equipping people for ministry. After graduation he moved to Mount Auburn United Methodist Church in Greenwood, Indiana to serve as the pastor.
In 1985, Hunter awoke several nights in a row feeling "My heart is just all disturbed" and the notion that God was calling him to move into a new phase of ministry. Not knowing what action he was supposed to take with new idea, he sought the counsel of a venerable nearby church pastor, saying that he was aware God wanted him to move, but he had never taken a job in a church that was not appointed for him by a bishop. He found out, through a letter sent to several church overseers across the United States, that there was a church called Northland Community Church in Orlando, Florida, that was looking for a senior pastor. He flew to Orlando to interview at Northland.
Several days after he accepted the role of Northland's senior pastor, Hunter's wife, Becky, had a conversation with a wife of one of the church elders who told her that the elders' wives had consistently prayed that God would "disturb the heart of the pastor who was supposed to be here." Becky was taken aback and explained to her that it was during that time period that Hunter had awakened night after night due to "a heart disturbed."
Northland Community Church had been started in 1972 by 11 people in the "north land" of Orlando., retrieved 30 October 2009 As it grew, Northland began to meet in local elementary schools. It bought a dilapidated roller skating rink in Longwood, Florida, the year before Hunter became the senior pastor. By 1985, the church had a weekly attendance of 200 people.  Over the next two decades the church grew to an average weekly attendance of more than 10,000 people. Eventually transformed from a    community church    into to a    church distributed   , Northland has been consistently named among ''Outreach'' magazine's 100 Largest and Fastest-Growing U.S. Churches., retrieved 30 October 2009 ''Ministry Today'' magazine listed Northland's facilities as one of "The Seven Most Innovative Church Buildings in America.", retrieved 30 October 2009
In 1996, Hunter began to pursue the idea of a church that could reach many more people than those who gathered inside its walls. He started discussing the idea with the elders of the church and soon Neighborhood Networks of the church began to meet. These were intended to be groups of 30 to 300 Northland churchgoers who would meet during the week in their own neighborhoods to study together, encourage each other and serve the neighborhoods' needs in practical ways. The idea seemed promising at first, but ultimately failed. Hunter later attributed the failure to a disconnectedness of these groups resulting from a lack of a concurrent worship service with the larger church body.
Hunter felt that to allow local manifestations of the church to flourish, it would require a weekly concurrent worship service. This requirement was met years later by an overcrowding at the increasingly cramped renovated roller skating rink in which Northland met. It was the increasing numbers of worshipers shortly after September 11, 2001, that forced Northland to create its first fully interactive multisite location at Lyman High School down the road.  Through fiber-optic cable, Northland was able to have a worship service at both the main site and at the high school. Duets were sung between singers half a mile apart, and Scripture read by either congregation was able to be heard in real time at both sites.
Northland replicated the multisite worship service in several different locations to meet the needs of different locations across Central Florida and now holds concurrent worship services with more than a thousand congregants in Mount Dora, West Oaks, and Oviedo, Florida. The same technology has allowed the church to hold concurrent interactive services with partner churches in Windhoek, Namibia; Kiev, Ukraine; and Cairo, Egypt.
In order to more fully realize the potential of a truly distributed church, Northland opened its new facility in August 2007. The $43 million, 3,100-seat building features technology that enables it to be a hub capable of transmitting enormous amounts of data each weekend to sites around the world. Today, a growing segment of Northland   s congregation has never even set foot inside the church building. Approximately 2,000 people worldwide now participate in Northland   s worship services online via InSite, a fully interactive online church application. Online worshipers participate in services via live webcast and have many ways to interact with the church and with one another, including instant access to an online pastor and the ability to chat with other worshipers. In 2009 this live worship tool also became accessible via iPhone and 2010 Northland worship services went live on Facebook.
Hunter was asked in February 2006 to sign the Evangelical Climate Initiative, a document recognizing global warming based on the findings of the Nobel Prize-winning Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). Fellow signatories included Rick Warren, the presidents of 39 Christian colleges, and the president of the Salvation Army.  In the spring of 2006, he was asked to host a TV advertisement by the group . In the summer of 2006 and 2008, Hunter was invited to symposiums on creation care at Windsor Castle where he heard from, among others: theologian N. T. Wright; former chairman of the IPCC, Sir John Houghton; and Prince Charles. He has since been named by  magazine as one of the top 15 religious leaders in creation care, along with Pope Benedict XVI and the Dalai Lama.
Hunter was asked in July 2006 to become the next president of the Christian Coalition. The group was started in 1988 by Pat Robertson and grew in influence throughout the early 1990s to a base of 1.2 million members and a revenue of $26.5 million in 1996. Hunter accepted the position of president-elect and set to work seeking to broaden the agenda of the group beyond gay marriage and abortion into creation care and the alleviation of poverty.
Hunter provided the closing benediction to the Democratic National Convention in 2008.  The transcription of this prayer is as follows:
Almighty God, let Your will be done on earth as it is in heaven.
Give us a reverence for all life. Give us a compassion for the most vulnerable among us: the babies, the children, the poor, the sick, the enslaved, the persecuted     for all of those who have been left out of the advantaged world. Give us a zeal to clean the environment we have polluted while we create an economy where everyone who can work can have a job.
Help us to honor those who defend our country by working harder and smarter for peace. Help us to counter those who incite fear and hatred by becoming people who are informed and respectful, and are known for principles and projects that aim higher than our own group   s benefit.
Guide Barack Obama and all of our leaders to be agents of Your will and recipients of Your wisdom. And grant that all of us citizens will continually do our part to contribute to the common good by loving our neighbor as we love ourselves.
Now, I interrupt this prayer for a closing instruction: Because we are gathered in a country that continues to welcome people of all faiths, let us personalize this prayer by closing according to our own tradition. On the count of three, end your prayer as you would usually do     one, two, three __________ (   in Jesus    name   ) AMEN!
Let   s go out and change the world for good!"
On January 20, 2009, Hunter offered a blessing over President-Elect Obama during an intimate, pre-inauguration service held at St. John's Episcopal Church, located on Lafayette Square just across from the White House. The service is a tradition for those about to become President. Speakers included the church   s rector, , as well as prominent evangelical pastor T.D. Jakes.
At the service at St. John   s, Hunter prayed the following blessing over our nation   s 44th President.
Through your leadership, Mr. President-elect, may God bless the United States of America in a way that makes us a blessing to the whole world. Amen."
Dr. Hunter served in the inaugural year on the President   s Advisory Council on Faith-Based and Neighborhood Partnerships, which advises President Barack Obama on substantive policy issues, including interfaith relations, strengthening the role of fathers in society and reducing the number of abortions. He continues as a spiritual advisor to the President.
The advisory council was introduced February 5, 2009, to coincide with the National Prayer Breakfast and the appointment of Pastor Joshua DuBois as head of the council.
Joel Hunter met his wife, Becky, at his first church appointment in seminary, Bradley United Methodist Church in Greenfield, Indiana. They were married July 2, 1972. Becky is a former biology teacher.  She served as the president of the  (2006   2008) and is the author of ''Being Good to Your Husband on Purpose.'' The Hunters have three sons: Joshua (1975), Isaac (1977), and Joel (1981). Josh is married to Lisa and they have two children, Noah and the late Ava. Isaac and his wife, Rhonda, have three children: Jada, Ella and Lincoln.  Joel is married to Elizabeth and they have one son, Luke.
Ava Belle Hunter was Josh and Lisa's daughter (Joel's granddaughter), born on November 1, 2004.  On June 26, 2010, she was diagnosed with a extremely aggressive and rare Glioblastoma multiforme. She died on September 4, 2010, only 10 weeks after the diagnosis.  
A memorial service was held on September 9, 2010 at Northland. The Hunters remain confident that Ava was put on Earth as a way to bring more people to Christ as Josh was quoted saying that "Ava's life is a call to worship" during the memorial service.  Many have posted on Josh's blog that they did not have any belief in God before reading his posts about Ava.