Note:  If you are seeing this page as a result of an attempt to re-nominate an article for deletion, you must manually edit the AfD nomination links in order to create a new discussion page using the name format of  .  When you create the new discussion page, please provide a link to this old discussion in your nomination. -->
The result was delete, as consensus to do so exists and the article is yet to address the concerns raised.  I've userfied this to   so that it may be worked on. -    02:48, 24 July 2006 (UTC)
I haven't been doing any work on wikipedia in ages (just busy), so I don't know how much cred I have at this point. However, most of my work dates back to before "Advanced Yoga Practices" came into being, so I'm at least not a new face. This is certainly not a new "branch" of yoga, Ohnoitsjamie. They haven't added any in a few millennia. So that's not a fitting benchmark. However, it's a fresh and innovative approach, it reveals a lot of information previously kept secret (one had to be initiated and stick around for years to get this stuff), and it integrates a lot of obscure, esoteric, and far-flung elements into one very well-written and exceptionally clear system purged of superstition, doctrine, and lots of the other junk that inevitably gets added on over the millenia. It's a brilliant work of integration, IMO. And since Yogani has been called "the first yoga eGuru, having come to prominence on the Internet" on a patently independently web site (http://www.globalserve.net/~sarlo/Yyoga.htm), the topic deserves inclusion. Though I agree some work needs to be done on the article to make it a bit less boosterish. --  03:02, 19 July 2006 (UTC)
AYP is a very new approach to Yoga and is catching on very fast among people around the world. It is a guruless system.. wherein you are given all the tools and enough guidance through lessons and a forum to take you ahead in the spiritual path.
All these yoga techniques have been around for ages, however AYP picks the best and most effective tools.. and has come up with a system that is the most efficient for both meditation and pranayam. 
The reason for not having many hits when you google is because it is still new.. but catching on very fast. AYP online memberships in the AYP Yahoo groups and the AYP website forums total nearly 10,000 people. The AYP websites have been visited by over 50,000 people during the past few years, and are currently receiving over 20,000 page hits per day. 
It may not be at the Wikipedia popularity level.. but it is getting there.. it can only increase with addition of new online lessons and the publishing of the remaining 5 books in the AYP enlightenment series. 
Thousands of people who have been following AYP have had very quick progress in their spiritual path.. You can find testimonials of this http://aypsite.com/Testimonials.html
Finally ''search for "Yogani," yields only about 730 hits, many related to a few books''.. is because Yogani wants to remain anonymous.. AYP is not about him.. it is about Yoga and getting the best and most efficient techniques out to everyone who may or may not have a guru. 
For other sites that have talked about AYP, please look at  
There are articles from Hindustan Times that I have, which are scanned articles.. but  the ''links to them are not active'' any more.. they have been archived. 
Amazon carries all of Yogani's books and you can check out the review 
There are various press releases
There is more on the founder
AdvancedYogaPractices -- International Translations
Bulgarian -- http://www.bg-ayp.dir.bg/index.html
French -- http://fr.groups.yahoo.com/group/Pratiquesavanceesdeyoga
German -- http://groups.yahoo.com/group/AYPdeutsch
Hindi -- http://groups.yahoo.com/group/AdvancedYogaPractices_Hindi
Spanish -- http://www.namaste.com.mx/practicas
I would really appreciate if you would consider this topic for Wikipedia. If the writing does not fit in with the Wikipedia standard and style I will gladly re-write it. However, this was not meant to be an advertisement or a promotion. I just thought it would be a good topic for people looking for a fresh approach to Yoga and let them know that there is something available for people interested in spirituality who don't have a guru.
Thanks for your time and patience.    21:11, 18 July 2006 (UTC)