Also, the official romanized names are: Go, Ryo, and Tokichi. Please do NOT insert macrons, as the spellings without macrons have officially been used in the anime.
Please feel free to discuss these on the talk page if you feel otherwise. -->
The NA Astro Rangers are a team of NASA trainees in the WGP competition, representing the USA. All members use the same car, the Buck Blader, but each one has a different tuning setup despite their identical exteriors. The Buck Blader is noted for their versatile build due to their all-terrain custom chassis.
The leader of the Eisen Wolf. A nature-lover boy. His M4WD is the Bergkaiser Type:R.
Member of the Eisen Wolf along with Eric. He is always overprotective
Also a member of the Eisen Wolf. His M4WD is the Bergkaiser Type:R
The leader of Rosso Strada. Serious and a cool guy also. His M4WD is the Dio Spada.
Yuri Shuvolks  CV: Yuka Imai
A boy who is kind and careful. A nature-lover also. His M4WD is the
Omega01.
Asides from their manager/coach (Kai Okita), the Savannah Soldiers consist purely of female racers. Their Team's Machines are the Beak Spider Zebra; modelled directly after their coach's original machine, the Beak Spider.
Huan:
A Chinese boy who never gives up as a Mini-four Racer. His Mini 4WD is the Shining Scorpion.
Nieminen CV: Shibihara Chiyako
He always says that his M4WD is the strongest(he said in Japanese
Jim  CV: Miyazaki Issei
An Australian boy. His M4WD is the Native Sun; which is equipped with Solar Panels used for powering the vehicle to eliminate the need for changing batteries. The Native Sun is also equipped with auxiliary batteries used for powering both the vehicle and the wipers (used for removing foreign objects blocking the panels).
Pico:
A Jamaican Racer and the leader of Cool Caribbeans who loves to dance. His M4WD is the Jammin RG.
On September 8, 2002 until August 29, 2004, Bakuso Kyodai Let's & Go!! broadcasted on RCTI every Sunday at 6.30 AM. Opening song using Indonesian language dub. While ending song using original Japanese language.