Bareilles was born and raised in Eureka, California, the youngest of three daughters of Bonnie Halvorsen (nee Capellas), a funeral home worker, and Paul Bareilles, an insurance adjuster. She was raised Catholic and participated in the high school choir, Limited Edition, and local community theater musical productions, including her high school's production of ''Little Shop of Horrors'' as Audrey.
Bareilles attended the Communication Studies program at the University of California, Los Angeles, where she was a member of the co-ed a cappella group Awaken A Cappella, and can be heard on their ''Dysfunktional Family'' album singing "Gravity" and "I Want You Back" by The Jackson 5. The group's rendition of Bareilles' "Gravity" was featured on the ''Best of College A Cappella 2004'' compilation CD.  Sara also stated on MTV's ''TRL'' that she and the band Maroon 5 go back far to their younger days in California when the band was known as Kara's Flowers. She performed in the annual student concert, UCLA Spring Sing, winning twice.
After graduating from college in 2002, Bareilles performed at local bars and clubs (such as the Hotel Cafe and Genghis Cohen in Los Angeles), building a following before performing in larger venues. She issued two demos of mostly live tracks in 2003: ''The First One'' in April and ''The Summer Sessions'' in October. In 2004, she appeared as a singer in a bar in the indie film ''Girl Play'', performing the song "Undertow". 
In January 2004, Bareilles released her first studio album, ''Careful Confessions''. She signed a contract with Epic Records on April 15, 2005. The remainder of the year and early 2006 were spent writing and reworking songs for her upcoming album. Her song, "Gravity," appears briefly in the 2006 independent film ''Loving Annabelle''.
In mid-2004 she opened for Rocco DeLuca and the Burden during their inaugural headline tour, supported Guster on their first UK tour and co-headlined a tour with Jon McLaughlin. She toured as the opening act in 2006 for Marc Broussard's "Carencro" tour. In 2007, Bareilles toured as the opening act for Aqualung and Mika, and later that year opened for several shows on both Maroon 5 and Paolo Nutini's U.S. tours. She also opened for James Blunt on his U.S. Tour in association with VH1 You Oughta Know.
In June 2007, iTunes featured Bareilles' single "Love Song" as the free single of the week.  The following month, her major-label debut ''Little Voice'' shot to #1 on the list of most downloaded albums of the music store in its first week of release, and debuted at #45 on the Billboard 200 chart. After being featured on a Rhapsody commercial in 2007, "Love Song" began climbing the pop charts, jumping from #73 to #16 in one week. It entered the Top 10 on the Billboard Hot 100 on December 27, 2007, and peaked at #4. On other charts, such as the Pop 100 and Hot AC, "Love Song" hit #1. Bareilles performed the song on ''The Tonight Show with Jay Leno'' on Thursday, January 17, 2008, and on the ''Today'' show on Thursday, February 21, 2008. Soon after that, the song entered the UK Singles Chart, peaking at #4. The music video was directed by Josh Forbes and stars British actor Adam Campbell.
As of 2010, ''Little Voice'' has been certified Platinum by the RIAA. The album peaked in the Billboard 200 at #7, and the UK Top 40 at #9. Bareilles' breakthrough single, "Love Song" has since been certified 3x platinum.
On October 28, 2008, Bareilles released " " on DVD and CD. The package is a recording of her first headlining tour at the famous Fillmore in San Francisco. She concluded the tour in her home town of Eureka, California on December 19, 2008, at the Arkley Center for the Performing Arts.
She toured with Counting Crows and Maroon 5 between July 22 and August 26, 2008. The first stop was Virginia Beach, Virginia and the last stop Cuyahoga Falls, Ohio. Bareilles was selected as MTV artist of the week for July 7   11 and appeared again on ''The Tonight Show with Jay Leno'' on Wednesday, July 9, 2008; and on December 9, 2008 (with Ingrid Michaelson).
During the spring of 2009, Bareilles was on her second headlining tour, the "Gravity Tour," to promote the third and final single from her album ''Little Voice''. She made her third appearance in Charlottesville, VA during UVA's annual Springfest on March 28, her first as the opener for Marc Broussard in 2005 and the second being an opening for Maroon 5. Bareilles also played multiple college shows in April and May. Some were for college students only and others were open to the public.
She sent out a special holiday message to fans on her mailing list and gave out a free live acoustic EP recorded during her Gravity Tour last Spring. The EP contains 7 acoustic songs, including a new song "Free Ride," "I'm On Fire" a Bruce Springsteen cover duet with Tony Lucca, and two speaking segments.
In early 2010, Bareilles recorded video of what she called "An Ode To Jersey Shore" and posted it to her official website as a gag for fans.
Bareilles began work on the follow-up to her major label debut in the summer of 2009, collaborating with the likes of Amir "Questlove" Thompson, members of Weezer, and Pharrel Williams. As the songs began to take their final shape, Neal Avron was assigned to produce, record, and mix the entire album.  The album was recorded at The Village Recorder and Sunset Sound in Los Angeles.
The first single from her second album, "King of Anything," began receiving radio airplay in the US in May 2010, and was released for sale in June.  "King of Anything" had its first play on the UK radio airwaves on Paul Kay's "Album Download" show on Mid-Wales commercial radio station "Radio Maldwyn - The Magic 756" in August 2010. King of Anything has since been certified Gold by the RIAA.
In anticipation of the new album, Bareilles released a series of webisodes, featuring the making of select songs from "Kaleidoscope Heart," including "King of Anything," "Uncharted," "Gonna Get Over You," "Bluebird," and a strings only version of "King of Anything." The first webisode also contains Sara writing the chorus for "Hold My Heart". She was selected as VH1's Posted Artist of the Month for July 2010, chronicling her life leading up to the album's release.
Kaleidoscope Heart was released on September 7, 2010 and debuted at number 1 in the United States, selling 90,000 copies. Interestingly, her previous album ''Little Voice'' re-entered the charts at number 200 in the same week, bookending the charts.
She toured in support of ''Kaleidoscope Heart'' from September to December 2010, with most of the shows being sold out. Bareilles toured Europe and parts of Asia and Australia with Maroon 5 throughout spring 2011. She embarked on a small headline "Uncharted" tour in April 2011 with openers Elizabeth & the Catapult and Ximena Sarinana in support of the second single from Kaleidoscope Heart "Uncharted", which concluded April 23, 2011 in Memphis, TN. She will also be opening select shows for country music duo Sugarland on their Summer 2011 Incredible Machine Tour.
Joni Mitchell and Norah Jones due to her vocal ability and incorporation of piano in her music. Her musical influences include Sarah McLachlan, Nelly Furtado, Alicia Keys, Christina Aguilera and Joni Mitchell. 
Her sound is described as "slightly edgy, stompy piano-based pop rock" that incorporates jazz and soul, with Bareilles finding inspiration from singers such as Etta James and Sam Cooke.
She is often praised for her songwriting abilities, with critics stating she "conveys vulnerability and wisdom in lyrics that speak honestly about relationships from a woman's point of view", and that her "writing voice is uniquely her own."
She plays the piano, guitar, ukulele, and harmonium.
Bareilles tours with regular band members Javier Dunn (guitar and vocals), Daniel Rhine (bass) and Joshua Day (percussion and vocals). Other musicians who have toured with her as part of her band include Eric Robinson (guitar and keys), Holly Conlan (backing vocals), and Philip Krohnengold (guitar and keys).
In December 2008, a single with Ingrid Michaelson titled "Winter Song" was released off the compilation ''The Hotel Cafe Presents Winter Songs''. The two performed it on ''The Tonight Show with Jay Leno'', and an animated video was released. She also recorded a song "Come Home," a duet with OneRepublic, which was released on iTunes on July 14, 2009.
Bareilles performed with many other singers on the season 3 finale of ''30 Rock'', alongside Mary J. Blige, Rachael Yamagata, Sheryl Crow, Norah Jones and Elvis Costello. She also appeared with Weezer on ''Jimmy Kimmel Live'' and AOL Sessions guest performing "(If You're Wondering If I Want You To) I Want You To" as well for a special performance on YouTube.
She has performed for the First Family numerous times. Bareilles was first invited by First Lady Michelle Obama to play at the G-20 Summit in Pittsburgh in September 2009. Here she performed songs for the First Ladies of 20 nations and afterward dined with Michelle Obama. The Obamas again invited her to perform at the Easter Egg Roll in 2010. On October 20, it was announced that Bareilles would open for President Obama at a Las Vegas rally for the Democratic midterm elections. In December, Bareilles and fellow singer Ingrid Michaelson performed "Winter Song" for the Obamas and many spectators at the National Christmas Tree Lighting.
In December 2010, Bareilles appeared with The Backbeats on the season finale of ''The Sing-Off''. She will perform a duet "Love Won't Let You Get Away" at Club Nokia with Seth MacFarlane on March 26, 2011.
The Grammy Awards are awarded annually by the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences. Bareilles has received three nominations.