The company (organisation) was formed as a separately-listed subsidiary in November 1997 under the name of Singapore Bus Services Limited, although it can trace its history back to the formation of Singapore Bus Service in 1973 with the merger of three bus companies. On 1 November 2001, the company's name was changed to SBS Transit Limited to reflect its status as a bus and rail operator.
Its parent company is ComfortDelGro Corporation, which was formerly known as DelGro Corporation Limited. The parent company has Singapore Bus Service as its direct predecessor.
In 2003, SBS Transit started operating the North East MRT Line of the Mass Rapid Transit system in addition to its existing bus operations. SBS Transit announced in November 2009 that they were preparing to bid for future MRT lines, starting with the Downtown MRT Line.
Singapore Bus Service (SBS) was initially formed in 1973 with the merger of three private bus companies. The government-sanctioned merger was undertaken to improve service standards of the bus transport system.
With the shift towards the creation of multi-modal transport companies, Singapore Bus Service Ltd changed its name to DelGro Corporation Limited in November 1997. Bus operations were hived-off to a fully-owned subsidiary called Singapore Bus Services Limited, which was separately listed on the Singapore Exchange.
In November 2001, Singapore Bus Services Limited was renamed as SBS Transit Limited when the company formally became a multi-modal transport operator with the impending opening of the Sengkang LRT Line.
SBS Transit's primary business is providing public transport services in Singapore. Its more notable operations are the following.
SBS Transit currently operates 75% of the scheduled bus market share in Singapore with more than 265 bus services and has a total fleet of more than 3,000 buses. All but 95 buses are non air-conditioned.All the different bus models have a common lifespan of 17 years, except the Mercedes Benz O405 and Volvo B10M Mark III buses whose lifespan were extended to 19 years. The 100 non-air-conditioned buses will be retired in 2011. In the last 3 years, SBS Transit ordered 1,100 single-deck buses from Scania AB and 350 double-deck buses from Volvo as part of its fleet renewal programme. SBS Transit also placed an order for 300 Mercedes-Benz O530s and another 300 buses from Volvo in 2010. SBS Transit also evaluates wheelchair-accessible chassis offers from Volvo and Scania AB. The newest additions to the bus fleet is the both made in China King Long Higer KLQ6129G Hydrogen Fuel Cell "GreenLite" bus and the Sunlong SLK6121UF14H Hybrid buses.
SBS Transit operates many different types of bus routes and bus services, taking up the majority of the pie of Singapore's duopoly bus system in almost all areas of Singapore, with the notable exception of the North and Northwest areas, where bus services are mainly run by its competitor, SMRT Corporation.
SBS Transit is the operator of the North East Line since it opened in 2003. The North East Line is the third Mass Rapid Transit line in Singapore, and also the world's first fully underground and automated rapid transit line. The line is 20&nbsp;km long with 16 stations.
The operating license was given to SBS Transit in order to foster competition with SMRT Corporation and to create multi-modal public transport companies, each specializing in their own district.
As the name implies, the line connects central Singapore to the north-eastern part of the island. Currently, transfers to the North South Line are provided at Dhoby Ghaut Station, East West Line at Outram Park Station and Circle Line at Serangoon Station and Dhoby Ghaut Station. In 2011, HarbourFront Station along the line will interchange with the Circle Line. The rolling stock used is Alstom Metropolis.
In addition to the North East Line, SBS Transit is also operates two LRT systems, Sengkang and Punggol. Both lines connect the estate to one of two NEL Stations and is total of 29 stations including Sengkang and Punggol interchange stations.