The plot of ''Gone with the Wind'' revolves around a pampered Southern woman named Scarlett O'Hara, who lives through the American Civil War and Reconstruction.  ''The Wind Done Gone'' is the same story, but told from the viewpoint of Cynara, a mulatto slave on Scarlett's plantation and the daughter of Scarlett's father and Mammy; the title is an African American Vernacular English sentence that might be rendered "The Wind Has Gone" in  Standard American English. Cynara's name comes from the Ernest Dowson poem ''Non sum qualis eram bonae sub regno Cynarae'', a line from which ("I have forgot much, Cynara! gone with the wind") was the origin of Mitchell's novel's title as well.
Sold from the O'Haras, Cynara eventually makes her way back to Atlanta and becomes the mistress of a white businessman. She later leaves him for a black aspiring politician, eventually moving with him to Reconstruction Washington, D.C.
The book consciously avoids using the names of Mitchell's characters or locations. Cynara refers to her sister as "Other", rather than Scarlett, and to Other's husband as "R" instead of Rhett Butler.  Other is in love with "Dreamy Gentleman" (Ashley Wilkes), although he is married to "Mealy Mouth" (Melanie Wilkes). The magnificence of the O'Haras' house, Tara, is reduced to "Tata" or "Cotton Farm", and Twelve Oaks is renamed for its builders, "Twelve Slaves Strong as Trees".
The estate of Margaret Mitchell sued Randall and her publishing company, Houghton Mifflin, on the grounds that ''The Wind Done Gone'' was too similar to ''Gone with the Wind'', thus infringing its copyright.  The case attracted numerous comments from leading scholars, authors, and activists, regarding what Mitchell's attitudes would have been, and how much ''The Wind Done Gone'' copies from its predecessor.  After the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit vacated an injunction against publishing the book in ''Suntrust v. Houghton Mifflin'' (2001), the case was settled in 2002 when Houghton Mifflin agreed to make an unspecified donation to Morehouse College, a historically African American college in Atlanta, Georgia, in exchange for Mitchell's estate dropping the litigation.
The cover of the book bears a seal identifying it as "The Unauthorized Parody."  It is parody in the broad legal sense: a work that comments on or criticizes a prior work.  This characterization was important in the ''Suntrust'' case.  However, the book is not a comedy, as the term "parody" would imply in its common usage.
Lawrence Lessig, The Future of Ideas, p. 198.