This is a list of the '''evolution of the borders of the United States'''. This lists each change to the internal and external borders of the country, as well as status and name changes. It also shows the surrounding areas that eventually became part of the United States. Each stage has a map, to show what the specific makeup of the country was at any given time.
After achieving independence with the Treaty of Paris, the United States expanded westward, enlarging its borders seven times, with two major border adjustments, one each with colonies of the United Kingdom and Spain, and several small disputes. The original thirteen states grew into fifty states, most of which began as incorporated territories. The general pattern seen in this is of territorial expansion, carving of organized territories from the newly acquired land, modification of the borders of these territories, and eventual statehood. Only two states, Nevada and Missouri, grew appreciably after statehood, and five, Georgia, Massachusetts, North Carolina, Texas, and Virginia, lost land, in each case to form new states.
The United States Constitution came into effect, forming the new nation. Note that the states ratified at different times, but to simplify the map, the final result is shown here. 
Some peculiarities to point out to those familiar only with the current borders: Many states had sea-to-sea grants from the British crown that they would not give up easily, so prior to this date, they ceded this land to the federal government in exchange for their Revolutionary War debts. However, Georgia did not do so until much later, and Connecticut ceded most land but kept its Western Reserve. Virginia ceded its claim to the territory north and west of the Ohio River, and this land became unorganized territory. North Carolina also ceded its claim to its western counties, but this was not officially accepted by Congress until 1790. New York ceded its claim on the Erie Triangle to the federal government. At this point in history, all of the states except for Georgia and Virginia were at their present-day borders, except for some of the minor issues mentioned above.
The Wedge, disputed since the 17th century, remained a point of contention between Delaware and Pennsylvania.
The Vermont Republic was a complex matter, with areas being claimed by New York and New Hampshire, but it existed as a ''de facto'' unrecognized independent state.
The United States Congress affirmed the organization of the Territory North West of the Ohio River, or Northwest Territory, under the terms of the Northwest Ordinance.
Congress accepts North Carolina's cession of its western counties, which had initially been ceded on December 22, 1789. The land became unorganized territory.
The Southwest Ordinance organized the Territory South of the Ohio River, or Southwest Territory, which corresponded to present-day Tennessee.
The Vermont Republic, which had portions claimed by New York and New Hampshire and, while unrecognized by the United States, was a ''de facto'' independent country, was admitted as the 14th state, Vermont.
The District of Columbia, the nation's federal district, was formed from land granted by Maryland and Virginia; the Virginia portion would be returned in 1847.
The federal government sold the Erie Triangle to Pennsylvania.
The western counties of Virginia beyond the Appalachian Mountains were split off and admitted as the 15th state, Kentucky.
In the third Nootka Convention Spain surrenders its exclusive claim to the entire Pacific Coast and acknowledges the right of Britain or other powers to use unoccupied territory.
Pinckney's Treaty, 
The Southwest Territory was admitted as the 16th state, Tennessee. 
Due to the Yazoo Land Fraud, an act was signed by President John Adams, authorizing him to appoint commissioners to negotiate with Georgia about ceding its western land. The act created Mississippi Territory in the region ceded by West Florida, corresponding to roughly the southern third of present-day Mississippi and Alabama except their panhandles, which were part of West Florida.
Indiana Territory was formed from the western portion of Northwest Territory.
Connecticut ceded its Western Reserve to the federal government, which made it part of Northwest Territory, and is the northeastern part of present-day Ohio.
The secret Third Treaty of San Ildefonso transferred the colony of Louisiana from Spain to France. Its boundaries were not specified and control was not actually transferred until the Louisiana Purchase.
Georgia finally ceded its western claims, the Yazoo Lands, to the federal government, where it became unorganized land.
The southeastern portion of Northwest Territory was admitted as the 17th state, Ohio. The remainder of Northwest Territory was transferred to Indiana Territory.
The Louisiana Purchase was made, expanding the United States west of the Mississippi River. There was a dispute with West Florida over how much land east of the Mississippi River it included.
The unorganized land ceded by Georgia was added to Mississippi Territory, consisting of the whole of present-day Mississippi and Alabama, minus their panhandles which were still part of West Florida.
The Louisiana Purchase was split into the District of Louisiana, which was temporarily under the authority of Indiana Territory, and the organized Territory of Orleans, which corresponded to part of present-day Louisiana with a small portion of Texas.
Michigan Territory was split from Indiana Territory, including the whole of the lower peninsula of present-day Michigan but only that eastern tip of the upper peninsula which was held by the Northwest Territory after Indiana Territory had been split from it.
The District of Louisiana was organized as Louisiana Territory.
Illinois Territory was split from Indiana Territory. Illinois Territory included present-day Illinois, northeastern Minnesota, and Wisconsin. Indiana Territory included the present-day borders of Indiana, with its western and eastern borders continuing northward; thus, it also included the central portion of the upper peninsula of Michigan, as well as Door Peninsula of present-day Wisconsin.
The Hawaiian islands are unified as the Kingdom of Hawaii.
By proclamation by President James Madison, the United States annexed the Baton Rouge and Mobile Districts of West Florida, declaring them part of the Louisiana Purchase. These had, 90 days earlier, declared independence as the Republic of West Florida.
Most of the Territory of Orleans was admitted as the 18th state, Louisiana. The rest of the territory (the northwestern tip) was ceded to Louisiana Territory.
The federal government annexed a part of West Florida, the Mobile District, to Mississippi Territory, making the territory correspond to present-day Alabama and Mississippi.
Louisiana Territory, having the same name as a state, was renamed to Missouri Territory.
Republican Army of the North captured San Antonio, Texas, assassinated the governor Manuel Maria de Salcedo, proclaimed Texas an independent nation, and issued Texas's first constitution on this date. Spanish forces recaptured the province later that year and executed any Tejanos accused of having Republican tendencies. By 1820 fewer than 2000 Hispanic citizens remained in Spanish Texas.
The southern portion of Indiana Territory was admitted as the 19th state, Indiana. The remainder became unorganized.
Alabama Territory was split from Mississippi Territory; both correspond to their present-day counterparts.
Mississippi Territory was admitted as the 20th state, Mississippi.
The Treaty of 1818 established the 49th parallel north west of the Lake of the Woods as the border with British-held lands, and Oregon Country was established as a shared land between the United States and United Kingdom.
The southern portion of Illinois Territory was admitted as the 21st state, Illinois. The remainder was reassigned to Michigan Territory. The unorganized lands which had been a part of Indiana Territory prior to the admission of Indiana as a state were also assigned to Michigan Territory.
The southern part of Missouri Territory was organized as Arkansaw Territory, consisting of present-day Arkansas as well as part of Oklahoma.
Alabama Territory was admitted as the 22nd state, Alabama.
The Maine District of Massachusetts was split off and admitted as the 23rd state, Maine, as part of the Missouri Compromise.
The Adams-Onis Treaty or Transcontinental Treaty came into effect, establishing a defined border between the United States and New Spain. The treaty ceded Spain's claims to Oregon Country to the United States and American claims to Texas to Spain; moved portions of present-day Colorado, Oklahoma, and Wyoming, and all of New Mexico and Texas, to New Spain; and all of Spanish Florida to the United States.
The southeastern corner of Missouri Territory was admitted as the 24th state, Missouri. The remainder became unorganized. Missouri did not include its northwestern triangle at this point, that being added later in the Platte Purchase.
Ukase of 1821 attempts to forbid non-Russian ships from approaching the Northwest Coast. Only attempt at enforcement is seizure of the U.S. brig ''Pearl'' in 1822. U.S. reacts with the Monroe Doctrine in 1823.
The Viceroyalty of New Spain achieved independence as Mexico. Spanish Texas became Mexican Texas.
East Florida and the portion of West Florida not already part of other states were combined and organized as Florida Territory, which corresponded to present-day Florida. Around this time, the official spelling of Arkansaw Territory became Arkansas Territory.
Arkansas Territory was shrunk, the western portion becoming unorganized.
Russo-American Treaty of 1824 gave Russian claims south of parallel 54  40    north to the United States. This and the Anglo-Russian Convention of 1825 leave Britain and the U.S. as the only claimants to Oregon Country. Russia retained Fort Ross, California until 1841.
Arkansas Territory was shrunk further, attaining the present-day borders of Arkansas, with the remainder again becoming unorganized, excepting the land it still claimed as Miller County.
A large portion of unorganized land was added to Michigan Territory, corresponding to present-day Iowa, western Minnesota, and eastern North Dakota and South Dakota.
The Republic of Texas achieved independence from Mexico, though with a large portion of the territory disputed. It had control over the eastern half of present-day Texas, and disputed the western half, as well as portions of Colorado, Kansas, New Mexico, and Wyoming. Miller County in Arkansas Territory now intruded on the borders of Texas, and the people there began to take a Texian identity, leading to both governments having representatives from the county.
Arkansas Territory was admitted as the 25th state, Arkansas. It continued to claim Miller County, with increasing irrelevance.
Wisconsin Territory was split off from Michigan Territory, consisting of present-day Wisconsin, Minnesota, Iowa, and eastern North and South Dakota. As an inducement to give up its claim over the Toledo Strip to Ohio, the whole of the present-day upper peninsula was assigned to Michigan Territory, giving it the present-day borders of Michigan.
Michigan Territory was admitted as the 26th state, Michigan.
The Platte Purchase added a small area of land to Missouri, giving it its present-day boundaries.
Iowa Territory was split off from Wisconsin Territory, consisting of present-day Iowa, western Minnesota, and eastern North Dakota and South Dakota, leaving Wisconsin Territory with northeastern Minnesota and Wisconsin.
The Webster-Ashburton Treaty settled the border between the United States and lands held by the United Kingdom east of the Rocky Mountains, ending the disputes over the northern border of the state of Maine and northeastern border of Wisconsin Territory, which today resides in present day Minnesota.
Florida Territory was admitted as the 27th state, Florida.
The Republic of Texas was admitted as the 28th state, Texas. The United States Congress passed the joint resolution of annexation on March 1, 1845,
The Oregon Treaty established the 49th parallel west of the Lake of the Woods as the continental border (so it did not include Vancouver Island) with the lands held by the United Kingdom. The sharing of Oregon Country ended, and the American portion becomes unorganized territory.
U.S. Army of the West (1846) under Stephen Kearny captures New Mexico and claims it for the U.S.
He installs a U.S. military government of New Mexico under the Kearny Code and later a provisional government of New Mexico, subject to the federal government and not to Texas.
The southeast portion of Iowa Territory was admitted as the 29th state, Iowa. The remainder became unorganized.
Californio resistance to U.S. forces in California ended with the Treaty of Cahuenga.
The District of Columbia retroceded its land south of the Potomac River back to Virginia. Congress passed the retrocession act on July 9, 1846, and Virginia took possession of the land on this date.
The Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo ended the Mexican-American War. Mexico ceded the Texas-claimed areas as well as a large area of land
The southeastern portion of Wisconsin Territory was admitted as the 30th state, Wisconsin. The remainder became unorganized.
Oregon Territory was organized, including present-day Idaho, northwestern Montana, Oregon, Washington, and western Wyoming.
Minnesota Territory was organized, consisting of present-day Minnesota, and eastern portions of North Dakota and South Dakota.
The Compromise of 1850 divided the Mexican Cession and land claimed by Texas but ceded to the federal government in exchange for taking on its debts. The western portion was admitted as the 31st state, California, most of the rest was organized as Utah Territory and New Mexico Territory, and a small portion became unorganized land.
Washington Territory was split from Oregon Territory, consisting of present-day Washington, northern Idaho, and the western tip of Montana, leaving Oregon Territory with all of Oregon, southern Idaho and a portion of Wyoming.
The Gadsden Purchase added some land to New Mexico Territory, corresponding to the southernmost areas of present-day Arizona and New Mexico. The present-day Continental United States borders were defined at this point. 
Kansas Territory and Nebraska Territory were organized; the remaining unorganized land colloquially became known as Indian Territory.
A peculiarity appeared at this time, when a small strip of land north of Texas was not officially assigned by any state or territory; this came to be called the Neutral Strip or "No Man's Land", which corresponds to the present-day panhandle of Oklahoma.
The eastern portion of Minnesota Territory was admitted as the 32nd state, Minnesota. The remainder became unorganized.
The western portion of Oregon Territory was admitted as the 33rd state, Oregon. The remainder was assigned to Washington Territory.
Texas began claiming Greer County, Texas, controlled at that time by the federal government as unorganized territory, and now in present-day Oklahoma.
The eastern portion of Kansas Territory was admitted as the 34th state, Kansas. A peculiarity arose for the western portion. It was added to Colorado Territory on February 28, 1861; however, for the month between statehood for Kansas and the Colorado Territory being formed, it appears to have had no official status.
The Confederate States of America (CSA) was formed. The Southern states seceded at different dates and joined the CSA at different dates; to simplify the map, only the final form of the CSA is shown here. There were rebel governments as well as Union governments in Kentucky and Missouri, and the CSA had full control over Indian Territory. To view a detailed animated map depicting the various state secessions see  .
Colorado Territory was organized, with land from Utah, New Mexico, and Nebraska Territories, as well as the land left over from Kansas Territory; it corresponded already to present-day Colorado. Also, the eastern tip of Washington Territory was transferred to Nebraska Territory.
Dakota Territory was split from Nebraska Territory, and included the unorganized land left over from Minnesota Territory. Dakota Territory consisted of both present-day North and South Dakota, as well as most of Montana and northern Wyoming. Nebraska Territory consisted of all of Nebraska and southeastern Wyoming.
The Confederacy established Arizona Territory (CSA) in the southern half of the Union's New Mexico Territory. It would be organized on February 14, 1862. It corresponded to the southern halves of present-day Arizona and New Mexico.
Due to its nature as a mining and grazing area, land started to be added to Nevada Territory to accommodate these activities. Its eastern border was moved eastward from the 39th meridian west from Washington, to the 38th meridian west from Washington, transferring the land from Utah Territory.
The Union created its own Arizona Territory, splitting it off from New Mexico Territory, making both territories correspond to their present-day states, except for Arizona Territory including the southern tip of present-day Nevada.
Idaho Territory was created from portions of Washington, Dakota, and Nebraska Territories, consisting of present-day Idaho, Montana, and most of Wyoming. Nebraska and Washington Territories were left corresponding to their present-day counterparts.
The counties of northwestern Virginia (whose population had opposed secession from the Union and established a pro-Union state government) were split off and were admitted as the 35th state, West Virginia.  The new state had been mostly under Union control since late 1861, but is not recognized by the Confederate and state governments in Richmond.
Montana Territory was split from Idaho Territory, which also had some land transferred to Dakota Territory. Montana Territory corresponded to present-day Montana, Idaho Territory consisted of Idaho and western Wyoming, and Dakota Territory included both North and South Dakota, and most of Wyoming.
Nevada Territory was admitted as the 36th state, Nevada; it was a bit smaller than it is today, lacking area in both the east and south.
The main army of the Confederate States of America surrendered, and the Confederacy dissolved soon afterward. Much of the Confederate States' territory had already been retaken by force of arms prior to this point and the process of Reconstruction and readmission to the union would take several years following the Confederacy's collapse; to simplify the map, the former Confederate states are shown as already readmitted. To view a detailed animated map depicting the various state readmission during Reconstruction see  .
Nevada's eastern border was moved from the 38th meridian west from Washington, to the 37th meridian west from Washington, transferring land to it from Utah Territory.
The northwestern corner of Arizona Territory was transferred to the state of Nevada, giving it its present-day borders.
Nebraska Territory was admitted as the 37th state, Nebraska.
The United States purchased Alaska from Russia; it was designated the Department of Alaska, and corresponds, except for a boundary dispute, to present-day Alaska.
Wyoming Territory was formed from portions of Dakota, Idaho, and Utah Territories, corresponding to the present-day borders of Wyoming.
San Juan Islands awarded to the U.S., formally ending the Pig War with Britain.
Colorado Territory was admitted as the 38th state, Colorado.
The part of Dakota Territory south of 43   north and north of the Keya Paha and Niobrara Rivers was transferred to Nebraska.
The Department of Alaska, previously under the direct control of the federal government and the military, was redesignated the District of Alaska, forming a local government.
Dakota Territory was split in two, and it was admitted as the 39th state, North Dakota, and 40th state, South Dakota.
Montana Territory was admitted as the 41st state, Montana.
Washington Territory was admitted as the 42nd state, Washington.
Oklahoma Territory was organized from the western portion of Indian Territory, and included the Neutral Strip, and corresponded to the western half of present-day Oklahoma.
Idaho Territory was admitted as the 43rd state, Idaho.
Wyoming Territory was admitted as the 44th state, Wyoming.
The Kingdom of Hawaii became the Republic of Hawaii.
Utah Territory was admitted as the 45th state, Utah.
A Supreme Court ruling officially assigns Greer County to Oklahoma Territory.
The Republic of Hawaii was annexed by the United States.
The annexed Hawaiian islands were organized as the Territory of Hawaii, and corresponded, except for including Palmyra Atoll, to the present-day state of Hawaii.
The Alaska boundary dispute is resolved by arbitration, generally favoring the American claim.
Oklahoma Territory and Indian Territory were combined and admitted as the 46th state, Oklahoma.
New Mexico Territory was admitted as the 47th state, New Mexico.
Arizona Territory was admitted as the 48th state, Arizona.
The District of Alaska was organized as Alaska Territory.
The dispute over a square mile between Delaware and Pennsylvania, The Wedge, is finally resolved in favor of Delaware.
Alaska Territory was admitted as the 49th state, Alaska.
Hawaii Territory was admitted as the 50th state, Hawaii, resulting in the present-day situation of the United States. The statehood act specifically excluded Palmyra Atoll from the new state; it thus became unorganized land. Since it had been incorporated as part of the Hawaii Territory, Palmyra Atoll became the only incorporated territory left in the United States.
The Chamizal Dispute with Mexico over about 600 acres (2.4 km2) on the U.S.-Mexico border between El Paso, Texas, and Ciudad Juarez, Chihuahua is resolved. It was caused by differences between the bed of the Rio Grande as surveyed in 1852 and the present channel of the river.
The city of Rio Rico, Texas, was ceded to Mexico in the Boundary Treaty of 1970. The handover officially took place in 1977 and the city was added to the Mexican state of Tamaulipas.