P.O. Box 1107, Orange, TX 77631               
The '''West Orange-Cove Consolidated Independent School District''' is a public school district in Orange County, Texas (USA).
The district serves the cities of West Orange and Pinehurst as well as portions of Orange, including the majority of Orange below I-10, and the Old Peveto area. The district has 4 schools, including West Orange-Stark High School.
West Orange-Cove was formed from the Orange School District, the West Orange School District, and the Cove School District. The last consolidation was in 1967. The district's name upon consolidation was West Orange-Cove Consolidated Independent School District.
Upon the 1967 consolidation, the North High School, an all black high school, was open, along with West Orange High, and Stark High. It was decided that North was not needed, and unable to be used for segregated education, due to the new laws, and it was turned in to a Middle School. In 1977, West Orange High and Stark High Consolidated, with 2 grades in each campus, as oppposed to 4 grades in each. The new name was decided to be West Orange-Stark High, with the West Campus on Newton, serving the upper two grades, and the East Campus at the former Lutcher-Stark High School Campus, serving the lower two grades. In the mid-90's, West Orange Middle and North Middle, housed at the former North HS campus, consolidated in to the West Orange Middle Campus, on Western, which, before 1967, housed West Orange ISD's K-8 and Administration offices. The North campus sat empty for 5 years until it was used as the Head Start and Early Elementary School. Shortly after this, the West and East campuses consolidated, and became housed at the Newton campus. The middle school moved to the Stark campus, and the Western Ave. campus became an Intermediate school. In 2003, the Intermediate school closed, sending the 5th grade to 3 different Elementary schools, and the 6th grade went to the former Stark campus, along with 7th & 8th grades. In 2005, after the closure of Bancroft Elementary, Anderson Elementary, which closed in 2010, became the only campus to serve K-3, with the help of approx. 9 mobile buildings, and Lorena Oates, also closed in 2010, became the new Intermediate, serving 4th & 5th grades. In 2010, West Orange-Stark Elementary was opened, easily serving grades K-5 in approx. . The Lorena Oates and Anderson buildings are currently unused. The 2011 Bond Project decided that Anderson would be used as an Administration Building/Alternative Center/Community Outreach Facility.
Orange High School started out in a three-story building which stood where West Orange-Stark Middle School stands today. Built in the 1890s, the original Orange High School closed around the 1920s, when the huge new OHS, built in the downtown area, was opened. It served students until the 1940s when Lutcher-Stark High was built, directly across from the original Orange High School location, which had been turned into Carr Junior High, named after Helen Carr, the then Director of Secondary Instruction. The Downtown Orange High School was demolished. Shortly after these events, in the early 1950s, a new one-story Carr Junior High was built around the existing Tall-and-Narrow building. After its completion, the original OHS was demolished. 
Wallace/Moten High, the first segregated school, opened in the early 1930s. It was replaced by North High in the early 1960s. It still stands on the corner of 1st and John.
Many elementary schools served Orange ISD, including the large Anderson School, which was repetitively rebuilt at its 8th and Park location. In the 80s the Anderson School name would see its last new building; a huge, contemporary, two-story building, in its original location. This building was closed in 2010. Other elementary schools that served Orange ISD include: 
Although unknown when the dates of operation were, the children of the City of West Orange went to a small K-8 building on Western until it caught fire.This having been shortly after Lorena Oates Elementary was erected, in 1949, a new campus was construct, to serve grades 6-8, on Western. It had a state-of-the-art auditorium, and the district's administrative offices. This campus was called West Orange Middle School. In the early 60's, the district was asked to build a High School by the Orange ISD, which is the district that West Orange Middle graduates attended at the time. The Orange ISD was dealing with severe overcrowding, so, in 1966, West Orange ISD constructed, one block down from Lorena Oates Elementary, West Orange High School. 
Cove ISD, which also served grades K-8, in one building, was part of the 1967 consolidation. Until then it served as a school for the Cove Incorporation, which was dissolved shortly after the consolidation. The 1950s-era building still stands today on the corner of Campus.
The Public Schools of the Greater Orange Area have seen many administrators over the years. Some include;
The district is commonly referred to as 'West Orange-Stark CISD' due to three of the four campuses being named 'West Orange-Stark,' despite the fact that only one campus, the high school, actually involves the consolidation of a campus named 'West Orange' and another named 'Stark.'
West Orange-Cove voters recently (May 2011) approved  a low-interest federal bond for District advancement. The bond will provide funding for; replacing the track at West Orange-Stark High School, which has been unusable since 2005, and remodeling the former Anderson Elementary campus, converting it to an Alternative Education campus, a Community Oureach Facility, and the Administration Offices, which are currently housed in a building in a prime commercial area. The bond funds would also provide fencing and playground equipment at the new West Orange-Stark Elementary School, new Heating/Ventilation/Air Conditioning systems in various areas throughout the district's school, and ADA modifications, where necessary.
The funding, amounting to $6,075,000, will be paid back over 15-years.
The district plans to sell the current Administration building, and collect money in doing so.
The campus directly off of Green Ave. is believed to be the district's oldest campus.  Before 2010, it consisted of two buildings; the Stark Building, which used to be Lutcher-Stark High, before the consolidation, and the Carr Building, which used to be Helen Carr Junior High. The street that ran between them, 13th, was demolished, and a building now conjoins the former two buildings, which was an effect of the 2007 Bond.
WO-S Middle was built in 1942, as Lutcher-Stark High School.  In the older gym (the Game gym), the logo for Orange High School, which was kept for LSHS, can be seen.  After the consolidation, the building was referred to as WO-SHS East Campus, until the early 90's.
The 'annex' building (the part of the Stark building closest to Pine, which is separated on the first floor by a breezeway) was added quite a few years after the school was built. Much of the building is still original, including certain "materials" (tile, paint, in some places, etc.) which are the original L-S High 'Tigers' colors. Things currently present in the school can also be seen in school pictures from the '50s.
The Carr building (referred to now as the Carr Hall) was at that location before Lutcher-Stark, but is a newer building. Before the present Carr bldg was erected, a 3-story, fully functional school was present. Once the high school was built, there was no need for a cafeteria in both buildings, or two libraries. The new building was a one-story building, with not much more than classrooms and an office. It appears that the building was renovated at one point, as most tile, etc., are Mustang Blue, which shows it was done anytime from 1977   present. The Jr. High was named after Helen Carr, whom was the Director of ' Secondary Pupil Curriculum' at the time of the building of the original building, which was the first Orange High School, until 1923, up until the  60's. Part of the original, 3-story building is still standing, and was joined as a wing of the new Carr Jr.High. This part was utilized by Lutcher-Stark students though, as it was an auto mechanics class, with several garage openings. Since then, the openings have been closed up, and the room remodeled for use by personnel, but can still be identified by the "boxes" of 'missing' brick.
Both buildings have gone under multiple renovations/expansions, including the Stark addition (expanding the campus to the edge of Pine), the cafeteria expansion, the Stark gym remodeling, the building of a second gym, a storage building, a band hall (later demolished, as a part of the 2009 bond), and many more. As of the 50's, quite a few "mobile trailers" could be seen on campus. The reason for the presence of those is unknown. They are gone now, and have been for at least 30 years. There were also houses located where the 'annex' now is. Although it is implied by records that they were utilized by the district.
Built adjacent to the original West Orange ISD School , the mid-20th century Carl A Godwin Auditorium was meant to make the West Orange ISD seem innovative, and prosperous. This was at a time where Orange ISD was always referred to as the aforementioned, and West Orange ISD was losing students because of it.  Named after the first fallen WWII soldier from the City of West Orange, it has been used for graduations, city meetings, board meetings, performances (including one mid-1970s concert by celebrities Jack Greene and Jeannie Seely), until 2003, when West Orange-Cove declared it unusable due to damages from age.The funding for renovations for the auditorium came from the 2007 bond. Repairs were carried out by district maintenance crew. It reopened for school performances in December 2010.
At the turn of the century, WO-CCISD had approximately 3,900 students. As of August 2010, the district serves only 2,500. The majority of the decrease in pupils occurred during Andrew Hayes' duration as superintendent, but isn't believed to be the effect of Hayes assuming that title. In 2004, the district dropped to UIL-level AAA. Enrollment fluctuated after Hurricane Katrina, increasing well over 500 students, yet after Hurricane Rita, just one month later, enrollment was at a new low.  Since 2005, the district has dropped aprroximately 100 students per year. Attempts to increase enrollment have failed, whether it be from more strict discipline measures, Open Enrollment, or setting academic goals. Lack of valuable property in the districts boundaries have also been blamed.
September 3, 2010 marked the first increase in enrollment in years. The district had 22 more students than they did the last day of May 2010. Bill Conway, then interim superintendent, said the following;
Although still low on the state achievement rankings, the district has improved its state-mandated test scores by vast percentages. West Orange-Cove excels at Academic UIL Competitions, including Math, Science, and Writing. 
The high school yearbook has received National Honors from Taylor Publishing, the yearbook publishing company, for design, on several occasions. The Drama departments in both the Middle and High schools are highly successful in UIL competitions, as is the high school Choir. The high school Career Center has also won several Precision Machinist and Speed Skills championships. The Future Teachers of America chapter at WO-S High won State recognition as Advisor of the Year.
WO-C is the only area school district to implement complete band and music programs in all grades, K-12.
In 2010, the West Orange-Cove Consolidated Independent School District was the only school district in Orange County to not receive a 'Recognized' rating. Upon receiving this news, Interim Superintendent Bill Conway said the following;
The district is known for many athletic achievements since its consolidation. This includes two consecutive football state championships, several state finals, and vast amounts of regional championships, belonging to both of the secondary schools. The districts athletic coordinator is Dan Hooks, whom has held that position for 20+ years. In 2009, 2010, and 2011 WO-C won state championships for track.
Dan R. Hooks, the West Orange-Cove CISD Executive Director of Athletics, announced his retirement in support of the leave incentive offered by the district, in spite of a minor budget shortfall. Hooks' last day will be June 30, 2011, after over 30 years of service. The new director of Athletics will be longtime coach Cornel Thompson.
The district, as of 2007, was awarded Best in State for African Americans, as awarded by Texas A&M University. The study included 3 years of data. The ethnic makeup of the district includes people of many ethnicities.
The Board recently (November 2010) named a new Superintendent of Schools for the district. James Colbert, of Tennessee, was chosen to lead the school system. Colbert left the Hamilton County Department of Education to serve WO-CCISD.
The WO-C Education Foundation was created in 2009. Since its creation, it has seen many donations from community members and companies alike. 
Current & Past members include;
Pete Amy, Jane Stephenson, Terese McKee, Doug Bready, Lois Bready, Sam Kittrell, Al Granger, Linn Cardner, Margaret Adams, Stephen Lee, Andrew Hayes, and Lorraine Shannon.
The district has a standardized dress code for the elementary and middle schools. These rules may be found in the 
The district was directly affected by Hurricane Ike, leaving NELC damaged by floods, and other district schools damaged in other ways.
The West Orange-Cove Consolidated Independent School District, in 2003  and 2005,
In 2005, following a huge food fight at the Middle School, Supt. of Schools O.T. Collins informed all Middle School Employees that as of the end of the year, their contracts would not be renewed, but that they must reapply and be given back the position. This was mainly due to the reaction of the teachers during the lunchtime occurrence and several other problems during the year. 
In 2009, the district, and First Student (formerly Laidlaw) decided to cut after school transportation from athletic events/practices. The district's Board of Trustee's stated that this would save the district approximately $19,000.
In June 2009, the district got a bond to purchases 29 new school busses, to be owned by WOCCISD, (previous busses were owned by Laidlaw/First Student.) After purchasing the busses, WOCCISD dropped outsource company Laidlaw, and switched to managing/maintaining company STS.
In March 2010, the Board of Trustee's decided to cut daycare programs at North Early Learning Center, which was costing them $21,000 a year. The district has made plans for an all-day preschool, in addition to the normal half-day preschool.
In April 2010, a robbery, assault, and homicide occurred within  of the middle school, at Micky McNamara Insurance. The school immediately went into lockdown. Many WO-C Administrative Staff were present at the middle school to assist with the procedure, and later sending the students home. After the insurance agent was "LifeFlighted" away, all district busses were present at the school, should the need for emergency evacuation appear. Although evacuation wasn't necessary, early release did occur, and, with the assistance of the Orange Police Department, students safely left the school. One of the schools surveillance cameras that was facing the building and surrounding land was used to help find the suspect, and as evidence. The footage from the Middle School camera was gladly turned over to law enforcement by Dr.Collins, former Supt. of Schools, WO-C.
During a Sept.17, 2010 game, team Quarterback Reginald Garrett walked to the sidelines and fell to the ground. It was rumored that he was having a seizure and also rumored that he had a history of seizures.  His mother explained that he only had one seizure when he was three years old from a high fever and none since. While still conscious, he was removed from the field by paramedics. He was later pronounced dead at Memorial-Hermann Baptist Hospital - Orange. As the word of his death made its way across the stadium, fans poured out of Hooks Stadium to go visit the player's family at the hospital. The following two games were cancelled.
October 5, 2010, marked the release of the new WO-CCISD website release. The website was designed by Educational Networks Inc.
On November 4, 2010, Pinehurst Police began investigating a break in at the new West Orange-Stark Elementary School. The newly built school had no alarm system, and several computers were stolen. Interim Superintendent Bill Conway informed the media that the district learned of this when the school was completed, after O.T.Collins resigned, and ever since the district has been looking in to surveillance and security systems. Since then, the school has installed an alarm system.
On March 23, one of the final products of a professional film crew was made available via the district website. The new WO-CCISD promotional video highlights aspects of each individual campus, students, staff, events, and the district as a whole. 
In Early April, the West Orange-Cove CISD Put up for auction the former Anderson campus' nine portable buildings, in a step to further offset deficit, and clean up the campus.
Due to an expected large budget cut from the state, and a very minor local shortfall, the West Orange-Cove CISD offered an incentive for employees to leave the district, to save money. Amongst the names or retirees/resignees were Dan Hooks, longtime Athletic Director, and local 'Sports Legend', several Career Center staff, all of whom have been in the area and district for extremely long periods of time, and several other teachers.
Despite the problems that might be faced with over 50 teachers leaving, it was necessary. Most classrooms, according to Superintendent James Colbert, had very few students per block, creating the need for multiple same-subject teachers. 
The incentive offered a leave bonus of 10% of the employees salary.