The prince was born at Stockholm.  He was granted a very old dukedom, that was carried already in the Middle Ages by various Danish and Swedish royal relatives, such as Benedict, Duke of Halland. After his eldest brother Prince Gustaf Adolf died in 1947, leaving a less than one-year-old son, and because other heirs had already given up their places in the succession (owing to unacceptable marriages), it seemed likely that he could one day become regent.
For this reason, Prince Bertil chose not to marry Welsh commoner Lilian Davies, as that would have deprived him of his place in the succession, so the couple simply lived together discreetly. Their common base was a home in Sainte-Maxime Southern France. The arrangement was well known by all and intended to keep the lineage until the heir to the throne was old enough. The then Mrs  Davies was a known part of the Royal Family from their private perspective but not officially. However, his father lived long enough for the prince's nephew Prince Carl Gustaf to come of age.
After the death of King Gustaf VI Adolf (in 1973), and after himself having married, the new King approved the couple's marriage, which took place in Drottningholm on 7 December 1976. Still first in line to the throne (until the birth of Crown Prince Carl Philip in 1979), Prince Bertil continued to act as the King's deputy. His widow is known as HRH Princess Lilian, Duchess of Halland. The prince was a brother of the late Queen Ingrid of Denmark (''nee'' Princess Ingrid of Sweden), mother of the current Queen Margrethe II of Denmark.
When the Act of Succession was changed in 1980, rights to the throne was restricted to Carl XVI Gustaf and his descendants; however, a special addendum was made for Prince Bertil's case, so that he became third (and, after the birth of Princess Madeleine in 1982, fourth) in line to the throne.
Prince Bertil was a very popular person domestically. He was fond of cars and Volvo asked him to open the Volvo Halifax Assembly plant in 1963 in Nova Scotia, Canada. He was a keen supporter and practitioner of various sports, notably tennis and boules, and was also a member of the fine-dining society, La Chaine des Rotisseurs.  He died in Stockholm.