After a while the guy on Rick Ross' site checked out the Potter's House artcile and discovered the link's that I had been putting up on the Rick Ross site were there, so he deleted them. I have tried to discuss the problem with him but have found him unreasonable. I suggested that ALL poor quality links be removed or none at all, he refuses to talk to me but just continues to delete links, or add links I delete which are of the same or poorer quality.
This guy seems to follow me around wiki chopping and changing everything I do. I have tried to revise the Johnny Lee Clary article also Wade Watts. Tom Papania I tried to write something about Rick Ross' accusations of the Potter's House, but they were deleted straight away. (added later - I am getting tired of having to get others in to solve problems with this guy - yes I am inexperienced and am a bit sloppy, but this guy just deletes whole pages that I have been working hard on. It is very discouraging - and a waste of time because most see my side of the story clearly and overide him - can he be warned somehow? I have been warned for less!)
I hope I don't have to recuse, because I've edited Rick Ross and helped newbie PH with his story of reconciliation with Rev. Watts. But ... Perhaps the thing to do is provide a source for the '''POV that Ross is gay''' and also explain why it matters. Is there, for example, that claim's Ross' supposed homosexuality inclines him to make disparaging remarks about religious people? (Perhaps as retaliation for perceived "homophobia" in their religion?) 
Anyway, PH is a newbie and probably just needs someone to explain (gently) how things work around here. --  14:28, 8 August 2006 (UTC)
If you look at http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:Potters_house and go to each site, look at the history and see how Mr Antaeus Feldspar continually seems to stalk me! This guy never offers any suggestions or help, but the usual complaint of no sources or links simply everything is not good enough and deletes it. I tell you one thing though, I will have some of the best linked and best sourses on wiki if he keeps this up!   17:24, 8 August 2006 (UTC)
Ok, your history shows that you guys continually post against scientology (one of Rick Ross' favorite groups to mock - and I suppose rightfully so) and other groups Rick sees as cultic which is fine. But you telling me to "just relax" etc is not dealing with the problem.  Why don't you guys have a cuppa tea and allow me to put ALL links concerned with this article and Rick Ross article up, not putting some of Rick Ross' favorites. So allow me then to put the link to http://www.rrexposed.u2k.biz/ up on the PH & Ross articles and we can all have a cuppa tea and sing "we are the world" if you like. The real issue here is being avoided by you guys. By this statement, it is obvious that you see this type of bias and vandalism as common place. At least we ARE actually talking here - which is a great start. 
You said - ''"There is criticism, but also a ''response'' to it. Sounds fair to me. And the rest of the article seems to be rather Potter-sided, so be happy about it." I am not interested in the Potter's House site being in "Potter-sided,"'' but I am interested in it being a truthful and neutral article. I know that by just having FACT it will appear "Potter-sided," much like the link and discussion I put up on the King James I of England article - it shows the other side of the coin on the issue of the Kings sexuality and allows people to make up their own response. The link is also much more factual that the previous posts and if you notice I didn't deleted anything but contributed. Just because the information (facts) may show popular opinion is wrong, doesn't mean that it is biased. From all of my research King James I of England was never a homosexual but a victim of racial slurs and propaganda. But one must have ALL the facts to find this out - and once all facts are provided the reader can then make a reasoned logical conclusion. Which is why I felt it was fine to leave all other parts of the article intact. Rick answers his critics and I linked to this but even that was deleted. Guys you are not allowing any criticism about Ross but allowing much criticism about the Potter's House, which is mostly tabloid press rot and unfounded rumor.
If you guys allow "poor quality" links saying that that the leader of any group is a jerk moron liar etc, and I try to provide a balance by putting other "poor quality" links to show the contrary, this is fair. But if you delete all "poor quality" links saying that that the leader of any group is a jerk moron liar etc, then I will not have a need to have other "poor quality" links to show the contrary. So if you don't mind - have a chill pill and I will put up these "poor quality" links or have "poor quality" at all!   01:41, 9 August 2006 (UTC)
I was doing what these guys are a while back but was reproved see: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User_talk:218.214.37.212
Why a double standard? Why am I rebuked for deleting links but they are not?   02:01, 9 August 2006 (UTC)
See Neil '''lie about his identify''' as soon as the group started. He stared to use different usernames because he knew his daughter used the group. He used multiple usernames (to confirm his lies) to get his daughter out of the church.
I discovered who he was after he used multiple usernames to deceive people but had his '''IP exposed''':
His multiple user names
So I exposed him.
Here are some other links:
This next post was '''Neil pretending to be my ex girlfriend''' who '''said that I may had a homosexual attraction to Neil.''' 
Need I say more Tilman? I think the RR site is tame compared to what is being thrown at me (let alone the rest of the people in the 1400 churches in CFM). 
I'm glad you said that now, because that is exactly what they say.  13:01, 9 August 2006 (UTC)
BTW I did try to talk this through with Antaeus_Feldspar dispite his post
The yahoo links don't really prove anything. Just people accusing a lot.
That you insist on bringing up the rrexposed link (likely a scientology smear job) makes it highly doubtful that this Potter Club is a "good christian" organisation. --  15:33, 9 August 2006 (UTC)
I know who made the RR site. If you read it you will see that he is a christian. So you seem to think that this is all OK?   18:47, 9 August 2006 (UTC)
On the group Slam the door on the potters house http://groups.yahoo.com/group/slamthedoor_on_the_pottershouse/ they have this: http://us.a2.yahoofs.com/groups/g_15533306/.HomePage/__sr_/1304.jpg?grvEu3EBImFz9jnH
Is this usual mediation? Silence?   08:24, 12 August 2006 (UTC)
Think about it, if this was a Black, Jewish, or Muslim minority religious group, and the leader was being made fun of in cartoons, they made out that anyone attending is brainwashed or in a cult, anyone who opposes them is labelled a Gay and made fun of and threatened, they mock, gossip, slander and lie all the time which is proven by all their own yahoo groups, it wouldn't be tollerated as a "quality link"! Just think on that for a while!   13:59, 12 August 2006 (UTC)
Seeing that I cannot seem to get anywhere with this, I am forced to make my own Rick Ross site exposing him see www.newsau.com. The man who made the anti potters house site IS THE SAME GUY WHO MADE rrexposed!!
See why I will not settle for you people being the victims? You say that this guys is not credible when refering to Rick Ross, but is credible when refering to the Potter's House.
I don't really want to make a large exposure site of Rick Ross, but it seems I am being driven in that direction. 
I was hoping you people would be rational   05:28, 13 August 2006 (UTC)
Forget it, you are not being co-operative, xo I will just go ahead and create the anti RR site myself. You can't say I didn't try to work through this! Bye   12:29, 13 August 2006 (UTC)