The '''Platinum Triangle''' is a district of Anaheim, California surrounding the city's two major sports venues, the Honda Center and Angel Stadium of Anaheim. Currently in the midst of large-scale redevelopment, the area is undergoing transformation from a low-density commercial and industrial zone into a more urban environment with high-density housing, commercial office towers, and retail space.
The district's boundaries are roughly defined by Interstate 5, the Santa Ana River, and Cerritos Avenue.  A small section to the south is part of the city of Orange, and thus is not considered part of the Platinum Triangle. The primary arterial roads through the area are State College Boulevard and Katella Avenue.
The district is located east of the Anaheim Resort, a major tourist destination which encompasses the Disneyland Resort, the Anaheim Convention Center, and several dozen hotels.  It is also just north of The Block at Orange, a large outdoor shopping center, and UCI Medical Center. The Triangle also contains Angel Stadium of Anaheim and The Grove of Anaheim, a popular entertainment venue adjacent to the stadium.  Honda Center, although on the other side of the 57 freeway, is also within the Platinum Triangle boundaries, according to the city's website.
When redevelopment is completed, the district is expected to offer mixed use urban living with easy access to dining, shopping, and entertainment. It is envisioned as a downtown district for Orange County, competing with the South Coast Metro area, Irvine Business Complex, and downtown Santa Ana. The current tenants of the area, mainly industrial buildings, are gradually relocating to make way for mid-rise apartments, retail space, and several high-rise commercial buildings.
In 2008, Anaheim city planers announced an expansion of the initial Platinum Triangle proposal, doubling the amount of housing units and commercial office space from the original plans.  Currently, 16 projects are either planned or currently under construction for a total of 18,363 homes,  of commercial space and  of office space.
As of August 2009, three projects had been completed: the Stadium Lofts, 1818 Platinum Triangle, and Archstone Gateway apartment homes. Additionally, construction has begun on several new roads west of Angel Stadium, including Market Street, the central promenade for the district.
The Platinum Triangle is the fastest growing area in Orange County. .
City planners envision the triangle as a transit-oriented environment, encompassing the Anaheim Regional Transportation Intermodal Center, or ARTIC, which is planned to replace the current Anaheim Amtrak Station located in the Angel Stadium parking lot.  ARTIC will continue to serve Amtrak's Pacific Surfliner and Metrolink trains, and will also be a terminus for the  planned California High-Speed Rail system.
Additionally, ARTIC would be a transfer point to a planned rapid transit line which would run from ARTIC to the Disneyland Resort.  ARTIC would also be a main transfer point to current Orange County Transportation Authority bus routes. Planners hope that the robust transportation infrastructure will prevent a severe increase in traffic congestion from the large number of new residents and commuters.