The site's main areas were the GD Review, an online magazine which consisted mostly of staff reviews and previews of games, the Downloads section featuring game demos, patches, and shareware, and the Games Info section which stored FAQs and walkthroughs. 
In early 1998, Games Domain was acquired by The Attitude Network, who also hosted popular gaming site HappyPuppy.com. Theglobe.com, at the time a successful new web portal, purchased Attitude Network in a $52.8 million deal in April 1999.  By 2000, after acquiring games retailer Chips & Bits and Computer Games Magazine publisher Strategy Plus, theglobe.com was considered the second largest online gaming network. However, like several companies from the dotcom era, the company went bust within 2 years. Theglobe.com sold these operations in August 2001 and continued with a reduced games division consisting of just Computer Games Magazine and the Chips & Bits mail-order service until the present day.
The site had been up for sale since July 2001, and would not find a home until October of that year. BT Openworld, the internet arm of British Telecom purchased Games Domain to boost its online gaming division. BT launched a new service on the site called Games Domain Multiplay in November 2001, providing servers for online gamers at a price. It was unsuccessful, and within 16 months the Multiplay service was shut down.
In November 2003, BT sold Games Domain to Yahoo!. The site would be integrated into Yahoo's Games channel. During the Yahoo years, Games Domain was revamped visually and covered both console and PC games until Yahoo abandoned the brand and URL in March 2005.
From the early start and through its development up until the point of the theGlobe.com acquisition, Games Domain used a combinatorial management system incorporating internal office
Staff editors, responsible for their subcategories, were also involved in management decisions. Staff discussions were conducted via email, in a lengthy process which could 
At the same time, when changes were deemed necessary due to marketing pressures such as the necessity for faster turn-around times, and then ultimately various acquisitions, the system proved inflexible and in-part contributed to both, first the high success of Games Domain at the peak of the dotcom era, and then the ultimate decline of Games Domain.
Although Games Domain has now been absorbed into Yahoo's games channel, at the time of writing (March 2008) original GD Review editor Richard Greenhill still works for Yahoo and writes a regular editor's column.  He is joined by Mike Smith who worked out of Games Domain's Birmingham office for a number of years.