 and a third flyby in September 2009. (The first space probe to reach Mercury was Mariner 10 in 1975.) ''MESSENGER'' is the first spacecraft to orbit the planet Mercury. Inserting into orbit around Mercury is difficult because a satellite approaching on a direct path from Earth would be accelerated by the Sun's gravity and pass Mercury far too quickly to orbit it.
The instruments carried by ''MESSENGER'' performed well on a complex series of flybys of Earth (once), Venus (twice), and Mercury itself (three times). These flybys allowed the craft to be slowed relative to Mercury with minimal fuel. ''MESSENGER'' successfully entered Mercury orbit on 18 March 2011 with no reported problems. The craft's science instruments were reactivated 24 March, with a first photo returned from Mercury orbit on 29 March. Its formal science data collection mission began on 4 April 2011.
In 1973 Mariner 10 was launched to make multiple flyby encounters of Venus and Mercury. Mariner 10 provided the first detailed data of Mercury, mapping 40-45% of the surface. The final flyby of Mercury by Mariner 10 occurred on  March 16, 1975, ending close-range observations of the planet for over thirty years. Being the least explored terrestrial planet with no future planned mission, a study, published in 1998, detailed a proposed mission to send an orbiting spacecraft to Mercury. In the years since the Mariner 10 mission, subsequent mission proposals to revisit Mercury had appeared too costly, requiring large quantities of propellant and a heavy lift launch vehicle. However, using a trajectory designed by Chen-wan Yen in 1985, the study showed it was possible to seek a Discovery-class mission by using multiple, consecutive gravity assist, 'swingby' maneuvers around Venus and Mercury, in combination with minor propulsive trajectory corrections, to gradually slow the spacecraft and thereby minimize propellant needs.
The primary science objectives of the mission include:
The spacecraft was designed and built at the Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory. Science operations, managed by Dr. Sean Solomon as principal investigator, and mission operations are also conducted at JHU/APL. The contrived acronym MESSENGER was chosen because Mercury was the messenger of the gods according to Roman mythology.
The ''MESSENGER'' bus measures  tall,  wide and  deep. The bus is primarily constructed with four graphite fiber / cyanate ester composite panels which support the propellant tanks, the "'''LVA'''" ('''l'''arge '''v'''elocity '''a'''djust) thruster, attitude monitors and correction thrusters, antennas, the instrument pallet, and a large ceramic-cloth sunshade, measuring  tall and  wide, for passive thermal control.
Main propulsion is via the 645&nbsp;N, 317 sec.Isp bipropellant (hydrazine and nitrogen tetroxide) LVA thruster. The spacecraft is designed to carry  of propellant and pressurizer (helium).
Four  monopropellant thrusters provide spacecraft steering during main thruster burns, and ten  monopropellant thrusters are used for attitude control. For precision attitude control, a reaction wheel attitude control system was also included.
Information for attitude control is provided by star trackers, an inertial measurement unit, and six sun sensors.
The probe includes two small deep space transponders for communications with the Deep Space Network and three kinds of antennas: a high gain phased array whose main beam can be electronically steered in one plane, a medium-gain    fan-beam    antenna and a low gain horn with a broad pattern. The high gain antenna is used as transmit-only at 8.4&nbsp;GHz, the medium-gain and low gain antennas transmit at 8.4&nbsp;GHz and receive at 7.2&nbsp;GHz, and all three antennas operate with right-hand circularly polarized (RHCP) radiation. One of each of these antennas is mounted on the front of the probe facing the sun, and one of each is mounted to the back of the probe facing away from the sun.
The space probe is powered by a two-panel, gallium arsenide/germanium (GaAs/Ge) solar array providing an average of 450 watts at Mercury. Each panel is rotatable and includes optical solar reflectors to balance the temperature of the array. Power is stored in a common-pressure-vessel, 23-ampere-hour nickel hydrogen battery, with 11 vessels and two cells per vessel.
The computer system is based on the Integrated Electronics Module (IEM), a device which combines core avionics into a single box. The computer features two radiation-hardened IBM RAD6000, a 25&nbsp;megahertz main processor and 10&nbsp;MHz fault protection processor. For redundancy, the spacecraft carries a pair of identical IEM computers. For data storage, the spacecraft carries two solid-state recorders able to store up to one gigabyte each. The IBM RAD6000 main processor collects, compresses, and stores data from the MESSENGER instruments for later playback to Earth.
MESSENGER uses a software suite called SciBox to simulate the orbit and instruments, in order to "choreograph the complicated process of maximizing the scientific return from the mission and minimizing conflicts between instrument observations, while at the same time meeting all spacecraft constraints on pointing, data downlink rates, and onboard data storage capacity."
The ''MESSENGER'' probe was launched on August 3, 2004 at 06:15:56 UTC by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration from Space Launch Complex 17B at the Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida, aboard a Delta II 7925 launch vehicle. The complete burn sequence lasted 57 minutes bringing the spacecraft into a heliocentric orbit, with a final velocity of 10.68&nbsp;km/s (6.64&nbsp;miles/s) and sending the probe into a 7.9 billion-kilometer trajectory that took 6 years, 7 months and 16 days before its orbital insertion on March 18, 2011.
Traveling to Mercury requires an extremely large velocity change (''see delta-v'') because Mercury's orbit is deep in the Sun's gravity well.  If on a direct course from Earth to Mercury, a spacecraft is constantly accelerated as it falls toward the Sun, and arrives at Mercury with a velocity too high to achieve orbit without excessive use of fuel. For planets with an atmosphere, such as Venus and Mars, spacecraft can minimize their fuel consumption upon arrival by using friction with the atmosphere to enter orbit (aerocapture), or can briefly fire their rocket engines to enter into orbit followed by a reduction of the orbit by aerobraking. However, the tenuous atmosphere of Mercury is far too thin for these maneuvers.  Instead, ''MESSENGER'' extensively used gravity assist maneuvers at Earth, Venus, and Mercury to reduce the speed relative to Mercury, then used its large rocket engine to enter into an elliptical orbit around the planet.  The multi-flyby process greatly reduced the amount of propellant necessary to slow the spacecraft, but at the cost of prolonging the trip by many years and to a total distance of 4.9 billion miles.  To further minimize the amount of necessary propellant, the spacecraft orbital insertion targeted a highly elliptical orbit around Mercury.
The elongated orbit has two other benefits:  It allows the spacecraft time to cool after the times it is sandwiched between the hot surface and the sun, and it allows the spacecraft to measure the effects of solar wind and the magnetic fields of the planet at various distances, while still allowing close-up measurements and photographs of the surface and exosphere.
The spacecraft was originally scheduled to launch during a 12-day window that beginning May 11, 2004. On March 26, 2004, NASA announced the launch would be moved to a later, 15-day launch window beginning July 30, 2004, to allow for further testing of the spacecraft.. This change significantly altered the trajectory of the mission and delayed the arrival at Mercury by two years. The original plan called for three fly-by maneuvers past Venus, with Mercury orbit insertion scheduled for 2009. The trajectory was changed to include one Earth flyby, two Venus flybys, and three Mercury flybys before orbit insertion on March 18, 2011.
The navigation team is led by KinetX, Inc. of Tempe, Arizona. KinetX is the first private company to be responsible for navigation of a NASA deep space mission. In that role, they were responsible for determining all trajectory adjustments throughout the probe's flight through the inner solar system ensuring that ''MESSENGER'' arrived at Mercury with the proper velocity for orbit insertion.
During the Earth flyby, the ''MESSENGER'' team imaged the Earth and Moon using MDIS and checked the status of several other instruments observing the atmospheric and surface compositions and testing the magnetosphere and determining that all instruments tested were working as expected. This calibration period will be useful for ensuring accurate interpretation of data as the spacecraft orbits Mercury.
On October 24, 2006 at 08:34 UTC, ''MESSENGER'' encountered Venus at an altitude of . During the encounter, MESSENGER passed behind Venus entering superior conjunction, a period when Earth was on the exact opposite side of the Solar System, with the Sun inhibiting radio contact. For this reason, no scientific observations were conducted during the flyby. Communication with the spacecraft was reestablished in late November and performed a deep space maneuver on December 12, to correct the trajectory to encounter Venus in a second flyby.
On June 5, 2007, at 23:08 UTC, ''MESSENGER'' performed a second encounter of Venus at an altitude of , for the greatest velocity reduction of the mission. During the encounter, all instruments were used to observe Venus and prepare for the following Mercury encounters. The encounter provided visible and near-infrared imaging data of the upper atmosphere of Venus. Ultraviolet and X-ray spectrometry of the upper atmosphere were also recorded, to characterize the composition. The ESA's Venus Express was also orbiting during the encounter, providing the first opportunity for simultaneous measurement of particle-and-field characteristics of the planet.
On July 3, 2008, ''MESSENGER'' team member Thomas Zurbuchen announced that the probe discovered large amounts of water present in Mercury's exosphere, which was an unexpected finding.  ''MESSENGER'' also provided visual evidence of past volcanic activity on the surface of Mercury as well as evidence for a liquid planetary core.
 Mission lead engineer Eric Finnegan indicated that the spacecraft achieved a near-perfect orbit. ''MESSENGER'''s orbit is highly elliptical, taking it within  of Mercury's surface and then  away from it every twelve hours. This orbit was chosen to shield the probe from the heat radiated by Mercury's hot surface.  Only a small portion of each orbit is at low altitude where the spacecraft is subjected to heating from the hot side of the planet.
After orbital insertion, an eighteen-day comissioning phase took place. The supervising personnel switched on and tested the craft's science instruments to ensure they had completed the journey without damage. The commissioning phase "demonstrated that the spacecraft and payload  all operating nominally, notwithstanding Mercury   s challenging environment.   
The primary mission began as planned April 4, with MESSENGER orbiting once every twelve hours for an intended duration of twelve Earth months, the equivalent of two solar days on Mercury.http://messenger.jhuapl.edu/news_room/details.php?id=166 Principal Investigator Sean Solomon, of the Carnegie Institution of Washington, said:    With the beginning today of the primary science phase of the mission, we will be making nearly continuous observations that will allow us to gain the first global perspective on the innermost planet. Moreover, as solar activity steadily increases, we will have a front-row seat on the most dynamic magnetosphere   atmosphere system in the Solar System.   
On February 18, 2011, a portrait of the Solar System was published to the ''MESSENGER'' website.  The mosaic contains 34 images, acquired by the MDIS instrument during November 2010.  All the planets are visible with the exception of Uranus and Neptune due to the vast distances.  The "''MESSENGER'' family portrait" is intended to be complementary to the "Voyager family portrait" acquired from outside the solar system on February 14, 1990.