In 2007 Schaeffer published his autobiography, ''Crazy for God: How I Grew Up As One of the Elect, Helped Found the Religious Right and Lived to Take All (or Almost All) of It Back'', in which he goes into much more detail regarding what it was like to grow up in the Schaeffer family, and around L'Abri.
In 2006 he published ''Baby Jack'', a novel about a Marine killed in Iraq. He is also known for his best selling non-fiction books related to the United States Marine Corps, including ''Keeping Faith   A Father-Son Story About Love and the United States Marine Corps'', co-written with his son John Schaeffer, and ''AWOL   The Unexcused Absence Of America's Upper Classes From Military Service and How It Hurts Our Country'', co-authored with former Clinton presidential aide, Kathy Roth-Douquet.
In 1990 Schaeffer became an Orthodox Christian as a member of the Greek Orthodox Church, which he says "embraces paradox and mystery."  He converted in 1992 at a Greek Orthodox Church in Newburyport Mass.
Schaeffer has written: "In the mid 1980s I left the Religious Right, after I realized just how very anti-American they are, (the theme I explore in my book ''Crazy For God'')." He added that he was a Republican until 2000, working for Senator John McCain in that year's primaries, but that after the 2000 election he re-registered as an independent.
On February 7, 2008, Schaeffer endorsed Senator Barack Obama for the Democratic Party's presidential nomination, in an article entitled "Why I'm Pro-Life and Pro-Obama." The next month, prompted by the controversy over remarks by the pastor of Obama's church, he wrote: "hen my late father -- Religious Right leader Francis Schaeffer -- denounced America and even called for the violent overthrow of the US government, he was invited to lunch with presidents Ford, Reagan and Bush, Sr."
After the 2008 Russian-Georgian War, Schaeffer described Russia as a resurgent Orthodox Christian power, paying back the West for its support of Muslim Kosovar secessionists against Orthodox Serbia.
On October 10, 2008 a public letter to Senator McCain (and Sarah Palin) from Schaeffer was published in the ''Baltimore Sun'' newspaper. The letter contained an impassioned plea for John McCain to arrest what Schaeffer perceived as a hateful, and prejudiced tone of the Republican party's election campaign. Schaeffer was convinced that there was a pronounced danger that fringe groups in America could be goaded into pursuing violence. "If you do not stand up for all that is good in America and declare that Senator Obama is a patriot, fit for office, and denounce your hate-filled supporters ... history will hold you responsible for all that follows."
Soon after Obama's inauguration, Schaeffer criticized Republican leaders for the course on which they had taken his former party:
In February, 2010, Schaeffer criticized President Obama's critics for being racist.