Housing First approaches are based on the concept that a homeless  individual or household's first and primary need is to obtain stable housing, and that other issues that may affect the household can and should be addressed once housing is obtained.  In contrast, many other programs operate from a model of "housing readiness"     that is, that an individual or household must address other issues that may have led to the episode of homelessness prior to entering housing.
Pioneered by Dr. Sam Tsemberis, a faculty member of the Department of Psychiatry of the New York University School of Medicine, and the organization Pathways to Housing in New York City in the early 1990s, Housing First for the chronically homeless is premised on the notion that housing is a basic human right, and so should not be denied to anyone, even if they are abusing alcohol or other substances. The Housing First model, thus, is philosophically in contrast to models that require the homeless to abjure substance-abuse and seek treatment in exchange for housing.  
Housing First, when supported by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, does not only provide housing.  The model, used by nonprofit agencies throughout America, also provides wraparound case management services to the tenants.  This case management provides stability for homeless individuals, which increases their success.  It allows for accountability and promotes self-sufficiency.  The housing provided through government supported Housing First programs is permanent and "affordable," meaning that tenants pay 30% of their income towards rent.  Housing First, as pioneered by Pathways to Housing, targets individuals with disabilities.  This housing is supported through two HUD programs.  They are the Supportive Housing Program and the Shelter Plus Care Program.  Pathways' Housing First model has been recognized by the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration as an Evidence-based practice. 
Housing First is currently endorsed by the United States Interagency Council on Homelessness (USICH) as a "best practice" for governments and service-agencies to use in their fight to end chronic homelessness in America, and is similarly endorsed by government agencies that deal with the homeless in the United Kingdom.    
Housing First programs currently operate throughout the United States in cities such as Anchorage, Alaska; Minneapolis, Minnesota;  New York City; District of Columbia; Denver, Colorado; San Francisco, California; Atlanta, Georgia; Chicago, Illinois; Quincy, Massachusetts; Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; Salt Lake City, Utah; Seattle, Washington, and  among many others, and are intended to be crucial aspects of communities' so-called ''10-Year Plans To End Chronic Homelessness'' also advocated by USICH.
In Massachusetts, the Home & Healthy for Good program reported some significant outcomes that were favorable especially in the area of cost savings.
The Denver Housing First Collaborative, operated by the Colorado Coalition for the Homeless, provides housing through a Housing First approach to more than 200 chronically homeless individuals.  A 2006 cost study documented a significant reduction in the use and cost of emergency services by program participants as well as increased health status.  Emergency room visits and costs were reduced by an average of 34.3 percent.  Hospital inpatient costs were reduced by 66 percent. Detox visits were reduced by 82 percent. Incarceration days and costs were reduced by 76 percent.  77 percent of those entering the program continued to be housed in the program after two years. See .
In Utah, a decrease of 42 percent in chronic homelessness from 2009 to 2010 "can be attributed to the State   s Housing First Initiative," according to the Utah Division of Housing and Community Development.
In August 2007, the US Department of Housing and Urban Development reported that the number of chronically homeless individuals living on the streets or in shelters dropped by an unprecedented 30 percent, from 175,914 people in 2005 to 123,833 in 2007.  This was credited in part to the "housing first" approach; Congress in 1999 directed that HUD spend 30% of its funding on the method.
In September 2010, it was reported that the Housing First Initiative had significantly reduced the chronic homeless single person population in Boston, Massachusetts, although homeless families were still increasing in number. Some shelters were reducing the number of beds due to lowered numbers of homeless, and some emergency shelter facilities were closing, especially the emergency Boston Night Center.
The United States Congress appropriated $25 million in the McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Grants for 2008 to show the effectiveness of Rapid Re-housing programs in reducing family homelessness.
In February 2009, President Obama signed the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 part of which addressed homelessness prevention, allocating $1.5 billion for a Homeless Prevention Fund. The funding for it was called the "Homelessness Prevention and Rapid Re-Housing Program" (HPRP), and was distributed using the formula for the Emergency Shelter Grants (ESG) program.
On May 20, 2009, President Obama signed the Homeless Emergency Assistance and Rapid Transition to Housing (HEARTH) Act into Public Law (Public Law 111-22 or "PL 111-22"), reauthorizing HUD's Homeless Assistance programs. It was part of the Helping Families Save Their Homes Act of 2009. The HEARTH act allows for the prevention of homelessness, rapid re-housing, consolidation of housing programs, and new homeless categories. In the eighteen months after the bill's signing, HUD must make regulations implementing this new McKinney program.
In late 2009, some homeless advocacy organizations, such as the National Coalition for the Homeless, reported and published perceived problems with the HEARTH Act of 2009 as a HUD McKinney-Vento Reauthorization bill, especially with regard to privacy, definitional ineligibilty, community roles, and restrictions on eligibile activities.
Housing First technology is also being adapted to decreasing the larger segment of the homeless population, family homelessness, such as in the Los Angeles based program ''Housing First for Homeless Families'' which had been established in 1988. Dennis Culhane, University of Pennsylvania homelessness researcher, states:    There   s a lot of policy innovation going on around family homelessness, and it   s borrowing a page from the chronic handbook     the focus is on permanent housing and housing-first strategies.    