The university is accredited by the North Central Association of Colleges and Schools at the doctoral degree-granting level.
Wright State University has six : Human-Centered Innovation, National Center for Medical Readiness, Wright State University & Premier Health Partners Neuroscience Institute, Knowledge-Enabled Computing (Kno.e.sis), Micro Air Vehicle Research, and Product Reliability and Optimization (CEPRO).
Wright State has eight colleges and three schools. The colleges are: Education and Human Services, Engineering and Computer Science, Liberal Arts, Nursing and Health, Raj Soin College of Business, Science and Mathematics, University College, and Lake Campus. The schools are: Boonshoft School of Medicine, Graduate Studies, and Professional Psychology.
Founded in 1964, Wright State University was originally the Dayton branch campus of both Miami University and Ohio State University. At that time it comprised only a single building, Allyn Hall (named for Stanley Allyn, then-president of National Cash Register and one of the university's founders).
A 1965 act of the Ohio General Assembly created the university. Several names were considered, including Dayton State University, Southwest Ohio State University, Shawnee University, Four Rivers University (after the four nearby rivers: the Great Miami, the Mad, the Stillwater, and Wolf Creek), and Mad River University. Wright State University was eventually chosen to honor the Wright Brothers, residents of Dayton. On October 1, 1967, the university met enrollment criteria set by state legislature and Senate Bill 212 passed to actually create a new university. This led to the official charter of Wright State University.
Prior to current president David R. Hopkins appointment, Wright State University had five other presidents, including Brage Golding (1966   1973); Robert J. Kegerreis (1973   1985); Paige E. Mulhollan (1985   1994); Harley E. Flack (1994   1998); Kim Goldenberg (1998   2006).
In 2007, Wright State University celebrated its 40th Anniversary in connection with the Presidential Inauguration of David R. Hopkins. In order to mark this milestone in university history, Wright State created a 40th Anniversary website to highlight the events, history, and vision of its community. More information about the university's history can be seen on this .
Wright State has a compact campus, with several academic buildings constructed following Allyn Hall. Key buildings on campus include the Founders' Quadrangle (quad) buildings, which are Allyn Hall (home to the College of Education and Human Services and WSU dining option, The Hangar), Millett Hall (named for John Millett, former president of Miami University, and home of the College of Liberal Arts), Fawcett Hall (named after Novice Fawcett, president of Ohio State), and Oelman Hall (named after Robert Oelman, first president of the board of trustees, and the home of the College of Science and Mathematics).
Other buildings include Rike Hall (named after the founder of the Rike Kumler company, since merged into Federated Department Stores, home of the Raj Soin College of Business); the Diggs Laboratory (a Gold LEED certified building), University Hall (administrative offices, University College, and the College of Nursing and Health), the Creative Arts Center, the Mathematical and Microbiological Sciences Building (M&M), the Fritz and Dolores Russ Engineering Center (home of the College of Engineering and Computer Science), the Medical Sciences Building, Biological Sciences Building, Health Sciences Building (home of the School of Professional Psychology), Joshi Research Center, and the Student Union (which was created by combining the former gymnasium and University Center). The main university library is the Paul Laurence Dunbar library.
Across from the Mathematics and Microbiology building is an abstract sculpture titled "Turning Points," designed by David Black. This piece was created in 1998, as part of the Ohio Arts Council Percent for Arts Program and the addition of University Hall. The statue has been criticized for appearing very similar to many of Black's other works, most of which are displayed in public universities or public spaces.
The entire campus is accessible to people with disabilities, and it has a national reputation for being an extremely welcoming and accommodating campus. The campus made history when it opened the . Wright State is the first university in the nation to create a dog park especially for service dogs. A distinctive feature of Wright State is that one can travel around the main campus both by sidewalks outside and a tunnel network that connects almost all the buildings at the basement level.
The Wright State University Boonshoft School of Medicine utilizes the main campus for pre-clinical training and seven area hospitals for clinical and residency training opportunities. In 2005, the school changed its name to the Wright State University Boonshoft School of Medicine in recognition of the Oscar Boonshoft family, which gave Wright State's largest philanthropic gift to the medical school.
Admission to Wright State University's School of Medicine is competitive among the many students who apply; in 2009, over 2,832 students applied for admission to the school, and 100 were accepted. The Boonshoft School of Medicine is accredited by the Liaison Committee on Medical Education (LCME). The school's charter class began studies in 1976 and graduated in 1980. Since then, more than 2,345 M.D.'s have graduated from the School of Medicine. Wright State alumni are practicing in every state in the nation.
In 2009, the school became the first medical school in the United States to debut its own medical student produced radio program, dubbed Radio Rounds.
Wright State University currently hosts 6 North-American Interfraternity Conference fraternities and 5 National Panhellenic Conference sororities as well eight of the nine members of  National Pan-Hellenic Council fraternities and sororities.
Wright State offers 91 baccalaureate degrees in the following colleges: the , the , the , the , the , and the . The  also offers a limited number of complete undergraduate bachelor's degrees, as well as a variety of associate degrees.
Wright State offers 76 graduate, doctoral, and professional programs through the , the , and the . The  also offers a limited number of graduate programs.
For students interested in becoming commissioned officers in the U.S. military upon graduation, Wright State University offers Air Force ROTC and Army ROTC programs on campus, known as Detachment 643 and the Raider Battalion, respectively. The Air Force ROTC program contains the cross town schools of the University of Dayton, Cedarville University, and Sinclair Community College and is the largest AFROTC detachment in the Northeast Region.
The athletic program at Wright State University is recognized as an integral part of the total educational process. The athletics program is designed to contribute to the development of the student-athlete's health, fitness, leadership skill, and respect for others.
Wright State's intercollegiate athletes are student-athletes who are instructed on and dedicated to the principles of fair play and amateur competition as defined by the rules of the National Collegiate Athletic Association. It is the responsibility of the athletics administration and coaches to ensure that the entire program is in full compliance with all pertinent rules and regulations as a member of the Horizon League and NCAA Division I.
The Wright State University Athletic Department can be seen through two distinct phases of growth over the past 40 years. The first phase includes the birth and blossoming into the NCAA Division II elite while the second, and current, could be characterized by the move and quick success in NCAA Division I.
Since its first intercollegiate event when the men's soccer team defeated Wilberforce 4-2 in the fall of 1968, the Raiders have grown to the extent that the men's basketball team played the Indiana University before 35,000 fans on national television in 1993 and saw the Raiders beat eventual national-champion Michigan State for the "Upset of the Millennium" on December 30, 1999, at the Wright State Ervin J. Nutter Center or a recent 2010 NCAA Tournament bid by the softball team.
The first 20 years in Division II saw numerous national post-season tournament berths, over 200 All-Americans and a men's basketball National Championship in 1983. Great success became the norm instead of an exception for the Raiders as a high majority of the programs posted a better than .600 record.
Since becoming a NCAA Division I member in 1987, the Raiders success has continued as the squads climb and improve. The first to qualify for a Division I bid came in 1988 when a golfer participated in the NCAA national tournament.
The move to Division I also saw a move in 1990 to the Mid-Continent Conference and then the Midwestern Collegiate Conference (now the Horizon League) starting with the 1994-95 campaign. Since beginning league play, Wright State athletes have earned over 200 all-league honors while numerous teams have won conference championships and received NCAA Tournament bids. The coaching staffs has also received its share of recognition as well with Coach of the Year honors.
The student-athletes posted outstanding successes in the classroom as well as they regularly earn a grade point average over 3.0. Almost half of the student-athletes are honored each year at Academic Recognition Night.
Wright State sponsors 16 intercollegiate sports, including seven for men and nine for women: Both   basketball, cross country, soccer, swimming & diving and tennis; Women   softball, indoor track, outdoor track and volleyball; Men   baseball and golf. The latest sport additions to the department has been a women's indoor and outdoor track & field squad.
New facilities over the last 15 years include the Setzer Pavilion/Mills Morgan Center, a state of the art facility that is used by all 16 teams, particularly men's and women's basketball. Also new are Alumni Field, home of the men's and women's soccer teams, and Nischwitz Stadium, home of WSU baseball. Along with the new facilities, major improvements have been initiated at the softball field and tennis courts along with the Wright State Ervin J. Nutter Center, a 11,000-seat arena that is home to the volleyball and men's and women's basketball teams.
The most successful sports on the campus have been men's basketball, softball, baseball, and swimming. The Raiders' men's basketball team captured the 1983 Division II national championship and made the NCAA Division I Tournament in 1993 and 2007. The current head coach is Billy Donlon, named in April 2010. During Donlon's four years as an assistant coach at Wright State, the Raiders blossomed into one of the top teams of the Horizon League with great recruiting classes.
The men's swim team has won the Horizon League conference five times in the past 10 years. Currently, Wright State's Men's Swimming and Diving team holds the record for the most conference championships. The baseball team went to the 1987 NCAA Division II tournament finals. Moving to Division I, they made the NCAA tournament in 1994, 2006, and 2009. The 1994 team won an NCAA tournament game with a 14-12 victory over North Carolina State. The 2010 team won the regular-season title and advanced to the championship game of the Horizon League Tournament. The softball team has advanced to three NCAA Tournaments in the last four years, including the most recent in 2010. Raider Softball has two NCAA Tournament wins.
There have been numerous baseball players in professional baseball from Wright State, but the most notable of all professionals was Brian Anderson. He was a 1993 NCAA Division I All-American while leading the nation in E.R.A. He was selected as the third pick overall in the first round of the Major League Baseball Draft selected behind Alex Rodriguez and Darren Dreifort (Wichita State). Anderson played in the 1997 World Series with the Cleveland Indians and won the 2001 World Series with the Arizona Diamondbacks. Anderson is now an assistant pitching coach with the Tampa Bay Rays. Relief Pitcher Joe Smith (2006) is currently on the roster of the Cleveland Indians.
In men's basketball, Bill Edwards (1993) and Vitaly Potapenko (1996) have played in the NBA. Potapenko was a first round lottery draft pick by the Cleveland Cavaliers and played for the Boston Celtics, Seattle Sonics and Sacramento Kings. He is now an assistant coach with the Indiana Pacers.
Frank Lickliter (1992) has played on several professional tours, including a long-stint on the PGA Tour.
The three Departments of Art, Music, and Theatre, Dance & Motion Pictures are located in an interconnected Creative Arts Center with multiple theatres, concert halls, art galleries, and numerous classrooms. Each department has a distinguished track record of accomplishments, from international tours to national awards and honors.
In the WSU Department of Theatre, Dance & Motion Pictures, headed by W. Stuart McDowell, students and faculty and leading professional guest artists such as composer Ricky Ian Gordon, director Tina Landau, and lyricist and composter Tom Jones have worked on theatrical productions, dance concerts and film projects, gaining for the program a unique reputation among training programs in America. Motion Picture faculty have recently been nominated for the Academy Award in documentary film making, and alumni who have won several Emmy Awards in television production.
The collaborative work of the three departments of Art, Music, and Theatre, Dance & Motion Pictures was recognized by the university as one of its Centers of Excellence.
Each year - on an evening in early spring - the Wright State Departments of Art, Music and Theatre, Dance & Motion Pictures collaborate in a unique celebration of the arts to raise scholarship funds through the creativity of hundreds of artists, musicians, actors and dancers. A unique expression of the collaborative spirit between these three distinguished departments, the ArtsGala has become an event which has drawn thousands of patrons in its first decade, who have given over a million dollars to support students in the fine and performing arts. The evening combines fine dining with non-stop entertainment. Faculty and students work and perform side by side in what has become a full evening of art, music, theater, dance and motion pictures.
The ''ArtsGala'', which celebrated its 12th year in April 2011, is but one expression of the commitment of Wright State University to support its students through scholarships, and through exceptional training in the arts, just as in all of its educational programs.
In the fall of 2009, WSU's three departments of Art, Music, and Theatre, Dance & Motion Pictures inaugurated a new initiative of collaborative artistic and educational endeavor, called CELIA (Collaboration, Education, Leadership and Innovation in the Arts), dedicated to enhancing "ongoing collaborations as well as nurture new partnerships."
One of the first of these projects was the Academy Award-nominated half hour documentary ''The Last Truck'', produced for HBO and broadcast on Labor Day, 2008. The film documented the closing of a major GM truck plant in Moraine, Ohio, in 2008. More recently, the Department of Theatre, Dance and Motion Pictures co-produced the regional premiere of   in the fall of 2010, with the region's professional theatre, The Human Race Theatre Company.
Projects accepted for the CELIA designation demonstrate high-quality, innovative collaborations, and the ability to further strengthen the reputation of the arts at Wright State.
Jill Channing - Professor and English Department Head, Mitchell College