Joe e is a cool guy from Blyth, Northumberland. Here's what he had to say about his friend Lewis: "Man, that guy rocks!" then he went to add "I wish everyone was as cool as him"
A 12 foot 6 inch dinghy made of GRP.  Built by 'Anglo Marine of Essex'.  Originally designed as a family Dinghy and very stable thanks to it's bilge keels.  The builders have since gone bust and so the dinghy is no longer made.  It is not known how many were built or exist. 
Adventuress manual, Anglo Marine.
Squirrel Scouts are fictional girl scouts in Camp Lazlo.
The girl scouts were called Squirrel Scouts. The girls there had a lot to do, arts & crafts, campfires, nature hikes, volleyball, soccer, pine cone sitting, tea parties, croquet, & many more things. However, 1 particularly favoured sport of the Squirrel Scouts was making fun of the Bean Scouts of Camp Kidney, a more underfunded camp on the other side of the lake. The Squirrel Scouts were the group of girl scouts who were about the same ages as the bean scouts and lived in a natural environment setting like the bean scouts. They lived in a camp called Acorn Flats. The commonly seen scouts are Patsy Smiles, Nina Neckerly, & Gretchen. 
Patsy Smiles  
Nina Neckerly 
Gretchen 
Almondine 
Amber  
Honey  
Tootie  
Susie
Starblaze is a video game developed in 1983 for the TRS-80 Color Computer by game author Greg Zumwalt. It features gameplay very similar to Defender. Unlike Defender, the game featured 64 sectors that had to be cleared of aliens to win the game.
Roger Hazard is part of the cast of A&E's TV show Sell This House.  On this show he helps homeowners as a designer to Stage the home to make it more attractive to possible homebuyers.
At Jon Peddie Research we decided to investigate who was the person, or group who came up with the idea of adding a camera to a mobile phone.
We surveyed over 4,000 engineers and managers in the mobile phone and camera market and got over 2,000 replies and a lot with references to  (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Camera_phone)., http://www.w2forum.com/dictionary/Camera_Phones, http://www.answers.com/topic/j-sh04, http://sharp-world.com/corporate/info/his/chronology/p14.html, which all said    The world's first camera phone was the J-SH04 made by Sharp Corporation and went on sale in Japan in November 2000.   
Dave Cooper from Imagination Technology found an interesting patent filed by Alcatel in European Patent office in July 1992. (http://v3.espacenet.com/textdoc?DB=EPODOC&IDX=EP1028577&QPN=EP1028577&CY=ep&LG=en)
Source European Patent Office
Figure 1: Radio telephone with video player recorder
The radio telephone has a hand-held housing with electroacoustic transducers (2,3) behind sound inlets (9,10) and a video recorder (7), a video player (6) and an electronic circuit (5) for image and a sound communications by radio within the housing. The telephone also has a hands-free device. The video recorder has a wide-angle objective (8) and is mounted in the front of the housing with the video player.
And former JPA employee Tommy McClain found a US Patent filled in February 2002 by Miyake; Hiroyuki  at Mitsubishi.  which was originally disclosed in the 1998 Japanese Patent Publication (unexamined) No. 336498/1998.
Source: US Patent Office
Figure 2: Cellular phone with imaging device
Hitherto, in the cellular phone equipped with an imaging device in which the cellular phone and the imaging device are integrally accommodated, for the purpose of taking a picture while visually recognizing a photographing screen on a monitor, a camera of the imaging device faces in opposite direction of the monitor. Therefore, to take a picture of a user while watching on the screen a person to whom the user is speaking, it is necessary to change the direction of the imaging device every time. In a cellular phone equipped with an imaging device 1 according to the invention, on the front side 1a provided with a monitor 4 of a housing 100 of the cellular phone, a lens 2 of the imaging device is disposed facing outwardly. Further, a viewfinder 3a is provided facing in the same direction as that of the lens 2.
This patent was filled in the US in 2002, and probably was filled in Japan much earlier (Patent Abstracts of Japan, 11-146034, May 28, 1999.) Notice the similarity to the shape and locations of elements to the Kyocera VP-210 in Figure 33.
The real first camera phone
But the first commercially available phone was correctly identified by Eisaku Ohbuchi-san at DMP Digital Media Professionals, Dr. Peter Weigand at Micronas, and Tony Henning, Managing Editor, The Mobile Imaging Report form Future Image Inc.
Kyocera Corporation   s President: Kensuke Itoh, showed the VP-210 with a CMOS image sensor with approximately 110,000 pixels and a 2.0-inch reflective TFT color LCD at the Business Show '99 Tokyo.
The phone could transmits and receives images in real time at a rate of approximately two frames per second, making it the world's mobile first color videophone. In addition, users can send and receive e-mail with image attachments by using the P-Mail DX (deluxe) service offered by the DDI Pocket Telephone Group
Source Kyocera
Figure 3: First camera phone, Kyocera VP-210
The VP-210 had a 65k color 2.0-inch reflective TFT color LCD (size: approximately 40 mm x 30 mm. The phone was featured in a UK magazine article (PC World) in May 2000 with the SRP of    36.19.
Kyocera Corporation, headquartered in Kyoto, Japan, has been developing high-tech products, high-performance materials and electronic components since 1959.
The second camera phone
Don Lee at NexusChips had a totally different idea, and said,    As far as I know the world   s fist camera phone was the Samsung Anycall CDMA camera phone, SCH-V200 in June, 2000. The SCH-V200 had a 1.5 inch color TFT-LCD, 350K pixel and 20 pictures storage. It was released at "KIECO 2000 exhibition" in April, 2000. The  SCH-V200 was not a successful product. Then, Japanese camera phone, Sharp's SH04 was released in November, 2000.   
Source Samsung?
Figure 4: Samsung   s SCH-V200
Chris.Turner at Business-Advantage got some data from his friend Tony Henning Managing Editor, The Mobile Imaging Report form Future Image. The Camera Phone was the fifth multi-function hand-held phone developed by Samsung, after the Internet Phone, MP3 Phone, Watch Phone, and TV Phone. The unit featured a fixed lens located on the upper backside of the phone, and the subject captured by the lens is displayed on the TFT-LCD. Once the subject has been framed correctly, the user presses the shutter button on the bottom of the TFT-LCD. The Camera Phone can take 20 pictures at 350,000-pixel resolution and included a CD-ROM for picture editing and a data cable to connect the phone to a PC
We couldn   t find any of references on this phone in English, but found a dozen in Russian, and did see things in the text that suggested it was indeed an April 2000 event. Kudos to Don for finding this obscure little beauty.
And the third camera phone
How Sharp got credit for being first is a mystery, except that Sharp make such a claim in a 2000 document (http://sharp-world.com/corporate/info/his/h_company/2000/)...    The J-SH04 was the industry's first mobile phone to feature an integrated 110,000-pixel CMOS image sensor for taking digital photos.     Now it is interesting that the Kyocera and the Sharp have the same resolution, but the Sharp   s camera is on the back side, so it was intended as a camera and not a video conference phone like the Kyocera. Vodafone echoes the claim at http://www.vodafone.jp/english/release_detail/e20030326_02/e20030326_03.html, and even the history of photography   s timeline (http://www.marcine.com/photohistorytimelinefr.html ) gives them credit.
Source Sharp
Figure 5: Sharp   s J-SH04 camera phone
Like the Kyocera VP-210, the Sharp J-SH04 had a 65k color 2.0-inch screen and could show up 12 lines of text.
It gets a little confusing because also in October 2000, Sharp is credited with the J-Phone J-SH04 and it is shown as a clam-shell. 
Source Sharp
Figure 6: The other J-Phone?
FYI on Sharp, the company started in 1912 making mechanical pencils     check this site for some fascinating history. http://encyclopedia.thefreedictionary.com/Sharp%20Corporation 
What about the PDA?
David Kasik, of Boeing, who is something of a historian himself, pointed out that the big step that combined the phone, the PDA, and the camera began to happen in 1997. Says David,    Now you can argue that the Xybernaut portable system had accomplished the same thing two years earlier, but it really was not until 1997 that the average person had access to the pieces necessary to assemble a camera phone, which is when it really started happening. PDA's combined with cellular cards and cameras were visibly in use at most technology trade fairs in 1998.  So the idea of assembling the technology more or less accreted over a 3-4 year period, and perfectly functional camera phones assembled from off the shelf pieces were out there for a year or so, before it occurred to the cellular carriers to formally offer them.   
Camera attachment
Michael Kanello posted my question on his blog on Cnet, and L.Cosh-Ishii, from Wireless Watch responded with an interesting side note. Lars said Toshiba who made the 1st camera for a cellphone (see ). The Camesse was stand alone unit in late '99 that connected to your handset and allowed people to take photo's & "customize" them w/PDA type stylus pen & send thru the phone as e-mail attach!
Source L.Cosh-Ishii, Wireless Watch
Figure 7: Toshibia   s Camesse camera module for phones and PDAs
Lars probably saw an early unit because the camera didn   t    officially    go on sale un February 2000 when NTT DoCoMo introduced theToshiba's camesse petit. It was a picture-mail communication tool with a 110,000-pixel CMOS camera with a 312 x 230 pixel color LCD, and touch-sensitive panel to enable the user to take a picture and draw on it. 
Source unknown 
Figure 8: Example of picture-mail with hand notation
This picture is stored in JPEG format and sent with text as an e-mail to another camesse petit or PCs over the Internet. Though the e-mail is sent or received via cellular phone at a speed of 9,600 bps in those days. The Snapmail system newly developed by NTT DoCoMo then shortened the time required to approximately 26 seconds for a 10 Kbyte picture-mail. 
The camesse petit weighs only 170 g, and operates with 2 LR6 alkaline batteries. The body is designed to appeal to young ladies, according to Information Media and Consumer Products excerpt found at Toshiba   s website. (http://www.toshiba.co.jp/tech/review/2000/high2000/pdf/h0004.pdf) Additonal information on this very popular device can be found at: http://photojpn.org/notes/node.php?id=30
No one and everyone
And Alexly Trushin  at Austek asked,    I understand your attempts to figure out a hero, but I believe the father is not one and unknown. Who was the author of wheel? At the same time, Sharp can have an appointed hero or deputy hero. I do not know the name and I am not sure I'd like to figure out it. Because this question is historical as well as the question who was the father of PDA. Not the name, but the device. David Potter? Jeff Raskin? Hawkins? Or Bill Gates? All together, but nobody individually. Am I wrong?   
And Jim Oyler from E&S suggests it may not have been that simple , saying,    As you know, ideas tend to percolate around and no one person actually deserves all the credit.  But who knows?    Several others like Andrers Pfeiffer at MicroCosmos Design Report expressed similar thoughts, and Alessandro Gatti at Cresta Systems suggested no one was THE inventor.
Quite a few folks, like Peter Glaskowsky and my son in law Pat Madden, suggested it was Chester Gould.  
Source US Post Office
Figure 9: Chester Gould   s Dick Tracy and his wrist TV, circa 1931
However, Akio Tanaka at Macromedia says he read about it and that it was a team at J-Phone (now sold to Vodafone and is known as Vodafone KK) and Sharp who worked on this idea and popularized it in Japan. It became a killer feature for J-Phone, and KDDI and DoCoMo followed later. Japan was the first market where camera-phones have become the standard. 
Unsung heroes
Wolfgang Gruener at Toms Hardware said,    While you are giving that guy credit (hope you find him) do the same with John Edwards, since he is some kind of a sad story in this whole industry. There is enough evidence that he is the first guy who was running a functional cellphone system, but he forgot to patent this whole thing - i.e. - he is not getting any license fees whatsoever. This guy lives in Dorset, England.   
Rogier Smit at Playlogic International in the Netherlands thinks it might be a couple in the Netherlands. It was in the newspapers because they never received any credit or compensation from Nokia whom they had sent the idea to.    If you do some research,    says Rogier,    you'll find it. It was in the papers about 18 months ago. I think they are still trying to get accreditation and/or compensation.   
Manish Sing at Nvidia was kind enough to contact  Mr. Masafumi Matsumoto Corporate Senior Executive Director, Information and Communication Systems Business at Sharp Corporation for us, and learned fromMr. Sing and his other contacts at Sharp that they weren't aware of the original inventor of the concept of "camera with phone" however it is believed it was invented by a young engineer who belongs to their semiconductor division. He (or she) shared such idea with planning people of their cell phone division. The planning people believed that there must be a market since they also wanted to check and see how their kids are doing while they are at work.
So Masafumi-san said that if I want to award someone, he thinks I better gives the medal to the management guy who was responsible for the development of the first "camera with phone".
And finally, I include the observation of Darren McPhee at ATI, who postulated,    Maybe a more interesting story is how this is an industry-first;  and no one has jumped forward to take credit for something.    Darwwn   s right and I/we may have inadvertently opened Pandora   s box as all the inventors now call their lawyers in hopes of getting a cut of this explosive market development. Oh dear.
Fun stuff
One respondent, Steve Carroll of Tigermetrics remembers being at CeBIT in 1997 and making a presentation in front of Vodafone. Maxon and some other Far East manufacturers, Steve says,    They all laughed and even more when we mentioned video    
Two of our respondents, Bill Homes at DivX says it was his idea (and thanked us for recognizing him), and Ari Firestone at Learn BY DVD in Canada, said he did it in 1991 whilst driving down a back road talking with his stock broker, and to (sadly abbreviate his really humorous story (which we   ll send to you if you ask), says,    As I grabbed the phone and flung it out the window, I screamed uncontrollably at the top of my voice, "they can send a man to the moon so why the hell can't they make a cellular phone with a camera built in to it!!!!"  On the other end of the line my lawyer, who also happened to play golf with the then CEO of Motorola's cellular phone division, said quietly, "good idea" as the phone line went dead.     
Other fun stuff
If you   re interested in interesting gadgets and awards, go to Top 100 Forgotten Gadgets http://www.mobilemagazine.com/archives/2005/06/top_100_forgott.html
Dick Tracy wrist radio T-shirt www.cafepress.com/dicktracy.7613014 
Summary
So piecing together all the data we got it looks like the time line for camera phones is:
As for who is the unsung hero(s), well we still don   t know, but maybe someone reading this is one of them, or knows one of them and will write us (jon@jonpeddie.com) and enlighten us all.
Epilog     The inventor
After we completed the survey and published our results in two places ("Jon Peddie's Tech Watch," July 18, 2005, Volume 5, Number 14, Jon Peddie Research, Tiburon Ca., "Handheld Multimedia Devices: Semiconductor and IP enabling multimedia on handhelds and phones," copyright 2004, Jon Peddie Research, Tiburon Ca.) which got world wide distribution, some diligent readers kept digging, and in November of 2005, Wolfgang Gruener of Tom's Guide Publishing found THE inventor of the camera phone.
Equipped with the information from the above research, Gruener  poked into Kyocera's massive Japan operation, in the hope to find the man, woman or group behind the idea of the VP-210. 
It took several weeks until I was able to find the right contact, reported Gruner. But eventually, Masumi Sakurai from Kyocera's PR department at the firm's Kyoto headquarters assisted us and I spoke to Kazumi Saburi.
Source Wolfgang Gruner, TGdaily
Saburi led the VP-210 project back in 1997 as section manager of Kyocera's Yokohama research and development center and brought the device from idea to life. Today, Saburi is the manager of the Fifth Engineering Development Department for Mobile Communication Equipment in Kyocera's Corporate Mobile Communication Equipment Group.
Where did Saburi get the idea to build a camera into a cell phone?
So his initial thoughts were centered around a video rather than still cameras, something that is only recently become more popular in phones. "We knew that a handset must be equipped with a camera and a full-color display for visual communications of any kind - the former is required for catching the image of the speaker and the latter for showing it on the receiver's terminal. This pretty much outlines our first idea," he said.
Saburi's idea was to have users exchange pictures by email, using the SMS services of the phone network. He began working on the project back in 1997, and "the Kyocera visual phone came to the market in 1999, but we had nourished  for several years before we started development."
Looking back in the historical records 40 years ago, UK banks told John Edwards that no one ever would be interested in carrying a phone around all the time and ultimately denied him a loan to develop and market his cellphone idea. But Saburi didn't have any such difficulty. "Top management aggressively encouraged us to develop the product. We also believed that such a product would improve Kyocera's brand image."
Saburi's research on how consumers used cameras was a big reason for inventing the camera phone: "The cell phone's strongest feature is its portability. This alone creates the application opportunity for the camera phone: We imagined that users are likely to accept the minor weight addition of a camera in a cell phone and carry around 'weightless' photo albums to enjoy with friends. But they do not use heavy cameras or bring along traditional physical photo albums all the time. A cell phone with a camera and color display provided a completely new value for users: It could be used as a phone, a camera and a photo album. This is also where we started from a marketing point of view. From a technical view, we were also confident that we could develop such a device. The approach was to combine an existing teleconference system and a primary wireless data transmission technology."
The phone was a quick success in Japan and was the beginning of a cultural change in how phones were used. "After the release of Kyocera's visual phone for DDI pocket, now Willcom, and J-phone, now Vodafone K.K., introduced the service "SHA-mail" , which greatly contributed to boost the sales of camera-installed cellular handsets in Japan. SHA-mail greatly changed Japanese telecommunication culture. A key factor to support the boom of camera-installed handsets was in my opinion the evolution of the camera module. We saw remarkable downsizing of the modules, the quality and function were amazingly improved - to a level that was almost equal to digital cameras."
As you can imagine, squeezing a camera into a phone wasn't easy. Saburi remembers plenty of challenges. "I remember that I had discussions with R&D staff, project members and top management several road blocks we came across - again and again. What is the best angle for camera mounting? How can we improve the data transmission speed for minimizing the time lag while talking? What is the best balance of the image quality and frame rate? What about the battery? We faced a pile of challenges that we had never had before." About a dozen engineers worked on the key technologies, taking about two years to build the first model.
Today, Saburi is in charge of Kyocera's cell handset R&D, and he is working on phones with auto focus and 3 megapixel resolution. "In Japan, we are currently enjoying taking pictures and playing music on our cell phones. We can even make payments with our handsets, just like you use a credit card. We call this the 'osaifu-keitai' function. My guess is that the next big thing would happen after a seamless ubiquitous network environment is established."
I asked Saburi if there is anything he could change about mobile phones and the way we use mobile phones, what would it be? "We should not forget the key function of phones. Cellular telephones enable us to communicate with anyone, at anytime, from anywhere. This is the strongest feature of cell phones. We should focus much more on this feature of communication, which would allow us to extend battery life. How much fun would it be, if we could enjoy endless multi-communication, without having to worry about the battery? Of course, this is my personal opinion. I myself prefer the simple cell phone models that focus on just the communication feature."
And there you have it, the ultimate irony: the inventor of the camera phone, for all his influence over how technology is used, is the ultimate cell Luddite! I hope you enjoyed our journey to the heart of this innovative technology as much as I did.
Final comment (honest)
I (Jon Peddie) want to point out that this article and the research behind it is a classic example of how Wikipedia works and why it is so rich and valuable to the world at large.
Jon Peddie's Tech Watch, JULY 18, 2005     Volume 5, Number 14
Dr. Jon Peddie is one of the pioneers of the graphics industry, starting his career in computer graphics in 1962. After the successful launch of several graphics manufacturing companies, Peddie began JPA in 1984 to provide comprehensive data, information and management expertise to the computer graphics industry. In 2001 Peddie left JPA and formed Jon Peddie Research (JPR) to provide customer intimate consulting and market forecasting services. Peddie lectures at numerous conferences on topics pertaining to graphics technology and the emerging trends in digital media technology. Recently named one of the most influential analysts, he is frequently quoted in trade and business publications, and contributes articles to numerous publications including as well as appearing on CNN and TechTV. Peddie is also the author of several books including Graphics User Interfaces and Graphics Standards (1992), High Resolution Graphics Display Systems, and Multimedia and Graphics Controllers, and a contributor to Advances in Modeling, Animation, and Rendering.
California Parlor Car Tours is a tour company in California that has been operating tours since 1924. The bus tours originate from San Francisco and Los Angeles that include destinations like Yosemite National Park, Monterey, Carmel, Hearst Castle, Big Sur and the Napa Wine Country.
They are based in San Francisco, since its date of inception in 1924.
Zach Lewis is an aspiring actor, singer, and writer. He was born in 1991 From
Mike Lewis and Ann Lewis. he is the oldest of three siblings, Andrea who is 10
York City. At age three, his family then moved to MiddleTown Ohio. he doesn't 
Zach started acting when he moved to Prescott in 2001. He was found by 
Kay in the Great River Road production of A Connecticut Yankee. Judy Johnson 
Year Zach worked with Claudia haas in her production of A MidSummer Night's
Dream, at The Phipps Center in Hudson. he held the part of Theseus. "cluadia
Also Zach was involved in the schools Drama Rama class. he was nominated by
Rama coach Dianna Marshal says, "working with Zach has been a pleasure, i can count
Zach Aspires to do more shows and aspires to be in movies. he loves when 
Zach is also a very talented singer. many people in his community recognize
Zach stopped his singing for Four years as his voice became deeper. He then
Sang kareoke at a bar for his uncle's wedding. "Suddenly the bar tender and
All the drunks at the bars were telling me how far i could go and how good i
Fair but did not place. However a talent scout asked him to sing at the Ames 
Center in April. Zach enjoys singing and wants to someday have a record deal, but for now
Zach is also a published poet and has six books that have yet to be
Zach, and in his just written compilation The Very Best Of Zach. with 
Zach's permission we are able to give you a copy of this poem,
The Earth
Zach has a collection of books as well, here is a list
Zach                  Released 2004
Time                  Released 2004
Pain                  released 2005
I Am Me               Released 2006
The very best of Zach Released 2006
Dreamer               Realesed 2006 
Prescott journal clip, www.prescottjournal.com
Founder of Buck Automation Int. High Volume Mail Envelope Inserters SAMI(tm).
Buck Crowley has over 25 years of developing Products and founding Companies. He has designed more than 65 commercially successful products, more than $900 million in revenue. Most of these products enable the production of printing products. He has been awarded 75 US patents , mostly related to printing or related products.
He has authored over 150 articles and is a frequent speaker at industry conferences.
He has founded three companies: Lincoln Technologies, Automation, Inc., and Roll Systems Inc. Roll Systems, made the INC. 500 twice , with annual revenues reaching $46 million. Roll Systems was founded to pioneer high volume on-demand printing and mail production.
He was awarded 40 patents at Roll Systems Inc. for their outstanding and innovative products.
Four of his product designs were awarded the Graphic Arts Technical Foundation "Intertech Award" given for "outstanding commercially successful products". He has received numerous industry awards. He is a Member of the Who's Who of American Inventors.
Some of his Graphic-Art product contributions are: -Butler Automatic: Infeed tension, Web Guide, and Splicers. -Web Press: Ink/Water, automatic cutoff and register controls (Micro-register). -Web Printing Controls: CCR, Color-to-Color closed loop register. -Automation Inc./ Print-Cafe, EFI: AutoCount, for accurate press counts and warehouse bar-code system. -In-line finishing: plow, slit, rotary-cut.
Additional information about the AV7 Bible can be found at this web address: http://www.AV7.org 
AV7 is an accurate literal translation, not a paraphrase. It incorporates many new features that have never been seen before in any previous Bible. 
The first edition of the new AV7 Bible was published by Barbour Publishing and is available for only one dollar per copy at more than 2,000 Dollar Tree Stores throughout the United States. Copies can also be ordered from the AV7 website. 
Mixed Up Records is a second hand record shop located in the hidden Otago Lane in the Hillhead area of Glasgow. All types of music are catered for. Vinyl, CDs and DVDs are up for sale. A great place for a browse. Stock arrives daily, provided by people exchanging or offloading their music collections. 
Harry Rix currently goes to pembroke
This new rising trend originated in Ithica University in New York. Three freshman students performed this act for almost a year untill professors gained wind of their doing. Along with the professors discovery it started to spread rapidly throughout other nearby colleges. The three students who wont be named were cought and expelled from the university. Although there are such high risks with performing this act many students go forth regardless and capel during college parties and other occasions.
Caras Magazine is a Brazilian magazine that its also edited in Argentina etc. The magazine has an Island in Brazil. It is a ``chusmerio    , that means general interested content of famous people.
A Brazilian punk rock/emo Band originated from Rio de Janeiro founded in 2004. First metioned as nobix the original members of the band are William Byers (Vocals - Nobix), The Founder Jose Walter Pereira (Bass), Gulherme Guth (Guitar - Nobix), and the outrageous drummer Pedro Henrique Lucena (Drummer - Nobix). In october 2004 Nobix came to an end with the leave of the drummer Pedro Henrique to dedicate its' self for football. In 2005 Nobix Stayed on a pause trying to form anothe rooster with a new name Radact with a new guitarist Joao Pedro Brandao (Guitarist) and with a slightly modification in the rooster william went from vocalist to drummer, but still there was no vocalist until the year of 2006. In the year of 2006 the band got a second guitarist Pedro Caetano Leite (Rythym Guitarist) and a new vocalist jazz influenced Matthew Carter (Vocalist. The name was then changed to OCK (over Cast Kids) but there was a conflict because the name apparently was already the name of the  official fan club, so the name changed to 3 to fall where it still remains now a days. 3 to fall has being doing shows in schools and future projects for shows around Rio de Janeiro and Brasil. With its Blast from the Bass the high drums and the Distorted guitars conflict with the low vocals 3 to fall has being conquistating its place on the music business.
Josh Scogin (full name:Josh Scogin)Is the ex-vocalist of Norma Jean, and the Current of The Chariot. Scogin inpreses audiences with his loud skreeming, on (and off) stage theatrics and and deep, thought provoking lyrics.
Josh Scogin at Cornerstone Festival '06 with The Chariot
Basketballboards.net, or BBB.net, is a basketball based forums site. It owns.
BBB > RealGM
Co-author of ''The Biology of Life Span: A Quantitative Approach''. New York: Harwood Academic Publisher, ISBN 3718649837, and the following books:
Handbook of Models for Human Aging,  Burlington, MA : Elsevier Academic Press, 2006. ISBN 0123693918 
Handbook of the Biology of Aging,  Sixth Edition. Academic Press. San Diego, CA, USA, 2006,  ISBN 0120883872 ,   http://syndetics.com/index.aspx?isbn=0120883872/TOC.HTML&client=vtech&type=hw7
Grandmotherhood - The Evolutionary Significance of the Second Half of Female Life.  Rutgers University Press. New Brunswick, NJ,  USA, 2005,  ISBN 081353609X
Ruling Russia: Law, Crime, and Justice in a Changing Society. Boulder, CO: Rowman & Littlefield Publ., Inc,  ISBN 0742536750
Modulating Aging and Longevity. 2003. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, The Netherlands, 2003,  ISBN 1402013698
The Encyclopedia of Population. New York, Macmillan Reference USA, 2003,  ISBN 0028656776  
Encyclopedia of Aging, New York, Macmillan Reference USA, 2002,  ISBN 0028654722
Sex and Longevity: Sexuality, Gender, Reproduction, Parenthood, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 2000, ISBN 3540677402
Who's Who in Science and Engineering, in Marquis Who's Who, 7th Edition, 2003-2004 
Who's Who in Medicine and Healthcare, in Marquis Who's Who, 4th Edition, 2002-2003 
Who's Who in America, in Marquis Who's Who, 2002 and 2003 Editions
Sudio Sudarsan was born in a middle-class, South Indian Brahmin family in Madras, Tamil Nadu.  He is armed with multiple degrees in Engineering (Chemical, Environmental, Mechanical, and Energy) and MBA from Thunderbird, business school continually ranked No. 1 by reputed business journals.
Sudio was voted as the best graduating student by the Thunderbird faculty and executive staff through the ballot in 2005.  He was honored with General Barton Kyle Yount award.  Fellow peers of the graduating class of 2005 voted Sudio as Thunderbird President Circle winner for his contribution to Thunderbird community during his tenure and excellence in leadership.  Sudio graduated in the top 2% to be Honor Member at Beta Gamma Sigma (Business Honor Society).
In an interview with Pulse, US newsmagazine for Non Resident Indians, talks about his post-MBA consulting life.  He currently lives in Chicago IL.
The website is divided into two sections to cater for developers and linguists seperately from end users.
Microsoft's Indic  is availible from the website. The Indic IME enables computer users to type Indic scripts, (including conjunct formation), using a variety of keyboards. 
Golden goals are all time great goals performed by all time great sportsmen, eg Tony Lockett and Ronaldo and matthew rocks mother 
FLI - Flexible Line Interpretation.  This is an enhanced graphics mode on the 8-bit Commodore 64 computer.  It was invented by Roland Toegel, who is also known by the alias Crossbow in the Demoscene. The importance of this graphics mode is that it allows higher quality computer graphics on the C64 platform.
This term and technique has been used in the subculture of the Demoscene circa 1990's.
The technique uses a hardware trick to enhance the original graphics modes of the C64.
1: Definition, Flexible Line Interpretation (graphics format on 8-bit computers), http://acronyms.thefreedictionary.com/Flexible+Line+Interpretation+(graphics+format+on+8-bit+computers)
2: Definition, in context of demoscene, Demo_(computer_programming)
3: Article, http://www.studiostyle.sk/dmagic/gallery/gfxmodes.htm
4: Media, sample images in original format, http://dettke.homepage.t-online.de/iflis/
Codename: Rocky was a Ska/Rock oriented band from Southern California. Formed in 1997 by members of current bands from the area (I.E. Grover's Headache, Low Pressure, Channel Six)they went one to become a very big name on the modern Ska front. They played their official last show at the Anaheim House Of Blues on January first, 2004, though they recently played a reunion show with another SoCal ska band, Jeffries Fan Club. JFC was celebrating their 10 year anniversary.
Nicholas Cordova was born on July 29, 1986 in Anaheim, California. He spent the first 4 years of his life living in Corona, CA before moving to Orange, CA where he would grow up. Nicholas or Nick as he is known to most attended St. Norbert's Catholic school and was apart of the first kindergarten class. After St. Norbert's, Nick went on to attend Mater Dei High School in Santa Ana, CA. There Nick played football for his freshman and sophomore years before pursuing a job to help pay for his expenses which would utlimately help his single mother focus the family funds on his two younger syblings, Candace and Daniel. Nick began working at Produce World in Orange, CA. While most would struggle to balance work and school Nick seemed to do it with ease. He maintained both an honor roll worthy g.p.a and a nice bank account. Nick would go on to graduate with honors and academic commendations from Mater Dei in May of 2004. He decided that it was in his best interest to attend Fullerton College so that he may save money while at the same time attend one of Orange County and California's best Community Colleges. During his Second semester Nick would answer the call of opportunity as he always does and left Produce World to work for Kaiser Permanente in the Pharmacy. Nick was like nothing the company had ever seen, he was a favorite of both staff and the members of the health care provider. After two years of hard work and a 3.6 g.p.a., Nick would leave Fullerton College and his home of Orange County for San Diego State University where he starts this fall as a Junior. The future holds many things for this bright young man. Teacher? Lawyer? Professional wrestler? Of course! It is all just a matter of time for this talented young man.
Fall to Grace is a Metalcore band from Creston Iowa. They formed in late 2005. Dan Albrechtsen, Casey Mclain and Trevor Kinkade started the band.
Current Members:
Kole Young(vocals)
Dan Albrechtsen(guitar)
Casey Mclain(guitar)
Trevor Kinkade(drums)
Nick Brown(bass)
Josiah Ury(keyboards)
Former Members:
Braydon Potter(vocals)
Their myspace page, 
In this type of motor, also called the Scharge or variable-brush AC commutator motor, a different method of injecting the speed-varying e.m.f. into the secondary winding is employed. Referring to Figure 45, the supply is led to the rotor winding through slip rings, the rotor winding being the primary. The secondary winding is on the stator. On the rotor is an additional regulating winding with a commutator. The ends of the stator (secondary) windings are connected to brushes disposed on the commutator. 
The first point to notice is that when the rotor is at standstill, the rotating field sweeps past the secondary winding and the brushes at synchronous speed. As the motor gains speed, the frequency in the secondary windings and, due to the commutator, the frequency at the brushes are both reduced simultaneously. No matter at what speed the rotor is moving, the brush frequency ties up with the secondary frequency and, as a result, voltage can be picked up from the commutator and injected into the secondary windings. 
The method of varying the e.m.f. injected into the secondary windings is by altering the amount of commutator spanned by each pair of brushes. The pairs of brushes are arranged so that they can be moved simultaneously equal distances from the in-line position. When in-line, each pair of brushes rests on the same commutator segment. At this position, each secondary phase winding is short-circuited and no phase voltage is injected; consequently the speed is that of a normal induction motor. Movement of the brushes in one direction or the other increases or decreases the speed. Brush movement can be done by hand wheel or by means of a small servo or pilot motor, remotely-controlled. The general characteristics of this rotor-fed motor are the same as those of the stator-fed type. 
The Knoffler Calls are from the late 80's or early 90's; They are seemingly random calls that are in this authors opinion the funniest prank calls that have ever been done.  Most are "R" rated for language and in some calls racial slurs. 
The Grob 109B was developed out of the Grob 109 by Grob Aerospace of Mindelheim Mattsies of Germany.
The basic concept was that of a two seater self launching motorglider with a 57 foot wing span.  The basic airframe construction was in fibreglass.  Total weight was around 1870 lbs with a load of 506 lbs.  Cruising speed was in the region of 100 knots on the 90 horsepower engine.  Though Grob made the engine,  it was based on a VW car engine   The engine could be turned off in flight and propeller could be feathered.  The aircraft then became a pure glider,  with a best glide ratio of around 1:28.   The pilot and passengers sat side by side and enjoyed excellent views from the large perspex cockpit. 
Uglynet is a social networking site that was founded in February 2006. Launched in mid August of the same year, the Uglynet social network aims to provide a meeting place for anyone who considers themselves ugly.
On the premise that ugliness is equaled by someones inner-beauty, the site promotes pride in their members bad looks. Various competitions are available to members, including the ongoing 'Ugliest Countries' competition (based on a ratio of members from each country compared to population) and 'World's Ugliest Person', where members may sign up for rating by site visitors.
Membership of the Uglynet social network is free. The site advertises upcoming features which include individual blog hosting and the ability to make contact with other members. The site has a simple user-interface that resembles the columnar approach of yahoo. 
Nathan Peter Azarcon is born on January 29. A former bassist to many bands. He is also known as one of the original band member of the band Rivermaya. Recently he is a member of the band, Kapatid.
Nathan Peter Azarcon is born on January 29. A former bassist to many bands. He is also known as one of the original band member of the band Rivermaya. Recently he is a member of the band, Kapatid.
Located in Oxnard, California, it is home to about 2,800 students. It is one of the oldest high school in Oxnard, with forty years of age. Recently it has struggled in athletics but has had tremendous success with their squads. It is famous for their exciting rally's.
Vazquez Manuel, www.becauseiwenthere.com
Raiders," which boasts an array of 
Term used to describe something which is not functioning properly, typically an electronic or mechanical device.  For example, "My computer's hard drive is h0rked".  Very similar to FUBAR.
Playstation Spot is a service offered be Sony for the PlayStation Portable. It is a WiFi connection set up in areas in Europe, Australia and Japan that allows PSP owners to download content including game demos, photos, video and music as well as promotional content. For a map of spots in the UK you can visit the site: http://www.playstationspot.co.uk/
Fun With Akatsuki is a popular internet cartoon parody made by 18 years old Alex Novikov aka OmniStrife. It revolves around Akatsuki - a criminal organization from the Anime Naruto, they were initially made as gif animations on Narutofan forums. Lately, OmniStrife remade them into full streaming videos, including music from the original Naruto show, and voice acting provided by him, the videos are viewed on Youtube by thousands. There are 9 episodes in the 1st season. The 10th episode will start a new season known as "FWA X", FWA for Fun With Akatsuki, X for the Roman number of 10, It'll have a few episodes that make a whole arc sorounding the Chunnin Exams and an improved drawing style. A teaser for FWA X is currently out on Youtube.
The yogi Bear song is a rugby/drinking song performed by many rugby clubs on social (drinking) occasions. It follows a simple call and response pattern and the stanzas become progressively rude and offensive towards the end of the song.
One version out of many goes as follows.
In Yellowstone park there is a bear '''Yogi''' (all: Yogi)
In Yellowstone park there is a bear Yogi, ''Yogy bear''
Yogi, Yogi Bear, Yogi, Yogi Bear
In Yellowstone park there is a bear Yogi, Yogy bear
Yogi has a little friend, '''Booboo''', ''Boobo Bear''
Yogi has an Enemy '''ranger''', ''Ranger Smith''
Yogi has a girlfriend, '''Cindy''', ''Cindy Bear''
Booboo likes it up the arse, '''''Brown Bear'''''
Cindy likes it on the fridge, '''Polar''', ''Polar Bear''
Yogi's dick is long and green, '''Cucumm''', ''Cucumm Bear'' (Cucumber)
Booboo has a cheezy knob, '''Cummin''', ''Cummin Bear'' (Camenbert)
Cindy doesn't shave her pubes '''Grizzly''', ''Grizzly Bear''
Cindy hates it up the arse '''something''', ''Something she can't bear''
The European School of Economics is a private college of higher educationoffering unique graduate and undergraduate programmes at its centres in London, New York, Rome, Milan and Lucca.
The European School of Economics has prepared more than four thousands graduate for leadership positions in the key international fields of business studies such as finance, marketing, communications and political science.
The School specializes in today's emerging and cutting edge business sectors, such as entertainment, fashion, music and sports, among others, with emphasis on today's cornerstone issues of ethics and aesthetics.
Working in collaboration with more than fifteen hundred leading international companies, including some of FORTUNE'S 100 Best Companies to Work For, the European School of Economics offers the most extensive and comprehensive university placement programme available today.
The opportunity to attend the European School of Economics is limited annually to one hundred students per campus. This ensures the quality and individualized attention that sets the School apart.
Reid Kerr College, 
Author of the HAH rootkit (HAHkit) of which several files were accidently included with an upgrade of Red Hat Linux. This mistake, which was discovered within an hour of the update, nevertheless enabled hackers in the know to fully compromise a number of Internet Service Providers. In early 2006, Dahlin was questioned by authorities regarding the incident but not charged with any wrong doing. Dahlin is the founder of Disentomb, a group primarily advocating the concept of full disclosure.
Feb 22, 2006 Philadelphia Inquirer B-13 "Local Internet Provider warns users to change passwords".
2006-02-10 RHSA-2006:0207-10 Red Hat Security Advisory 
Rizwan ahmed is Director of Algorithm Consulting (Pvt) Ltd. he was born on 15th july 1979. he did his MBA from Institute of Business Administration (IBA)in 2001. After his graduation he joined Algorithm consulting and reached to a position of Director within a span of 4 years
This movie tells the tale of Sam Seed, an insane mass murderer who is set to be executed at the hands of Warden Wright. While strapped in the electrocution chair just before the executioner flips the switch Wright askes Seed, "Do you have any last words?" Seed replies, "I'll see you again." After three failed attempts to kill seed, they pronounce the man who has blood seeping from his eyes yet is still breathing, dead. Seed is bound and buried alive.
The enraged, blood-soaked madman claws and bites his ways to the surface and now is bent on destroying everyone who caused him to suffer.The reign of violence that follows will redefine the boundaries of extreme gore, physical & mental torture explored through cinema.
Based on a true story. Seattle 1972
This smart hunk of sexy meat man is a very funny and clever thinker. With many friends he can often make anyone laugh. He is popular and lovable with friends from different schools and from across the world! Known as 'Jb' or 'Jabba' he gets his reputation from being so funny and enjoyable!
Audiophox is Jochem Hamerling an Utrecht (Netherlands) based dj producer with various styles.
He is known for  his Trance, house club and progressive dj sets and releases.
Audiophox is also known as Valentin Molotov. 
Short Discography:
Spitfire - The Highlight ISRSL002 -2001
Audiophox - Highlife (futuristic theme) ISRSL011 -2005
Audiophox - my way of communication (artist album) ISRLP080 -2005
Audiophox - Electronification (artist album) ISRLP090 -2006
Some past gigs:
Studio 80 (back2back dj set with mark norman)
Gekkehuis HappyDayzz (with bruze and many more)
Exclaim! (with danjo & rob styles, sied van riel and more)
As part of its activities, The International Monetary Fund (IMF) conducts Financial Sector Assessment Programs FSAP for member countries. It was established as a program by both the IMF and the World Bank in 1999 and provides member countries, upon request, a comprehensive assessment of the respective financial systems. The IMF conducts the program to assess the strengths and weaknesses of a country's financial sector. Participation in the program is entirely voluntary, however many countries deem the programme necessary, with over two thirds of the IMF member countries participating in the Program.
When a country participates in an FSAP program, a technical team of financial experts from the IMF visit the respective country (mission) to hold meetings and gather economic and financial statistical information in order to generate an initial assessment. After an initial assesment, the IMF will subsequently provide FSAP updates on a regular basis. A member country's central bank or financial authority will specify whether they want the results of an FSAP review to be publicized.
From the BBC television series 'Doctor Who'
Amphibius is a Mutate, a human that was changed by Magneto, that lived in the Savage Land, a tropical preserve hidden in Antarctica. He was the first of the Savage Land Mutates to see the X-men, and has fought not just the X-men but also Ka-Zar and Spider-Man. Amphibius was one of Magneto's first Savage Land Mutates, and has been involved in all the Mutates' subsequent activities. Presumably, Amphibius remains with the Mutates in the Savage Land. 
Amphibius is a frog-like mutate who can leap great distances, breathe underwater, and control aquatic life. 
Farren Ray is a Western Bulldogs player he wears the number 1. He is 186 centimetres tall and weighs 79 kilograms. He was born 23rd of March 1986. He recruited from peel thunder. (WA)He has been playing for Western Bulldogs since 2005. So far this year up to round 20 he has kicked a total of 7 goals and had 299 possesions. His sporting idol is Danny Green, favourite training drill is match prctice. His favourite hair product is wax and his superstiton is tying a double knot when tying up his boots. His all time favourite song is All for you by Sister Hazel and his favourite actor is Tom Hanks. If he could be anything outside of football it would be NFL and basket ball and his interests outside of football is cricket and socialising. 
Dudovica je malo selo koje se nalazi u blizini Lazarevca.
Geografska duzina: 20   15' 51,400"
Geografska sirina: 44   17' 49,627"
River 94.9 is a commercial radio station based in Ipswich, Queensland, Australia. The station, which broadcasts to South-East Queensland, opened in December 2001 in the old studios of Star 106.9, Their playlist originally included pop music, rock and dance with specialty programming including 'Wild Nights', licenced from Wild FM. In late 2003, after some small changes in administration, most specialty programmes disappeared. Still claiming to be 'the hit music station', they began playing less pop music and more hit music from the 1980s and early 1990s. They now position themselves in the competitive market as playing "The Biggest Variety of Hits from the 70's, 80's, 90's and whatever" with a no repeat workday.
The station is owned by Rural Press & Bunderburg Broadcasters, forming part of the Star Broadcasting Network which also currently has radio stations in Bundaberg and South Australia.
As of 2006, the shifts included Waynee "Poo" Roberts (former 4IP DJ) (breakfast), Jodie (morning) and Jay Goldman & Kane Reiken (drive). River949 is the first station in Australia to have "now playing" in the PS of their RDS (radio data system).
To 'Pull a Watson'
To organise a night out for a celebration of yours but not turn up. Usually turns out to be a better night out than if you were there. Number one excuse for not turning up is    Dicky Tummy   , other excuses can include Passport revoked, dog ate my car keys and I   m washing my hair.
This is also called as Johannes Gutenberg University of Mainz. This is located in Rheinland-Pflaz sate in Germany.
I am Suresh Kumar, presently pursuing my PhD in Chemistry in Johannes Gutenberg University of Mainz, Mainz, Germany. 
I was born in a small village Jangareddygudem, West Godavari District, Andhrapradesh, India.
I did my studies in Triveni College Jangareddygudem, I live there up to my Graduation!
And i went to Hyderabad for about two years to Pursue my Master of Science in Chemistry in University of Hyderabad, Andhrapradesh, India.
In the year of 2005 i came to Mainz to Pursue my Doctorate of Philosophy (PhD) in Chemistry.
Nolan Willard
Born in Singapore April 3rd 1993
Died:Unknown
Moved to San Francisco, California at 1 year of age
Parents divorced in S.F.
2 years later he moved to Maumee, Ohio (suburb of Toledo)
Between the ages of 3 and 9 he befriended several people as he was very popular. He was given the nickname Nolie by his grandmother. He has brother, age 17 currently.
In 2003 his Mom died.He moved to Shanghai,China.But He visited every year.He is supposed to return next year.He met many friends.Including a girlfriend.
More updates to come.
Contact details:ickboys@gmail.com
Nolan Willard has made several funny movies that are posted on youtube.
More updates coming soon!
Myself.I am his best friend.
Pallickal is a small village 2 km away from Kottarakara.  A nice village with paddy cultivation.  This place is famous for it's maramadi maholsavam.
Terry Trueman is the author of Inside Out.
Inside Out.
CMS matriculation higher secondary school was established in the year 1977 by coimbatore malayali samajam
Its present Principal Mr.H.Hajah Shariff.
Tirana FAN-atics (or Tirona FANatics), is a group of Ultras from the city of Tirana in Albania. They are the strongest supporters of SK Tirana and are very well known all over the country for their passionate support, excellent organization, their signature songs, etc.
In their passionate and strong support, they have robbed many other supporters of other teams from their banners, therefore making FANatics the number 1 supporters in the country.
He is SWP and BWP lil brother
Christen Ellrich is a Florida actress with several credits under her belt. Trained in martial arts and staff-fighting, she often incorporates stunt work in her roles. As of this writing, she finished filming the role of the demon Karah in a theatrical film based on the hit video game Devil May Cry for Capcom. The film is currently in post-production.
CMSDK is an Oracle java-based Object-oriented File system
Future CEO of AIB Bank plc
Prince Christoph (Kiko) Victorio Egon Humberto zu Hohenlohe-Langenburg, was born on November 8, 1956 in Lausanne, Switzerland. He was the elder son of Prince Alfonso Maximiliano zu Hohenlohe-Langenburg and of Princess Virginia (Ira) zu Furstenberg.
Kiko was arrested at the Bangkok airport on July 29, following the alteration of his visa expiry date. Kiko spent almost a week at the Bangkok Remand prison where he fell victim to a sudden illness and died on August 6. The cause of death is not yet known, although possible reasons include heat stroke, heart attack, infection and insulin deprivation.
Prince Christoph   s funeral was held in Marbella on August 16.
A term used by Herbert Blumer in his theory of Symbolic Interactionism to refer to the positivistic (positivism), often quantitative, scientific methods of sociological research which he largely rejected in favour of qualitative approaches such as ethnography. Variable analysis would typically involve the isolation of two variables in a process, one 'dependent' variable to be measured and another 'independent' variable to be controlled, much as in the study of physical or biological science. Blumer viewed this approach as simplistic and as glossing over the complexities of social interaction, leading him to be viewed as the founder of a new sociological school known as symbolic interactionism.
The term can equally be used by extension to refer to the use of such analysis, and the objections to its use, in other fields.
Blumer, Herbert. 1969. Symbolic Interactionism: Perspective and Method. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall
Hello,
I, graduated in Computer Science & Engineering (B.E.)(Aurangabad University) started professional career from Mumbai, my dream city...
I have a very good network of friends, who are now seperated across the firewalls...
Arceburgo is one of the smallest cities fo Minas Gerais state. This city keeps until now old costumes as Sao Joao Party, Folia de Reis, etc. Beyond this, Arceburgo economy is based on plantation of Coffee and Sugar Cane, Cory Industry and other small business. One of the most famous stores in Arceburgo is Loja da Bayja, famous by selling good and cheap closes. Many Arceburgo citizens left the city to study and work, the main cities that these citizens go is Sao Paulo, Campinas and Macae. In the holidays they use to go to Arceburgo to talk and see their families.
World war 2 war a war that defined history for the united stated, but the wars today are simply useless. The people that forge war today cannot achieve anything greater than already achieved, when was the last time you heard of a country winning a war?George bush,the president, is fighting a war for oil that is hidden from the people. You really want to know why we're over  in Iraq, it is because of oil, people are getting killed for oil.  16:21, 21 August 2006 (UTC)
John Hicks (1951-)
Ohio State
Offensive Tackle, 1970-1973-
You could make the argument that for one season, no offensive lineman had a better season than Ohio State's John Hicks had in 1973. He won the Lombardi and Outland Awards and finished 2nd to John Cappelletti for the Heisman Trophy. How loaded was the 1973 Ohio State team? RB Archie Griffin finished 5th and TB Randy Gradishar 6th. Hicks, along with Griffin, was the main cog on one of the most dominant offensive teams in college football history as the 1973 Buckeyes outscored teams 413 to 64 and blew out USC in the Rose Bowl.
The comeback: That Hicks was the road grader for such great running backs as Archie Griffin and Pete Johnson is all the more amazing when considering what he had to overcome. The 6-3, 258 pound tackle started as a sophomore in 1970, freshman weren't eligible, and helped them go to the Rose Bowl. In 1971, he started off the season in dominant fashion before injuring his knee and missing the last six games of the season. He came back to become an All-American in 1972 helping the Buckeyes to go back to the Rose Bowl. Then he had his monster 1973 season. A first round draft pick of the New York Giants, injuries would put a halt to his pro career.
The Rose Bowls: Hicks was the first player to ever start in three Rose Bowls and was part of a monster Ohio State. The unbeaten Buckeyes lost to Stanford 27-17 in the 1971 Rose Bowl. The 1973 Ohio State team got steamrolled by USC 42-17. 1974 would be Ohio State's year as they beat USC 42-21 as Hicks led the way to 323 rushing yards.
Dominant offensive lineman of his era?: While Alabama's John Hannah and Michigan's Dan Dierdorf are widely acknowledged as the top offensive linemen of the early 70's, Hicks certainly deserved consideration. The Buckeyes went 19-2-1 in his last two seasons and 28-3-1 during the three full seasons he played in. Certainly Ohio State had as much talent as any program in the nation during that time, but Hicks had as much to do with making their offensive machine go as anyone on the team and it says something that he finished ahead of legends like Gradishar and Griffin for the Heisman.
Honors: 
First Team All-American - 1972, 1973 
2nd in Heisman Trophy - 1973 
Outland Trophy Winner - 1973 
Lombardi Trophy Winner - 1973 
First Team All-Big Ten - 1972, 1973 
01 - Make A Star ( Single Edit )
02 - Digital Freedom
03 - Fast & Beautiful
04 - Nuclear Decay
05 - Chase The Light
06 - Make A Star ( The Birthday Massacre Remix )
07 - Make A Star (cover version by L'Ame Immortelle vs. Fr!ek)
08 - Make A Star ( Extended Version )
09 - Theta Titanium ( Samsas Traum Remix )
Tracks 1,8: Produced by Thomas Rainer. Music written by Victor Love. Lyrics written by Victor Love and Grace Khold. Arranged and performed by Dope Stars Inc.. Additional guitars and solo by Alex Vega. Mixed and Recorded by Bernd Mezzag at Overall Studio, Vienna, Austria
Tracks 2,3,4,5: Produced by Victor Love. Music and Lyrics written by Victor Love. Arranged and performed by Dope Stars Inc.. Additional guitars and solo on track 2 by Alex Vega. Mixed and Recorded by Victor Love at Subsound Studio, Rome, Italy - www.subsoundstudio.it
Make a Star (After Party Remix by THE BIRTHDAY MASSACRE): Rainbow/M. Falcore/Aslan 
Make a Star (cover version by L'AME IMMORTELLE vs. FR!EK): Rearranged, programmed and produced by Bernd Mazagg, Markus Jager and Thomas Rainer. Mixed by Bernd Mazagg at Overall Studio, Vienna, Austria. Recorded by Markus Jager, at Studio Jager, Vienna, Austria. Additional guitars and bass by Markus Jager. Female vocals by Luisa Thum. Male vocals by Thomas Rainer. Thomas Rainer appears courtesy of GUN Records / SonyBMG
Theta Titanium (Samsas Traum Remix): Remixed By Alexander Kaschte @ Studio Mollmannsdorf/Austria. Additional Programming, Compositions And Guitars: Alexander Kaschte. www.samsas-traum.info
Graphic design, Art direction and Layout by Grace Khold at Ministry Of The Sign - www.ministryofthesign.com (comign soon)
Photography by Eolo Perfido / www.eoloperfido.com
Mastered by Bo Kondren at Calyx Mastering, Berlin, Germany
Http://www.myspace.com/rellummusic
The '''Georgian Trade Unions Confederation''' (GTUC) is a trade union centre in Giorgia. It is the successor to the ''Confederation of Independent Trade Unions of Georgia'' (CITUG). GTUC is the most rapidly developing tarde union organization in the South Caucasus, which works in close cooperation with its domesic and international partners. Almost 45% of all hired workers of the country are the members of trades unions. GTUC offers trainings in Labor Law and Organizing, as well as provides legal protection to its members.
The GTUC is affiliated with the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions.
Ruins of a castle in periphery of Prievidza in central slovakia. Attraction for tourists around the world.
Jotunspor are a Black Metal band that celebrate Black Metals nordic heritage. The Band Features members from the popular Norwegian Black metal band Gorgoroth. The band is a non-live perfromance at this time and has only one ablum released named Gleipners Smeder.
1.0   Biography
After spending two years at the University of Utah, Mr. Thomas transferred to Arizona State University where he graduated Magna Cum Laude with a Bachelor of Science in Accountancy. Mr. Thomas later attained the NASD 6, 7, 63, and 65 series securities licenses. 
From the time his professional career began in 1993, Mr. Thomas has assumed significant responsibilities and acquired a wide range of experience in accounting, general management, finance, and investment management.
From 1994 to 2000, Mr. Thomas served as investment manager, vice president, general manager, and for a short time as chief executive officer of Phoenix-based James Stewart Company, a real estate developer and investor with over $100 million in assets under management. 
In 2003, Mr. Thomas served as the Senior Analyst for Thorpe Capital Group, LLC performing due diligence for public and private corporate acquisitions, preparing business plans for venture stage companies, and serving as a mentor for The Wayne Brown Institute and on the Salt Lake Chamber of Commerce    Government Affairs Committee.
Mr. Thomas continues to serve on several boards including James Stewart Company, High Country Pines Water Company, a regulated Arizona water company, and Tempe Builders, Inc. He and his wife, Nicole, co-own LatterDayBride.com LLC.
Mr. Thomas has experienced first hand the impact of government and taxing policies on large and small businesses in the private sector. He looks forward to: 
Bringing common sense private sector values to Salt Lake County Government; 
Enabling efficiencies through the reasonable implementation of emerging technologies; 
Pushing for tough new standards including tighter internal and external controls government wide and more specifically with regard to elected officials; 
Restoring public faith and trust in the office of the Auditor; 
And serving you, the citizens of Salt Lake County, with your best interests in mind over and above any political, business, or special interest group. 
Mr. Thomas was born in Redondo Beach CA and moved to Sandy shortly thereafter where he was raised and attended Brighton High School. He enjoys fishing, skiing, water sports, tennis, and a good rock concert once in awhile. He and his wife Nicole became proud parents in 2004 with the birth of their first child, Isabel.
2.0 Statutory Duties
The County Auditor is an elected official who, by State and County Ordinance is the Chief Budget Officer of the County. The Auditor issues the Comprehensive Annual Financial Report (CAFR), prepares the annual budget and 5 year plan, reviews debt and bonding, pays County bills and issues payroll. The Auditor shares management duties regarding the real property tax system with the Recorder, Assessor, and Treasurer. The Auditor   s Tax duties include computing and issuing real property tax valuation notices, administering the appeals process, reconciling tax collections, and conducting the annual tax sale of delinquent properties. The Auditor also conducts audits of individual County organizations to evaluate both financial controls and program performance.
3.0  Accomplishments
The Salt Lake County Auditor's Office has been instrumental in helping the County to secure and maintain a "AAA" bond rating.  This is the highest bond rating from all three major bond rating agencies.  Salt Lake County is one of only 11 counties in the U.S. that maintain a AAA or "Triple Triple" bond rating from all three national bond rating agencies.  
The Auditor's Office has also received numerous awards for excellence in financial reporting, including recognition for Excellence in Reporting by the Government Finance Officers Association, the principal organization for public finance professionals in the United States. 
Zach Lewis is an aspiring actor, singer, and writer. He was born in 1991 From Mike Lewis and Ann Lewis. he is the oldest
Acting
Zach started acting when he moved to Prescott in 2001. He was found by luann sebelko, the director of lil' Abner at The
Great River Road Theatre. Zach held a major role as Pappy Yokum and was the youngest cast member to acomplish a
Parker in Okalhoma! However in that same year a tabloid came out that said Zach had snuck into the womans dressing rooms
MidSummer Night's Dream, at The Phipps Center in Hudson. he held the part of Theseus. "cluadia and the entire Phipps
Drama Rama class. he was nominated by his community to be on this team. He competed with teams from other schools in
Actor of Merit Awards. Just behind him is Kylie Miner who holds three. His Drama Rama coach Dianna Marshal says, "working with Zach 
Zach is also a very talented singer. many people in his community recognize him as the singer from the school christmas
Then Zach stopped his singing for Four years. "I just didn't want to do it any more, my voice was cracking and i wasn't as good
Zach soon competed at Hastings Days festival 2006 and was the youngest one to compete. He took Third place singing hits like 'If I could turn
Back Time", "I found Someone", "I knew i Loved you", and "Don't Stop believin'". In august 2006 he competed in the Pierce County Fair and sang 
Center in April. Zach enjoys singing and wants to someday have a record deal, but for now he says doing live concerts is fine for him.
Zach is also a published poet and has six books that have yet to be published. The Earth, Zachs best poem to date is being
The Earth a heavenly body hurling though space but if we could see her saddened face cars leave her scars and thugs take
Zach has a collection of books as well, here is a list
Zach Released 2004 Time Released 2004 Pain released 2005 I Am Me Released 2006 The very best of Zach Released
2006 Dreamer Realesed 2006
Zach is to this day his best book, with the hits "In his Shoes" which focus' on children being picked on in school.
This book also includes "The Earth" which is above. Time and Pain ultimately flopped except for the few poems like
If you have not heard of Zach Lewis it is probably because you do not live in Minneapolis or St. Paul. But Zach's 
Ability to reinvent himself as a singer, actor, and writer makes him the face of tommorow. Zach has kept going 
Article written by: Tom Lawrence
Caudete is a Spanish town situated in the south- east of Spain, near the cities of Valencia and Alicante. Now, Caudete is part of the province of Albacete and the community of Castilla- la Mancha. Caudete has a 10.000 population.
Caudete is situated in a cross of ways. In their municipal term three independent communities are united , the Comunidad Valenciana, the Region de Murcia and Castilla- la Mancha. For this reason, Caudete has a lot of monuments to visit and many cities near from it. 
In first place, in Caudete there are the Church of Saint Catherine (iglesia de Santa Catalina) in the town centre. This church was built in the 14th century and it have examples of the gothic, renaissance and baroc styles. 
Above the Saint Catherine's Church there are the castle. This castle was built by the Muslims in the 12nd century. 
In town centre too there are the Saint Joseph's Monestry (monasterio de San Jose) built in the 16th century. Next to the monestry there are the Our Lady of Carmen's Church (iglesia del Carmen). This church is in the main square of the town.
Outside the center town is the monumental district of San Francisco (el barrio de San Francisco). This district counts on the San Francisco' s Church, neobyzantine style, and the famous bullring "The Sands" of Caudete (Las Arenas de Caudete). These two works and all the district were constructed by the Count of San Carlos in the beginning of 20th century.
Outside the town, following the pretty stroll of the Way of the Virgin (el Camino de la Virgen), is the hermitage of Our Lady of Grace. This hermitage was built between the 14th and the 18th centuries. This church counts with a valuable artistic treasures, from the mantles of the Virgin to gothic painting tables. Our Lady of Grace is the patroness of Caudete.
But the greater touristic attractive of Caudete is their celebrations of Moors and Christians. This celebrations are celebrated between the 5th to the 10th of September, in honour of Our Lady of Grace and count with more of four hundred years of antiquity. In this celebrations the people of the town get dressed of moors and christians and remember the medieval time of the town. 
Other celebrations are the Dances of the Boy (Bailes del Nino) in Christmas, where the people of the town dance traditional dances in the squares, the popular celebrations of San Anton and San Blas, in January and February, the Easter, in March or April, and the celebration of Our Lady of Carmen, in the 16th July.
Aside from the touristic attractive of the town, Caudete counts with a communications network that unites the town with the beaches of the Costa Blanca (Benidorm, Torrevieja, Denia, etc) in less than one hour as well as with the big cities of Valencia, Alicante, Murcia or Albacete.
Manasota Optics, Inc. (MOI) A Diamond Turning and Polishing house located in Sarasota, Florida.  Specializes in flat (plano) metal (aluminum & beryllium) optics.  Also provides a thin film Optical coating. Established in 1994. 
History
The Flash
Jani was signed to Charlton from Sami Hyypia's former club MyPa 47 of Finland in November 2004, towering Tanska is entering his third campaign with the Addicks.
The six-foot-three central defender took a while to settle into his new surroundings but the 2005/06 season saw the uncompromising youngster show exactly why the club went to such lengths to secure Tanska's much sought-after signature.
Arriving in SE7 in a hail of publicity, Tanska initially had problems nailing down a regular starting berth for the U18s and picked up just six starts for the senior academy side in the remainder of the 2004/05 campaign.
The following season was a different story, however, and only Kieran Murtagh, skipper Grant Basey and Dane Springer managed more than the 15 starts the competitive young Finn accumulated.
Anjalankoski-born Tanska, who also opened his U18 scoring account with a fine headed effort against Crystal Palace in November, turned professional in the summer of 2005.
Tanska might not be the last player to join the Addicks from MyPa, either.
When he signed for the club, the Addicks also completed a deal with the Finns whereby the English club has first option on any promising youngsters emerging through the MyPa ranks
Signed for Luton in jan 06 for   100 000 from Rushden & Diamonds has been on the fringe's of the first team squad and will be hoping to break into the first team in the 06/07 season .
History
The Flash was the first comic book hero to be featured with superhuman speed, debuting in 1940. He developed other power related to his speed powers, such as time travel, vibrating his molecules to pass through solid objects, etc. With different people who assumed the identity (Jay Garrick, Barry Allen, Wally West, Bart Allen), his top speed changes. Barry Allen is the fastest, claimed to travel "faster than the speed of thought". He was also the most expericned with time travel. Wally West has an unbreakable connection with the Speed Force.
Another prominent speedster is Quicksilver, first appearing in 1964, in the early issue of X-Men. Quicksilver originally could run up to 175 mph, and with a 500 foot approach run up a building 300 feet beofre being overatken by gravity, or run on water for 1000 before sinking. However, after exposure to the Terrigen Mists, he vibrates his molecules through time.
Superspeed is a popualr superpower because of its flashiness,and everyone wants to be fast. 
Morton Number, M=g  4/      
Egg Tempera
Please make the reference in the article on Oil painting
The ignis project is licensed under the GPL (v2 or later) !
Is interpreted as an expressive mode which contains the research of the knowledge of inside thoughts and sensations. Also is called subjective realism the art where nature is the central theme for the artist and they try to recall archaic times, when manhood lives in absolute harmony with the environment. 
Track listing for "Building a Better _____"
1. The Trophy Wife
2. Mississippi Burning
3. Who Is Aliandra?
4. Angles and Errors
5. A Message
6. Chica Chica
7. La Amourex
8. Irukandji
9. Intro
10. Hide and Seek
11. A Message (Acoustic Version)
Drummer for Cynic - nwobhm - released Suicide and No Time at All 1983.              -->
In this episodes Raven Baxter helps out a senior citizen (Della Resse) to fufil her dream to prefom in her fathers resturant and have happiness again.
Easton Ahead drumsticks are a popular brand of hardened drumstick used by many famous drummers including Laes Ulrich of Metallica and Joey Jordison of Slipknot.The shaft of the stick is made from a hybrid metal alloy giving the stick both a lightweight feel and near indestructability
Trinidad : Piarco International Airport
Tobago : Crown Point International Airport
Clone Skateboards
Clone skateboards was founded by Drew from Dazed in Hanley, stoke on trent
Clone started when Drew saw three chavs all wearing the same Nike tracksuit.
He asked them if they knew what Clone meant. They shouted NO! back and Clone was born.
Clones home plaza is Stokeplaza, the biggest plaza in Europe. It has seen the likes of Zero, Blueprint,
Zoo York, Dvs Shoes and Santa Cruz.
Clone boards are sold only on Clone.com or Dazed.
STEP 3: Fill in the empty space below with at least one PUBLISHED,              
Clone-skateboards.com  
My Brain rules all!
J Tizzle(b.1973) is a newly recruited member of Three 6 Mafia and is also the Memphis rap group's manager. Rumor has it that Three 6 Mafia included him into the group because they needed some diversity.
Sharpay Evans is a fictional character in Disney and Kenny Ortega's High School musical and is portrayed by Ashley Tisdale and appears to be somewhat of a valley girl. She had a slight crush on Troy Bolton at the beginning of the movie and was a pinch jealous of Gabriella Montez for winning Troy Bolton's heart and for her wisdom. She is the twin sister of Ryan Evans. She was considered evil and let go of her crush of Troy and liked Zeke a friend of Troy's. She later accepted Troy and Gabriella and became a tinge nicer
It is possible that Sharpay's name came from the Chinese dog Shar Pei. 
Sharpay is possibly based on Ashley Tisdale seeing as she is a valley gir.
James Titchen is the new member to plus 44 as stated by mark hoppus. James plays the synthesizers for good backing track.
A person who you are connected with that is both a close friend and an actual family member( usually a cousin). 
MARTIN H. RUB , 50, of Encino was suspended for two years, stayed, placed on two years of probation with a requirement that he make restitution and was ordered to take the MPRE within one year. The order took effect Feb. 12, 2000.
Rub stipulated to misconduct involving settlement funds he received for five clients. Although he prepared breakdown sheets and contends he forwarded them, with releases for the clients    signatures, the clients never received the documents. The funds were not disbursed for five months.
The doctor who treated the clients never was paid, although Rub wrote two checks for him.
Rub stipulated that he failed to communicate with clients, promptly notify them of his receipt of settlement funds, pay out funds as requested by the clients, or perform competently to insure that medical liens were paid, and he did not properly maintain his client trust account.
In mitigation, he paid his clients    attorney fees when they hired new counsel and he has no record of prior discipline.
Wrestler: Jillian Hall 
Real Name: Jillian Fletcher 
Birthday: September 6, 1980 
Hometown: Ashland, Kentucky 
Marital Status:  
Height & Weight: 5'6" - 130 lbs 
Trained by: Fit Finlay 
Debut: 1998 
Previous Gimmicks: Macaela Mercedes 
Jillian Hall
Finishing Move: The Moonsault
Missile Dropkick
Favorite Moves: The Fender Bender 
The Crash Test Splash 
450 Splash 
Notable Feuds: Lady Victoria
Brandi Alexander
Tiny Tim
Lexie Fyfe
Nikita
Passion
Trudy Denucci
Molly Holly
Alexis Laree 
The Boogeyman
Kristal Marshall
Melina Perez
Kristal Marshall
Michelle McCool
SWF Women's title; 
SWF Tag Team titles w/Tiny Tim; 
SWF Tag Team titles w/Randy Allen; 
HPW Cruiserweight title; 
MCW Mid-American title; 
WWA Women's title; 
CIWindy Women's title; 
SSW Women's title; 
BWCW (Blue Water Championship Wrestling) Women's title; 
HPW Ladies title; 
PGWA title; 
In The Beginning - Macaela Mercedes:
Jillian Fletcher wrestled as a heel on the independent circuit under the name "Macaela Mercedes".. 
Ohio Valley Wrestling - Jillian Hall:
Jillian Fletcher joined Ohio Valley Wrestling and transformed herself into the "chronically cute" hyper babyface Jillian Hall.. 
Ohio Valley Wrestling - The Bombshell:
2005: Jillian Hall underwent breast enhancement surgery and bleeched her hair blonde and became an arrogant heel.. 
February 9, 2005--Ohio Valley Wrestling: Alexis Laree defeated Jillian Hall in a dark match.. 
February 19, 2005--Ohio Valley Wrestling: Alexis Laree defeated Jillian Hall w/Melissa Coates.. 
Summer 2005: Both Jillian Hall & Melissa Coates became valets for The Toland Brothers (aka The Blond Bombers).. 
June 7, 2005--OVW TV Taping: The Tolands defeated Gangrel & Kenzo Suzuki and Danny Inferno & Chris Cage in a 3-WAY.. 
World Wrestling Entertainment - Jillian Hall (What's that thing on your face?):
July 28, 2005 - Smackdown!: Melina Perez brought in Jillian Hall (who had a deformation on her face) to be MNM's new publicist.. 
65.1.63.36Jillian Hall's first act was to secure the cover of the September issue of SmackDown! Magazine for MNM.. 
August 3, 2005--OVW TV Taping: The Tolands cut a promo on MNM for stealing their valet Jillian Hall and taking her to SD!.. 
August 10, 2005--OVW TV Taping: The Blonde Bombers told Jillian Hall that she had to choose between them and MNM.. 
August 4, 2005 - Smackdown!: Jillian Hall cut a promo damanding that people not look at her blemish but instead into her eyes.. 
August 18, 2005 - Smackdown!: Joey Mercury & Melina Perez defeated Booker T & Sharmell after Jillian Hall tripped Sharmell.. 
August 22, 2005--Live Event (SD! crew): Stacy Keibler beat Jillian Hall and Melina Perez and Christy Hemme in a bikini contest.. 
World Wrestling Entertainment - Jillian & John Bradshaw Layfield:
September 16, 2005 - Smackdown!: After a loss to Rey Mysterio, JBL asked "The Fixer" Jillian Hall to work for him. She agreed!.. 
September 23, 2005 - Smackdown!: Jillian Hall introduced JBL, who came out nervously riding a horse to appeal to the Texas fans.. 
September 30, 2005 - Smackdown!: Jillian Hall sent JBL out in front of the Laredo fans with a Donkey, tiquilla and an inner tube.. 
October 9, 2005 - No Mercy: John Bradshaw Layfield w/Jillian Hall defeated Rey Mysterio in a Grudge match! 
October 12, 2005--OVW Taping: Johnny Jeter begged Jillian Hall to "fix his Matt Cappotelli problem" but she said no.. 
October 14, 2005 - Smackdown!: Christian had Stacy Keibler on the Peep Show and Jillian Hall interrupted (Stacy slapped Jillian!) 
October 28, 2005 - Smackdown!: Jillian Hall defeated Stacy Keibler in a match taped for Velocity.. 
November 9, 2005--OVW TV Taping: Jillian Hall defeated Mickie James (aka Alexis Laree).. 
November 14, 2005 - RAW Eddie Guerrero Tribute: Melina Perez (Latina Heat?) won a Nine-Diva Inter-promotional Battle Royal! 
November 19 & 20, 2005--Live Event (SD! crew): Christy Hemme defeated Jillian Hall.. 
December 30, 2005 - Smackdown!: Matt Hardy defeated John Bradshaw Layfield by Count Out when The Boogeyman interfered.. 
January 6, 2006 - Smackdown!: John Bradshaw Layfield w/Jillian Hall defeated Matt Hardy in a Falls Count Anywhere match.. 
January 13, 2006 - Smackdown!: Roddy Piper hosted a Piper's Pit with John Bradshaw Layfield & Jillian Hall... and the Boogeyman! 
January 29, 2006 - Royal Rumble: The Boogeyman defeated John Bradshaw Layfield w/Jillian Hall with a Pump Handle Slam.. 
February 24, 2006 - Smackdown!: Kristal Marshall and Jillian Hall had an in-ring confronation ending with clothes being ripped off.. 
March 10, 2006 - SmackDown!: Kristal Marshall defeated Jillian Hall in a Divas Uncovered match (clothes ripped off) 
March 17, 2006 - SmackDown!: Paul Birchall & Kristal Marshall defeated William Regal & Jillian Hall in a mixed tag.. 
April 14, 2006 - SmackDown!: John Layfield defeated Chris Benoit in a Steel Cage to retain the United States title.. 
April 21, 2006 - SmackDown!: John Layfield threw himself one of his "Great American" celebrations and fired Jillian Hall! 
World Wrestling Entertainment - Jillian Hall:
April 28, 2006 - SmackDown!: Melina Perez made fun of Jillian Hall and they ended up having a catfight backstage.. 
May 12, 2006 - SmackDown!: Jillian Hall & Brian Kendrick & Paul London all attacked Joey Mercury & Johnny Nitro & Melina Perez.. 
May 19, 2006 - SmackDown!: Brian Kendrick & Paul London & Jillian Hall defeated MNM (Joey Mercury & Johnny Nitro & Melina)... 
May 21, 2005 - Judgment Day: Jillian Hall defeated Melina Perez in a 1-on-1 Divas match.. 
May 27 & 28, 2006--Live Event (SD! crew): Jillian Hall defeated Kristal Marshall in a Best Body Contest 
June 2, 2006 - SmackDown!: Jillian Hall defeated Kristal Marshall.. 
June 9, 2006 - SmackDown!: Ashley Massaro beat Kristal Marshall, Jillian Hall and Michelle McCool in a Bikini Contest! 
July 14, 2006 - SmackDown!: Kristal Marshall & Michelle McCool got into a backstage catfight with Ashley Massaro & Jillian Hall.. 
July 15, 2006 - SNME: Jillian Hall participated in a special WWE Divas Mechanical Bull Riding contest (won by Michelle).. 
July 21, 2006 - SmackDown!: Ashley Massaro & Jillian Hall defeated Kristal Marshall & Jillian Hall.. 
July 23, 2006 - Great American Bash: Ashley Massaro beat Kristal Marshall and Jillian Hall and Michelle McCool (Bra & Panties).. 
July 28, 2006 - SmackDown!: Michelle McCool w/Kristal Marshall defeated Jillian Hall w/Ashley Massaro..
Tom Dlougus was the first man to have an Ileostomy preformed on him. He currently resides in Vermilion, Ohio.
I don't feel qualified to re-word the definition without distorting the meaning;  this term seems important, so maybe you can think of an accurate way to represent it:
Discover Magazine  Issues  jul-06  The Future of Terrorism
The Future of Terrorism
Neutron cameras versus smuggled nuclear bombs. Biodetectors versus bioengineered smallpox. Is technology making us safer--or more vulnerable?
By the editors of Discover
DISCOVER Vol. 27 No. 07 | July 2006 | Technology
Spennis Q. Krangle was '''b'''orn 500 years ago '''i'''n a '''l'''og cabin with a squid on his face, he grew up to become a cartoonist that worked at the k'''l'''eenex factor'''y''' in Be-Jing, Los Angelas, he saved the factory when it caught fire by eating jello and throwing up on the fla'''m'''es, he then be'''c'''ame a famous cartoonist/lacross surgeon, and retire'''d''' when his cartoons t'''u'''r'''n'''ed on him and shoved his pen'''c'''il up his nos'''e''' and shoving his computer mouse in his navel...killing him, he died with the name RandomCheese for no appearant reason...now he works on a comic series and several flash movies dealing with EXTREME randomness...
Spennis Krangle
My interview with Random Cheese by Shawn M. Allen
Quid Pro Quo is a film about a semi-paralyzed radio reporter who is sent out to investigate a story that leads him into an odd subculture and on a journey of disturbing self-realization.
Cast includes:
Credited cast:
Nick Stahl
Isaac
Vera Farmiga
Fiona
J.R. Ashton
Banker
Rachel Black
Janice Musslewhite (as Rachel Matthews Black)
Dylan Bruno
Scott
Kate Burton
Merilee Ankany
Anna Chlumsky
College girl
Jeane Fournier
Charlene Coke
James Frain
Father Dave
Tia Dionne Hodge
Soccer Mom
Joshua Leonard
Isaac's Dad
Ellen Marlow
Young Fiona
Aimee Mullins
Raine
Tommy Nelson
Young Isaac
Jacob Pitts
Hugh Bone
Pablo Schreiber
Brooster
Richard Serlen
Driver
Ben Siegler
Dan
Michal Sinnott
Isaac's Mother (as Michal Leamer)
Source: www.imdb.com
Connor O'Hanlon was born on the 19th of March 1993 and is the most impressive and most wanted young player in the game. With clubs like Manchester United, Deportivo La Coruna and Tottenham all battling for his signature, he is sure to have a good future in professional football. He plays central midfield in Gaelic Football for Chullhian Gaels in Omeath, County Louth. However in soccer he plays on either wing though he prefers the right wing as he is right footed. He has incredible pace and leadership qualties and can dribble the ball majesticly. He passes the ball emacutely and can shoot from long range and with power. He is a huge Celtic fan and loves the club and it is his dream to play for them and by the look of things that could easily become a reality. 
World Football Magazine
Football365
Joel Rainey oversees church planting and development for the Mid-Maryland Baptist Association in Columbia, Maryland.  Prior to this, he served as The Senior Pastor of Muldraugh Baptist Church, Muldraugh Kentucky, and then as Senior and Founding Pastor of True Life Church in Greenville South Carolina, which was recently renamed Sanctuary.  He has served churches in South Carolina, Kentucky, and Maryland for the past fourteen years.
Born January 21, 1972 in Greer South Carolina, Rainey completed his Masters and Doctoral Degrees at The Southern Baptist Theological Seminary in Louisville, Kentucky.  He has contributed to the most recent edition of the New Holman Illustrated Bible Dictionary, and served as Adjunct Professor of Evangelism at North Greenville University from 2001 to 2005.
Recently, Dr. Rainey has indicated his strong support of the Memphis Declaration, a confession written by conservative Southern Baptists in protest of perceived recent tendencies to further narrow the parameters of cooperation within the nation's largest protestant denomination.  An evangelical conservative, Rainey is a member of the Evangelical Missiological Society, and the North American Professors of Christian Education.  He, his wife, and their two sons live in central Maryland.
This kid is a legend. He lives in woodstock. His friends include danny,alex, ben, nick, and jerry meisner.
Patti Fritz is the current Repersentative for district 26B in Minnesota. And is the DFL canidate.The mother of 5, grandmother of 16, and her husband Jim have lived in  Faribault for more than 30 years.  Patti has been on the front lines helping people as a LPN for 29 years at St. Lucas Care Center.
She   s seen how nursing home costs can eat up the family farm.  How day care costs can exceed the mortgage payment.  And, how prescription drug costs can cripple the life of our seniors.  She   s seen enrollment decline in our rural schools along with the necessary funding for a quality education, and she vows to make sure that our kids and our schools get their fair share so that all our kids succeed.  Patti will be a passionate advocate for the working men and women of District 26B and won   t hesitate for one second to put her district before her political party.  What   s important to her district comes before pleasing her party leadership.
This district deserves better.  It deserves a representative that will put the interests of her district before those of her own party if she has to.  It deserves to have schools that are funded at adequate levels and nursing homes that receive the resources they need.  Teachers shouldn   t have to pay for their own teaching materials and students shouldn   t have to hold fundraisers for up-to-date schoolbooks.  Nursing homes shouldn   t be so strapped for cash that nurses and nursing assistants work 10-15 hours a day in unfavorable working conditions.  This isn   t fair to our community and this district deserves a representative who will fight everyday to make sure these wrongs are righted.  
Patti Fritz will be a strong advocate for District 26B.  If you have any more questions, please do not hesitate to contact the campaign.
On Education
Public schools are the cornerstone of Minnesota   s success.  A generation ago, Minnesota began a bi-partisan effort to invest in education.  For thirty years I have watched that investment pay off.  I sent my children to Minnesota schools that lead the nation in teacher quality, graduation rates, and college entrance scores.  Minnesota schools taught our children to compete in the modern economy of computers and technology.  As a result, most of my generation enjoy
However, over the past decade Minnesota   s 
As a State Legislator, Patti Fritz will work to guarantee that all children in our public school system will receive a high quality education no matter where they live or what school they attend.  
On Health Care
You do not need to be a health care worker to know that our health care system is in crisis.  We all know that insurance premiums are constantly on the rise; that small business owners are struggling to maintain coverage for their employees; that working  families are 
Patti Fritz is a health care worker and she knows the 
Minnesota.  As a LPN at St. Lucas Nursing Home in 
Faribault, Patti sees first hand how the lack of 
As a State Legislator, Patti will work to control the costs of health care coverage and lower the cost of prescription drugs so that all members of our community will have access to the care they need and deserve.  
On the Economy
Over the past three years, our state has taken in less revenue than it has committed to spend.  We have continuously operated under large deficits and as a result of restrictive tax policies those deficits have led to harmful cuts to health care, education, and public safety.   For example, by cutting Local Government Aid, state lawmakers have jeopardized our ability to fund such things as our police officers and fire fighters.
Patti Fritz, Representative for District 26B
While we scramble to cover the cost of providing essential community services, the true long-term solution to the ongoing state budget deficit is to revive Minnesota   s economy and create living wage jobs for everyone.  In general, state revenues are down due to 
If we reverse this disturbing trend by creating 
Reviving our economy and putting people back to 
Manny Perez is a Dominican film and television actor. Perez was born in 1969 in Santiago, Dominican Republic but when he was a little boy his family moved to Providence, Rhode Island, United States. After graduating from High School he move to New York city and attended Marymount Manhattan College.
The Internet Movie Database (IMDB) http://www.imdb.com
Christmas at Maxwell's   is an inspirational but light romantic Christmas drama, a story about the human struggle, the power of love, forgiveness, trust and uplifting the human spirit. It is the story of a fortysomething man confronting the overwhelming effect his past actions seem to be taking on his life and his family.
The movie was written, directed and co-produced by William C. Laufer.  Tiffany Laufer was the director and co-producer. LauferFilm.com is the production company.
Many successful projects are the result of support from family and friends, but not so many projects have quite as many family relationships as Christmas at Maxwell's. One of the main ones is the Tiffany and Bill relationship     they are a daughter / father team and make up Laufer Film.com. This somewhat unique film team has been working together since 1999.
Christmas at Maxwell's was shot in Cleveland, Cleveland Heights, Chagrin Falls, Lakeside and the Marblehead areas. Maxwell's Hospitality House is the set for the Lakeside Ohio scenes and is owned by Cecil, Kathryn and Jeanne Maxwell. Cecil Maxwell is the former mayors of Cardington, OH and the former owner of Riverside Dairy.
Commonly referred to as RPLND, it is a procedure to remove abdominal lymph nodes to treat Testicular Cancer, as well as help establish its exact maturity and type.
Testicular Cancer spreads in a well-known pattern, and the lymph nodes in the retroperitoneum are a primary landing site during spread of the desease.
The procedue is becoming standard treatment for clinical stage I and II Non-Seminomatous Germ Cell Tumors (NSGCTT) because of the low mortality and relapse rate with this procedue, as compared with the alternative, which is observation. Also, NSGCTT is considered more aggressive than Seminomas, the "other" kind of Testicular Cancer.
The potential problems in RPLND have mostly to do with nerves: they might get damaged or cut, resulting in infertility, an inability to ejaculate, or even an inabiloty to have an erection. This is why most often, a nerve-sparing technique is used. A less invasive form using laparoscopic technique (L-RPLND) exists, which is more costly, time-consuming, and requires special equipment that not every hospital may have. Open RPLND (O-RPLND), which is perfeomed by opening the stomach to get inside, has more room for problems, but is an equally effective way to get the lymph node out.
Adjuvant Chemotherapy is considered equally effective, but complicates follow-up regimen, as it may complicate therapies in case of relapse.
Yet Nashville's Singing Praises Of Director's Work
By Nick Krewen
Special To The Star
ROBERT LANTOS, are you listening?
STEVEN GOLDMANN, a man who wants to be the next ATOM EGOYAN, is on the verge of a rare three-peat at this Wednesday's Country Music Awards to be held in Nashville.
If he gets the nod for Best Video for ALAN JACKSON's "I'll Go On Loving You," it will echo the Montreal native's 1997 "455 Rocket" victory for KATHY MATTEA, and last year's computer animated FAITH HILL video win for "This Kiss."
He's also been named CMT Video Director Of The Year thrice, and won CLIO, Addy and Telly Awards.
Yet Goldmann can't understand why he's virtually a stranger in his own backyard.
While Goldmann nurses a mineral water and dabs at a Mediterrean appetizer, several associates and clients make their way over to say hello, including cornpone comedian CLEDUS T. JUDD, with whom Goldmann made his hilarious DEANA CARTER parody video "Did I Shave My Back For This?"
In the feature film circles where Canadian impressario Lantos is a heavyweight producer, Goldmann is an unknown. In country music circles, he has no such identity problem. Steven Goldmann is the man to know. Arguably country music's busiest video director, he has superstars Alan Jackson and Faith Hill calling upon him regularly for his services.
North of the border, Goldmann is a talent still struggling for recognition.
He sent a fax to the Gazette letting you know that three Canadians did win, and the third one was Steven Goldmann. They didn't publish a correction. It was almost as if I didn't exist -- even though I've done six SHANIA TWAIN videos, and Shania sells lots of records to both English Canada and French Canada."
Artists will most certainly tell you that not only Goldmann exists, but that the 38-year-old has been crucial in developing a visual stamp on their career that has enabled them to attain higher levels of stardom.
When Shania Twain was cultivating her plans for world domination during the The Woman In Me years, Goldmann lensed four of her videos, including the memorable step-dancing mini-movie " (If You're Not In It For Love) I'm Outta Here" and the spectacular go-kart reel "You Win My Love."
When MARTINA McBRIDE needed a breakthrough video, Goldmann came through with "My Baby Loves Me" and followed it up with "Safe In The Arms Of Love." And Goldmann's computerized animation video for Faith Hill's "This Kiss" -- filmed in Toronto over four days -- has set her on a path that is continuing to blaze crossover trails more than a year after the song was released.
FLETCHER FOSTER, senior vice-president of marketing for Arista Nashville, says Steven Goldmann's work on two Alan Jackson videos, the CMA-nominated "I'll Go On Loving You" and "Little Man" of his High Mileage album, has given country fans a whole new perception of his flagship superstar.
Foster says the right video can even generate sales, pointing to Australian singer Sherrie Austin's recent #1 hit "Never Been Kissed."
Foster said the label felt it necessary to retool Jackson's image, and that Steven Goldmann ideally fit the bill.
Foster and Arista aren't the only ones singing his praises. Happy customers include fellow Montrealer TERRI CLARK, ALISON KRAUSS, BROOKS & DUNN, CLINT BLACK, PAUL BRANDT, FRED EAGLESMITH, newcomer JULIE REEVES, PAM TILLIS and MICHELLE WRIGHT, whose "Take It Like A Man" video brought Goldmann to Nashville.
Yet Goldmann says because he works in country music, he's not taken seriously in some circles. He blames the perception of country music on snobbery.
And part of his anonymity he blames on country music video channels, including Calgary's CMT, who don't identify the directors whenever they play videos.
Although the son a former Hudson Bay and Seagram's salesman is now based in Nashville and New York with wife STEPHANIE and daughters ALANNA, 7, and ALEXANDRA, 4, he'd like to return to Canada some day as a moviemaker. But he admits he can't do it without some help.
He hopes that a potential third victory at the CMA Awards will garner some attention.
1992 -- Lee Roy Parnell, "The Rock"
1992 -- Martina McBride, "Cheap Whiskey"
1992 -- Pam Tillis, "Shake The Sugar Tree"
1993 -- Clint Black, "When My Ship Comes In"
1993 -- Martina McBride, "Life #9"
1993 -- Martina McBride, "My Baby Loves Me"
1993 -- Pam Tillis, "Let The Pony Run"
1993 -- Shania Twain, "What Made You Say That?"
1993 -- Shania Twain, "You Lay A Whole Lotta Of Love On Me"
1993 -- Michelle Wright, "Take It Like A Man"
1994 -- Suzy Bogguss, "You Wouldn't Say That To A Stranger"
1994 -- Mark Chesnutt, "She Dreams"
1994 -- Kathy Mattea, "Walking Away A Winner"
1994 -- Kathy Mattea, "Nobody's Gonna Rain On Our Parade"
1994 -- Shenandoah & Alison Krauss, "Somewhere In The Vicinity Of The               Heart"
1994 -- Pam Tillis, "Spilled Perfume"
1994 -- Pam Tillis, "When You Walk In The Room"
1994 -- Lari White, "Now I Know"
1994 -- Lari White, "That's How You Know (When You're In Love)"
1994 -- Lari White, "That's My Baby"
1994 -- Michelle Wright, "He Would Be Sixteen"
1994 -- Michelle Wright, "One Good Man"
1995 -- Patricia Conroy, "Bad Day For Trains"
1995 -- Patricia Conroy, "Somebody's Leaving"
1995 -- Patricia Conroy, "What Else Can I Do"
1995 -- Wade Hayes, "I'm Still Dancin' With You"
1995 -- Ty Herndon, "Heart Half Empty"
1995 -- Ty Herndon, "I Want My Goodbye Back"
1995 -- James House, "Anything For Love"
1995 -- James House, "This Is Me Missing You"
1995 -- Kathy Mattea, "Clown In Your Rodeo"
1995 -- The Mavericks, "I Should Have Been True"
1995 -- Martina McBride, "Where I Used To Have A Heart"
1995 -- Lorrie Morgan, "I Didn't Know My Own Strength"
1995 -- Lorrie Morgan, "Standing Tall"
1995 -- Collin Raye, "I Can Still Feel You"
1995 -- Marty Stuart, "The Likes Of Me"
1995 -- Pam Tillis, "Deep Down"
1995 -- Chely Wright, "Listenin' To The Radio"
1996 -- Paul Brandt, "I Meant To Do That"
1996 -- Mary Chapin Carpenter, "Let Me Into Your Heart"
1996 -- Wade Hayes, "On A Good Night"
1996 -- Wade Hayes, "Where Do I Go To Start Over"
1996 -- Ty Herndon, "She Wants To Be Wanted Again"
1996 -- Kathy Mattea, "There's A New Kid In Town"
1996 -- Martina McBride, "Safe In The Arms Of Love"
1996 -- Lee Roy Parnell, "When A Woman Loves A Man"
1996 -- Collin Raye, "I Think About You"
1996 -- Collin Raye, "Not That Different"
1996 -- Bruce Springsteen, "Born In The U.S.A. (Acoustic)"
1996 -- Pam Tillis, "The River And The Highway"
1996 -- Shania Twain, "Home Ain't Where His Heart Is (Anymore)"
1996 -- Shania Twain, "(If You're Not In It For Love) I'm Outta Here!"
1996 -- Shania Twain, "No One Needs To Know"
1996 -- Shania Twain, "You Win My Love"
1996 -- Michelle Wright, "Nobody's Girl"
1997 -- Sherrie Austin, "One Solitary Tear"
1997 -- Matraca Berg, "Back In The Saddle"
1997 -- Brooks & Dunn, "He's Got You"
1997 -- Brooks & Dunn, "How Long Gone"
1997 -- Mary Chapin Carpenter, "Better To Dream Of You"
1997 -- Wade Hayes, "The Day She Left Tulsa (In A Chevy)"
1997 -- Ty Herndon, "I Have To Surrender"
1997 -- Ty Herndon, "Living In A Moment"
1997 -- Cledus T. Judd, "Did I Shave My Back For This?"
1997 -- Lonestar, "You Walked In"
1997 -- Kathy Mattea, "455 Rocket"
1997 -- Michael Peterson, "From Here To Eternity"
1997 -- Michael Peterson, "Too Good To Be True"
1997 -- Anne Murray, "I Can See Arkansas"
1997 -- Ricochet, "Blink Of An Eye"
1997 -- Pam Tillis, "All The Good Ones Are Gone"
1997 -- Chely Wright, "Just Another Heartache"
1998 -- Terri Clark, "Now That I've Found You"
1998 -- Terri Clark, "You're Easy On The Eyes"
1998 -- Faith Hill, "This Kiss"
1998 -- Faith Hill, "The Secret Of Life"
1998 -- Faith Hill, "You Can't Lose Me"
1998 -- Alan Jackson, "I'll Go On Loving You"
1998 -- Alan Jackson, "Little Man"
1998 -- Kathy Mattea, "I'm On Your Side"
1999 -- Sammy Kershaw, Lorrie Morgan, "Maybe Not Tonight"
1999 -- Lila McCann, "Crush"
1999 -- Lila McCann, "With You"
1999 -- Shane Minor, "Ordinary Love"
1999 -- Shane Minor, "Slave To The Habit"
1999 -- Anne Murray, "Let There Be Love"
1999 -- Julie Reeves, "It's About Time"
1992 -- Canadian Country Music Award, Video Of The Year, Michelle Wright,             "Take It Like A Man"
1993 -- Country Music Television, Director Of The Year
1993 -- Canadian Country Music Award, Video Of The Year, Michelle Wright,            "He Would Be Sixteen"
1996 -- Academy Of Country Music, Video Of The Year, Collin Raye, "I Think            About You"
1996 -- Canadian Country Music Award, Director Of The Year, Shania Twain, 
1996 -- Canadian Country Music Award, Video Of The Year, Shania Twain, 
1997 -- Canadian Country Music Award, Director Of The Year, Paul Brandt, "I            Meant To Do That"
1997 -- Country Music Award, Video Of The Year, Kathy Mattea, "455 Rocket"
1997 -- Country Music Television, Director Of The Year
1998 -- Academy Of Country Music, Video Of The Year, Faith Hill, "This Kiss"
1988 -- Country Music Association, Video Of The The Year, Faith Hill "This              Kiss"
PUBLISHED IN THE TORONTO STAR ON TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 17, 1999                                            -->
By Nick Krewen
Special To The Star
Versatile actor with a gift for physical comedy, also known for his ability to create and portray a large array of characters with incredible depth and precision. Kahlil Ashanti began his career as a teenager performing in community theater and open mic nights at comedy clubs throughout the United States. He then enlisted in the United States Air Force, winning the 1993 Air Force Worldwide Talent Contest which earned him the opportunity to tour with the elite Air Force Entertainment troupe Tops In Blue in 1994 and 1995 as a comedian/dancer/actor. This provided him the unique opportunity to perform for over 700,000 people in nearly 27 countries. After being honorably discharged in 1996 Kahlil performed his own magic/comedy dinner theater show at Caesar's Magical Empire, Caesar's Palace Las Vegas from 1997-2000. Upon his arrival in Los Angeles in 2001 he began writing his critically acclaimed award winning one man show, 'Basic Training' which premiered at the 2nd Stage Theater in Oct 2004.  Kahlil can be seen in the 2006 Lions Gate Film release 'Akeelah and the Bee' and is currently preparing to stage Basic Training in New York City.
Johnny Manley was born in Augusta, Georgia on July 13, 1988 to Leon and Renee Manley(now Renee Rowell). His birthname is John Gregory Manley. He has a sister, Ashley, and a brother, Field. His parents divorced in 1995. He lived with his mother in Waynesboro, GA until he was fourteen. At this time he moved to Eatonton, GA and lived with his grandparents. He moved back to Waynesboro the next year. He received a guitar as a Christmas gift when he was fifteen and has been playing since. He recently has started writing songs. His influence being Jim Morrison. He hopes to attend the University of Georgia. 
Edmund Burke Newsletter(Get to know the students issue) Vol. 2 Issue 23
A documentary that follows the Dixie Chicks over three years while the band was under fire for publicly criticizing George Bush in 2003.
It will have its world premiere at the Toronto Film Festival in September 2006.
The album "Only In Your Wildest Screams" hit stores in late July, 2006. The album was critically acclaimed, although not as musically intricate as Wet Screams later work, Angry Salamander. The band toured ruthlessly behind the album, promoting it. It did not, however, land on the Billboard "Top 200" chart. 
The album featured hard-hitting percussion layered beautifully with urgent harmonicas, light guitars, and a marimba which added an amazingly interesting sound to an already interestingly-sounding album. The lead vocals by Matt Buotte were catchy--although sometimes a little rough around the edges. The background screaming by Mike Nicholas, no longer with the band, added a charming touch.
Tracks:
Hiding or not reporting another persons felony
The Conservancy Association (CA), founded in 1968, is a non-government environmental organisation with the longest history in Hong Kong. As champions of sustainable development, environmental conservation and cultural preservation, CA seeks to enhance the quality of life in Hong Kong for the current as well as future generations. CA does this through advocacy and local projects that impact operations at all levels of the Hong Kong government.
Tree Lovers is a program organized by The Conservancy Association (www.conservancy.org.hk) in Hong Kong. It has the goal of creating a concern for tree conservation and, more specifically, a group of local citizens known as "Tree Lovers" who can identify the most common street trees in Hong Kong and assess their health at a basic level. These "Tree Lovers" assess trees on their own and in groups and report their findings on the Tree Lovers website. Trees in poor condition are reported to local authorities.
JetsOwner.com is the home of the Return of the Jets Campaign, a grassroots effort to bring NHL hockey back to Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.  Founded by Darren Ford in the spring on 2003, the website acts as a hub for all supporters to get information on the history of the Winnipeg Jets, check out the latest news regarding their possible return, chat in online forums, and much more.  One special feature of the website is its detailed, in-depth look at just how the NHL can return to Winnipeg.  Also Included, there is an online campaign e-store, relevant press clippings and various polls.
The campaign has received ample media attention, including features/interviews on both local and national Canadian television, US radio and even on CBC's Hockey Night in Canada.  Other media attention include dozens of magazines and newspapers across the country. The ultimate goal of the camapign is to see the National Hockey League return to Winnipeg, a city that lives and breathes the sport and where so many feel it belongs.  The three main keys the site cites as crucial to this re-birth are a newly improved collective bargaining agreement in the league which makes operating a franchise more affordable, a brand new arena which Winnipeg now has with MTS Centre, and a dedicated ownership group with deep enough pockets to lure an existing franchise to Winnipeg.  The rallying of these indiviuals seems to be the last obstacle to conquer.  Although the interest throughout Winnipeg's corporate community seems to be there, it remains underground for the time being.  
Winnipeg, and the NHL, have been without the Winnipeg Jets since the spring of 1996 when they relocted to Phoenix, Arizona.  Since then, the franchise has lost far more money than they ever did while in Winnipeg.  
Source for JetsOwner.com can be found right here in Wikipedia by reading the definition of "Winnipeg Jets".  The website is referenced near the bottom of the page under related links and was checked by Wikipedia staff in August of 2005.
Dushyanthi is an upcoming pop/hip hop/r&b star soon to make an impact on the music scene today. She is also a model, dancer and actress and now singer. 
Official website: www.dushyanthi.com
MySpace: www.myspace.com/dushyanthi13
Scotty Ski Patrol is a monthly online comic book that is located on dfomni.com. It tells the story of a humorously inept Ski Patrol member named Scotty Ski Patrol the Third who often finds himself in wacky predictiments due to his stupidity and inabilty to get anything done right. As of August 22 2006 there are six issues online.
You can now buy the published CD's straight off the press from Jason Tully;  tullyja@monivae.vic.edu.au all procedes go towards the bands maintenance of equipment and better instruments.
Cale Bowd, was born in Cambletown, Australia in 1989, He started his first serious year of running at the late age of 17. All though he was never quite the runner in his primary school years, Cale has progressed to a high level througout his highschool years. He won his first race at the age of 15 at the Zone athletics carnival in the 1500m, progressing to the sydney north area gaining a place of 5th.When achieving this, Cale realised that he may have the potential to do better things towards his running.The next year with some limited training Cale hoped to do better and work towards reaching the state championships. He did this by gaining 6th place at the Sydney North cross country championships.Entering a competition at such a high level had Cale very excited and although placing 65th in the N.S.W all schools championships he was still happy to have made it.Throughout the past year Cale has been training hard and has recently joined a training group with Gosford Athletics Club, among with several other elite athletes aged 14-19, in hope to represent N.S.W at the National X-Country Championships in Hobart, Tasmania.This was cales main goal for the 2006 season and although Cale did not finish with a promising result at the N.S.W All Schools championships, a good average throughout the year in State meets has gained him a place in the N.S.W athletic team to compete at the National Titles in August.Cale is in good faith that he will continue to progress with his running in the near future and hopes one day to represent Australia at the highiest of levels.
2005: X-Country; 2nd-Broken Bay Diocese
2006: X-Country; 1st-Nsw Endurance Championships 2km Beach run
Nicholas Ballard is regarded by his peers as the world's best backgammon player.  His nickname "Nack" dates to his college days when he had a roommate also named Nicholas, so they became "Nick" and "Nack."  He is ranked #1 on the "Giants of Backgammon" list, and is the only player to be ranked in the top 10 in every survey taken since the inception of the list.  He also excels at other games, including Scrabble, where his rating when he retired from the game would rank him in the top 10 in the world.  He is the inventor of the backgammon variant "Nackgammon," in which the starting position is varied from standard backgammon.
Intresting.
A rock to felix is a mixture of a lip trick and a back roll. The skater performs the rock to fakie and whilst coming back facing backwards propels his body round using a backwards roll.
Callala Beach is a small village on the northern side of Jervis Bay with a total permanent population of around 700. This swells to around three times as many when the many holiday cottages are occupied during peak season. There is a local Store and Post Office which also provides petrol, newspapers, coffee and sandwiches, an Italian restaurant and a Fish and Chip shop.
The Callala RSL Country Club provides the usual licensed club facilities including the Dolphin Chinese Restaurant, a bowling green and a nine hole golf course. (www.callalarslcountryclub.gdayclubs.com.au).
The Callala Beach Volunteer Rural Fire Brigade has its station at the end of Greenway Rd. New members are always welcome. Callala Bay has a larger shopping centre including a number of real estate agents, butchers, baker, BBQ chicken, hardware, supermarket, newsagent, hairdresser, video store, doctor, pharmacy and a bottle shop. Callala Bay also has the area   s Public School, two Churches and a concrete boat ramp but no petrol and no Post Office.
The word 'Smat' is currently undefined.
The World According To Bill
Astrosat is a business agency specialising in the sale of digital satellite
Mitchel Chin was born on the 9th of March 1994 in Singapore. He has lived in the Netherlands and now he currently lives in Australia. His hobbies are singing, playing the gutar and piano, reading and searching the web. He is currently 12 years old. He attends Year 7St Ives High School. His favourite movies are High School Musical, Harry Potter and the Lord Of The Rings. His favourite songs are Wake Me Up When September Ends (Green Day) and Breaking Free (High School Musical). His favourite musicians are Green Day, James Blunt, Red Hot Chilli Peppers and Jet.
OpenTC (Open Trusted Computing) is a project founded by the European Commision in order to develop an open source operating system capable to take advantage from the trusted computing and, in particular, from the feature of the TPM chips.
Theo Ngoni was a boy from Zagwa who aided Wren and Tom in the Hungry Cities books
Attractio (Latin for something which excites interest and attention) is in the new theory of feeling and emotion (Emotional Intelligence, Peter Schmidt, 2006) the moment of pleasant emotion and motivation that makes things having a value. It   s a'' sui generis'' category of experience and different from sensations and thinking. Attractio, physical sensations and thinking constitute feeling and emotions. The opposite of "attractio" is "aversio" (all kinds of bad feeling).
The '''nucleus accumbens''' is thought to play an important role in constituting the experience of attractio.
Peter Schmidt: "Scanning", publishing house BELUGA NEW MEDIA, Germany, Herten 2006
Nota Group - it's ukrainian group of outsourcing development, management and quality control.
We can have a static class with in a class.In this case the only the static members of the top class can be accessed.
NOTE: since the class is defined as static the object of this can be created without having the top class objects. 
Java Black Book
Grattan Kerans, a former editor of the , was a member of the Oregon State Legislature in the House of Representatives from 1974 through 1984, and in the Oregon State Senate from 1986 to 1993.  He held the position of Speaker of the House during the 1983 Legislative Session.
He currently holds a position on the Board of Directors for the Oregon Center for Public Policy.
Oregon Center for Public Policy
Oregon Blue Book listing of Speakers of the House 
He has many years web development experience.
His blog is accessib;le at http://look-pavi.blogspot.com
A pioneer in the the field of financial derivatives and, more recently, in the use of market mechanisms to promote efficient reduction of pollutants, Sandor is a past chairman of the Chicago Board of Trade and the founder, chairman and chief executive officer of Chicago Climate Exchange (CCE), a self-regulatory exchange that administers a voluntary greenhouse gas reduction and trading program for North America. CEE's European subsidiary, the European Climate Exchange (ECX) is Continental Europe's largest exchange for trading carbon emission reduction allowances.
2004 Commencement Address to the Graduate School of International Relations and Pacific Studies, 
University of California, San Diego: http://www-irps.ucsd.edu/about/IRPS_Commencement_Address.pdf
Berska - Young trend
Stores are in the following Contries:
Belgium,
Cyprus,
France,
Greece,
Ireland,
Italy,
Lebanon,
Malta,
Mexico,
Netherlands,
Portugal,
Saudi Arabia,
Spain,
Switzerland,
Venezuela
Berska's official website: www.bershka.com
The Skupshtina is the formal name for the parliament in some Slavic countries; including Serbia and Montenegro.
1. Glenny, Misha. ''The Balkans: 1804-1999.''  London: Granta Books, 1999.
2. SERBIA, ''The Encyclopaedia of World History, 6th Edition.''  Houghton Mifflin Company, 2006.
Silentwulf, also known as Eric Ogden, is a young teenage filmmaker. Filming from the early age of 10 and on, he has become a internet celebrity. His first hit was "Funny Faces", which premiered on several websites, including AlbinoBlacksheep. Another popular series is "Insanity". Eric is often compared with internet superstar Fredryk Phox. Silentwulf is currently working on a series called "Counter-Clips" which a comedy/drama based on the online game "Counter-Strike:Source". He is also working on future episodes of "386 DOS Witticism", which pokes fun at old computer games. Silentwulf films, mostly contain silly, off-the-wall humor, but some films contain political, or more mature humor. For example, in Funny Faces 3, Eric makes a fool out of political filmmaker, Michael Moore. Silentwulf still makes films to this date, and is often chatting in the forums section of his website.
Based in the magnificent Barossa Valley Ranges of South Australia is a small boutique winery, Karra Yerta Wines.  Only very small amounts are made of Eden Valley Riesling and Eden Valley Shiraz from old, dry-grown vineyard in the pristine setting. There is no cellar door outlet.  Products are available through mail-order and selected outlets only.
June 26, 2006 - Dreams Inc., (DRMS.OB) parent company of Field of Dreams   retail stores, announced today that Jorge Salvat has been named franchise president of the popular sports memorabilia chain of stores, located in premier malls across the country since 1991. Salvat comes to Field of Dreams   with more than 25 years of experience in the franchise environment, including 10 years in senior management.    We are pleased to welcome Jorge to the Dreams family, and believe that his experience will dovetail well with our goals for our Field of Dreams   franchise stores,    said Ross Tannenbaum, president of Dreams, Inc.    His proven success and understanding of our marketing objectives give us confidence that he is the right person to lead our stores to new heights in the next few years.    Tannenbaum noted that Field of Dreams   has 10 company-owned stores as well as 19 individually-owned franchise locations with both divisions in a growth mode.    With Jorge on board, we will be able to execute our dual-pronged strategy to expand both store types in a well considered and complementary fashion.   
Salvat spent the past six years as president and CEO of Cartoon Cuts, LP, a chain of hair salons catering expressly to children. In his tenure there, he doubled the number of stores and was responsible for a significant increase in profitability. He has extensive knowledge of the franchise business, with experience both domestically and internationally. Salvat will be responsible for overseeing the current franchise locations as well as implementing an aggressive growth plan as part of the company   s overall franchise strategy. 
ISO 19114 provides a procedural framework for evaluating the quality of digital geographic datasets, consistent with the data quality principles defined in ISO 19113. It consists of three classes of conformance: one for quality evaluation, one for evaluating data quality and on for reporting quality information.
The ISO standard itself costs roughly $90 to buy from ISO, and is under copyright so not too many details aren easily available over the internet.
The 200 BULLETS was born in 2003 from the combination of all the experiences brought from each of the four components. 
Three months have barely passed since their coming together and they are already contacted by the independent label Kosentostre to publish a mini Ep.
This is how "10 Minuti di Panico" comes out. A crude, direct and immediate record that, despite being a small promotional cd, it becomes straight away a cult. Reviews (Rocksound, Punkster, Punkadeka and many others) are enthusiastic. First print is exhausted and reprinted after only 6 months. 
It is from this record that the fist single of the band is extracted: La dolce Morte. This song immediately becomes a mini hit, it is broadcast by the radio and for a long time (source: Vitaminic/Nielsen) it's the italian punk song more downloaded from the web. 
This exploit brings them all around Italy and gives them the opportunity of scheduling a 28 dates tour in the States in the autumn of 2004. In the same year they open with ToyDolls, ConckeyRejects and tens of other Italian and foreign bands. 
At the end of 2005 the band changes drastically its formation, and so 200 Bullets refresh their sound and prepare the new songs for the new album. 
They are the only Italian band coming out on "Nothing Set in Stone", a punk compilation distributed in the UK and in the USA. 
After this, they play two triumphal concerts in London the 24th and 25th of June 2006 and an English label proposes them to publish their record in the United Kingdom.
It's the kind of punk you have not been listening since a long time. They don't care. They play having a good time and they make you have a good time. Live attitude. Punk attitude. 200 Bullets are always on tour, they love music, they love playing, they love punk.
Source: www.200Bullets.com
The game of Thirteen Card Brag is also known as Crash. It is played over a large part of the north of England and in Wales mainly in a Public House.
This is a game for four people but two can play it
DMS12 is a NYC native living in miami. DMS12 has done Remix work for many major artists. 
Raunak Jaishree Ramakrishna is the last known survivor of an ancient species of lizard that is only known to the Andromedan Schgimzaghan race of Struphlem. This survivor is usually not spoken of due to his incapability of comprehension of the world around him and vice verca. Pi. the species mates the BBq each day
Raunak Jaishree Ramakrishna, Professor of the University of Alpha Centaurian Sciences and Religions, 2004
Common Opinion
Thea Francesca A. Senar is currently a senior high school student at Saint Joseph School, Naga City, Philippines. She love KPOP, JPOP, JROCK, KROCK. She adores Koreans and Japs. She has a crush on many Asian and International artists, including Jun Matsumoto, TVXQ!, and the Super Junior. She's really an ardent fan of KPOP and JPOP artists.
She loves food. She would eat anything that fancies her tastebuds. She likes any type of food. Her faves include chocolates, sashimi, sushi, steak, pasta, pizza, kimchi, kimbap, daifoku, takouyaki, and many more. You could say that she eats a lot but never gains weight.
Her parents are Warren Senar and Ma. Tina Aquino-Senar. She has three siblings, two boys and one girl. Their names are Warren William Senar, Tricia Sofia Senar, and Warren Cristopher Senar. She's the eldest. 
Thea doesn't have a boyfriend, and doesn't plan on having one until she has a career.
Rewarded the "1er Prix de l'Humour" at the Avignon Festival in 1993, he is well-known for cross-linking the genres of opera, circus and film. Kupferblum has worked in France, Austria, Germany, England, Spain, Belgium, USA, South Korea, Lebanon, Israel, Russia, Lithuania and Italy. 
He has taught master classes for singers and actors at Sorbonne university, Paris, the University of London, England, the University of Vienna, Austria, the University of Tel Aviv, Israel, Southeastern Louisiana University, USA, Bruckner University Linz, Austria, and others.
Publications: 'Las perspectivas dramaticas de la opera contemporanea independiente en Europa', ''Doce notas preliminares'' n   14 2005 primavera, Barcelona, Spain
14:39, 22 August 2006 (UTC) 
A part exchanged vehicle at a motor dealer.
An '''amateur fire brigade''' is a fire fighting force consisting of nonprofessional, sometimes volunteer members. Although largely superseded by professional fire fighters, amateur fire brigades were quite common  during the American Civil War and can be seen in the film ''Gangs of New York'' among other places. They were originally organized by insurance companies, but fire houses eventually turned into a sort of social gathering place for working-class men.
This led to a number of problems, however. Each fire brigade tended to have a "turf" it patrolled, putting out fires in order to reap the reward paid by the insurance company, but turf wars could lead to conflict among different brigades. In New York City and other places in the United States, for instance, it was not unheard of for two or more brigades to arrive at the scene of the fire and fight each other instead, while the building burned to the ground. Looting of the building in question was also quite common. See the incomplete article fire house and history of fire brigades.
Documentary accompanying the film ''Gangs of New York''; it originally aired on (I think) the Discovery Channel prior to and immediately following the film's release. I know it says not to list Google, but if you look this up, you should be able to find plenty of info. I'm primarily putting this here because I want to get the ball rolling for other editors, using info from the documentary, which can be validated and expanded upon using other sources. It's a fascinating topic really.
The European Business Aviation Convention and Exhibition (EBACE) (French: Conference et  	 exposition de l'aviation d'affaires europeenne) is the annual convention for business aviation in Europe. Organised by the US National Business Aviation Association (NBAA) and its European counterpart the European Business Aviation Association (EBAA). 
EBACE has been held in Geneva, Switzerland since 2001 and is now in its fifth year. 
Models is mainly based on 4 people'''(Jang Gong Gun,Han Jae Suk,Kim Nam Joo & Lian Jing Er)'''
Kim Nam Joo and Han Jae Suk meet under certain circumstances and Kim Nam Joo wants Han Jae Suk to help her with her project related to walking down a catwalk...Jang Gong Gun meets Kim Nam Joo at modeling school and becomes really close but due to the fact that Jang Gong Gun wants to have a successful life leaves Kim Nam Joo and woos Lian Jing Er to become rich.Jang Gong Gun and Han Jae Suk meet at modeling school because Han Jae Suk meet is an instructor then the two later become friends...Han Jae Suk seems really strict to Kim Nam Joo but actually he has interest in her.Jang Gong Gun and Han Jae Suk are rivals in love because they both like Kim Nam Joo...Dun Dun Dun...who get's hit by a car and for what reason... that's for you to find out and me to know!!! =p
Avnish Katoch is a noted social activist and entrepreneur from Himachal Pradesh (North Indian State) and is leading many social causes in his home state, he is based in USA and is General Secretary of Himachal association, My Himachal.
Avnish Katoch is a noted social activist and entrepreneur from Himachal Pradesh (North Indian State) and is leading many social causes in his home state, he is based in USA and is General Secretary of Himachal association, My Himachal.
Isaac Gammal was born on April 18,1988. He was born in Monouth Medical in New Jersey. Son of businessman Charles Gammal and housewife Fran (maiden name Klein). He has 4 siblings, 3 brothers and one sister. He currently attends Brooklyn College as an undergraduate student in the college of liberal arts and sciences.
TOV. (Name pronounced like "stove" no "s"). Full name: Tov Rose. Is a , , , performer,  and  . He is a pioneer in the field of  , providing "faith-friendly" Employee Care Programs to non-military personnel in the corporate world, through the company he founded,  . 
TOV was born into a family with more than 150 years of experience in the Entertainment Industry and has performed, taught or preached in thousands of  and   worldwide, including ; has been a published  ; and been in , including one with actor  of the 70   s hit television show,    .    He has worked in , and trained both as a lighting designer, and as an . He is a classically trained  who's performed solo, with  and groups of various musical , including three years both touring with and leading a consistently popular and decades-old Christian Contemporary/Pop/Folk group. Like many local, regional and cultural personalities (take , for example), TOV would be considered "niche celebrity." While many in the general public may not know who he is, there are thousands of people of select demographics and venues who would recognize him, and the various musical groups and bands he has toured with.
He holds a degree in  & Media Relations/Communications; and has completed internships and intensive courses of study in ,  Ministries, as well as  Languages .
TOV began work as a  in 1991, and along with his business partner and sister, Jen, gradually began focusing on serving the needs of the   as a , providing spiritual support and  for Entertainment Industry Professionals, including , support staff, corporations,  and .
In 1992, TOV began  a local  program. Under his direction, the program grew to have a viewer-ship of more than 300 stations world-wide.
TOV has made various guest appearances on both  &  shows to talk about subjects ranging from relationships, to helping  know the love of , with multiple appearances on     Drive Times    with DJ and friend, WWJD Musical Director, George Flores. He has also appeared as a performer on numerous television programs, with multiple appearances on the , program    Praise the Lord,    hosted by TBN founder   s Paul & Jan Couch.
Gary Lewallen (Jimmie's son)
For more about the firm, see , or its widely read blogs: 
More about the firm in the news, and other information for media, may be found at .
These girls are twins, who sing and play instruments. They are neo-nazis and are very pro white. They feel that the biggest problems facing the white population today are that white women are not having enough children to replace the white population.
Gary Holl, Born 1961, Professional Skateboarder. Resides in Northern California.
Gary began skateboarding in 1975 and has been riding for 31 years! In the early years everyone was riding it all, banks, freestyle, slalom and pools.  
In the late 70   s until 1984 Gary focused on Freestyle and discovered many tricks that others were later credited with.
Continuing to skate in the mid 80-90   s he was riding skate parks, street-style, pools and ditches.
In 2001 he renewed his enthusiasm for slalom racing and began competing on the National level where he took several podium finishes.
In early 2004 with renewed enthusiasm Gary reentered freestyle skateboarding and was crowned the State Champion in 2005.
Gary is one of the best all-around skateboarders today and is proud of his philosophy on skateboarding and it   s real simple, HAVE FUN!
Bard Guthormson, a Birkebeiner Chieftan born at: Rein, Trondelag, Norway died in battle on 1194 married to Ragnfrid Erlingsdatter, born at Kvie, Vang, in Sogn (Valdres), Norway.  She was a nobleman's daughter.
Pedigrees of Some of the Emperor Charlemagne's descendants, by J. Orton Buck & Timothy Field Beard, Volume 3,copyright 1978, reprinted with permission of the Order of the Crown of Charlemagne, by Genealogical Publishing Co., Inc., 1001 N. Calvert St., Baltimore, Md. 21202. page 256.    and
Telemark to America, Vol. 1 - Emigration. Available from : Telelaget of America, on the internet; page 18 where it says: He was a nobleman and Birkebeiner Chieftan from Rein, Trondelag.  etc, as above. . .
Ron Eliran, long considered "Israel's Ambassador of Song", is a one-man show combining the best of Israeli Traditional with the best of Contemporary International. Eliran, who was born in Haifa, Israel, received the "Violin of David Award"   which is the Israeli equivalent of the "Oscar" and "Grammy" combined   for the hit song "Sharm-El-Sheikh".  
Eliran has toured extensively throughout the world, performing in a variety of languages. Most recently he was a guest performer at the "Budapest Festival of Freedom" where his original composition became the Festival's official song. Eliran also wrote both lyrics and music for the Broadway hit show "Don't Step On My Olive Branch", and for the widely acclaimed show "Nightsong", in both of which he starred. 
Eliran has captivated audiences on Israeli and American TV as well as in live performances in New York's Carnegie Hall, in Washington's Kennedy Center, in London's Albert Hall, in Montreal's Place des Arts, and in Los Angeles' Music Center. 
In the wake of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin's assassination, Eliran, together with Gad Yaccoby, then Israel's UN Ambassador, wrote a song about the late Prime Minister's life. Eliran performed his poignant song in front of a crowd of 200,000 people at "Rabin Square" in Tel Aviv as part of a live nationally televised tribute for the fallen leader. 
On August 31, 1997, Eliran performed in Basel, Switzerland, at the Centennial celebration of the First Zionist Congress. His performance took place in the same hall where Theodor Herzl first prophesied the birth of the Jewish State exactly 100 years ago. Eliran sang with the Basel Symphony Orchestra a song he wrote named "If you will it   " about Herzl and the Zionist saga. 
Whether in an intimate club or in a big hall like Madison Square Garden, Ron Eliran is a distinctive voice who brings his people's roots to life with love, nostalgia, humor and showmanship. 
Wikipedia (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nechama_Hendel)
IMBD (http://imdb.com/name/nm0253682/)
The Pakistani American Anjuman is a non-political, non-sectarian, cultural and social organization that strives to promote the presence of the people from Pakistan living in the Triangle area of North Carolina. Their mission is to provide cultural and social interaction for the families and individuals of the Pakistani community and to offer a variety of programs and services to its members.  Have several events during the year, including special events for both the Eids, Iftar party during Ramadan, Pakistan Day (August 14th) celebrations, picnics and other musical and social events every year.
Geoff Craz, was born on November 3rd, 1991 in Brookhaven, NY. Geoff Craz is the guitarist for numerous bands on Long Island. He has written his own material and his bands play in local theaters. Geoff Craz started playing bass guitar at the age of 10. But soon moved on to playing guitar 2 years later. 
This latest recorded work sees the introduction of another Generation of P-FUNK offspring.With names like Haskins resurfaceing and Longest active FUNKADELIC giving way to syblings.Nowell Haskins,Tim Shider and Nate Shider are Co-writers and musicians on the Albums single,Sexy Side Of You.Truth is the Puddle never runs far from the P.
This latest recorded work sees the introduction of another Generation of P-FUNK offspring.With names like Haskins resurfaceing and Longest active FUNKADELIC giving way to syblings.Nowell Haskins,Tim Shider and Nate Shider are Co-writers and musicians on the Albums single,Sexy Side Of You.Truth is the Puddle never runs far from the P.
Maurice John
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Maurice    Maury    John (born in 1919; died in October, 1974 in Ames, Iowa) coached at Moberly Junior College in Moberly, Missouri; Drake University in Des Moines, Iowa; and Iowa State University in Ames, Iowa. His teams compiled impressive numbers throughout his career. 
A graduate of Central Missouri State (1941), his teams first attracted national attention at Moberly. John was a breathtaking 280-79 (.780) in his twelve seasons there. His Greyhounds won two national junior college championships (1954, 1955). John was inducted into the National Junior College Athletic Association (NJCAA) Hall of Fame in 1984.
Taking over at Drake for the 1958-1959 season, John had to compete in the stellar Missouri Valley Conference (MVC).  Bradley, Cincinnati, Saint Louis, and Wichita were very worthy opponents; Tulsa and North Texas were not as strong. Basketball purists loved it when John would coach opposite the big names in the Valley --- Chuck Orsborn (Bradley), Ed Jucker (Cincinnati), John Benington (St. Louis), and Ralph Miller (Wichita).  Outstanding competition notwithstanding, John was named MVC Coach-of-the-Year an incredible four times, and three years in a row (1964, 1968, 1969, 1970). On February 27, 1971 against St. Louis, Drake fans were chanting,    Don   t go, Maury, don   t go,    but it was too late. He had signed a contract that afternoon to take over at Iowa State after thirteen seasons in Des Moines. He was 211-131 (.617) as coach of the Bulldogs.
John   s 1968-1969 Drake team was known probably more than any other. For serious basketball fans the names of some of the Drake players (Willie McCarter, Willie Wise, Dolph Pulliam) roll off the tongue, and the team is discussed in reverential tones to this day in Des Moines. 
Once at Iowa State, John described (James H.) Hilton Coliseum as    an $8 million palace,    and he was 43-35 in three seasons there. John ended his ties with the Cyclones in July, 1974 because of illness, and he died on October 16, 1974 in Ames. 
John may be best remembered both as a magnificent recruiter and as a coach who was ahead of his time. He was in step with Hall of Fame coaches Al McGuire of Marquette and Ralph Miller of Wichita --- they saw African-American players as skilled performers on a basketball court and amiable people off of it, while the general population may have seen them in a negative, noncontributing role off the court, but in an acceptable role on it.  
Notable Games and Accomplishments
John was named the United States Basketball Writers Association (USBWA) Coach of the Year in 1969 while taking Drake to the Final Four. He was chosen for the MVC Hall of Fame in 2000.   
John   s death drew scant attention in Sports Illustrated. It said simply that he was    a former national basketball coach of the year.    
Drake Media Guide, 2004-2005
Andrew Heth was born in 1979 in Seattle Washington. Andrew is the creator of "Andrew's Cinnamon Sticks" and the "Baja Fiesta Chicken" which are sold at all Alfy's Pizza locations in the state of Washington. He is a graduate of the University of Washington and holds a Bachelors Degree in Business Administration. An accpomplished tennis amateur and musician, he currently resides in Western Washington and is focusing on travel and tourism.
The Sea Snipers are a video gaming clan that plays Socom U.S. Navy SEALs on the PS2. Their leader Rator aka Rich Hunsinger, illustrated all of the Socom 1 and 2 maps and he was hired by Piggyback Interactive to illustrate all 16 online and offline maps for the Official Socom 3 Strategy Guide and the whole clan was contracted to author the entire multiplayer section. They created the TWB or Tactical Whiteboard which allows gamers to draw tactics on the Socom maps. The TWB was featured in EGM (Electronic Gaming Monthly) as a "Must Hit Website".
The Sea Snipers are a brotherhood of gamers who take gaming to a higher level. Their average age is 30 and they do not tolerate cheating, glitching, racial slurs, defamatory or derrogatory comments. The Sea Snipers are built on honor and respect, dedication and sacrifice, and their members do for each other without the thought of receiving anything in return. Their dedication to the gaming community is admirable and continues to this day.
Neil was born in Thunder Bay, Ontario, Canada, in 1986. This is Neil's debut film
He has a bright future in the industry. 
ANACS was created by the American Numismatic Association (ANA)to correct major problems facing the coin collecting hobby, namely counterfeit coins. The ANA is a  not-for-profit educational association for collectors of coins, tokens, medals and paper money. The ANA is chartered by the U.S. Congress. In the 1970's, the ANA board of governors saw action was needed to remedy the confusion created by the counterfeit and altered coins that were flooding the coin collecting industry. Their solution was ANACS, the American Numismatic Association Certification Service. ANACS began with only two experts located in Washington D.C.  Washington was chosen to be nearby to use the Smithsonian   s Numismatic Collection and the services of the Treasury Department. ANACS certified its first coin as genuine on June 15, 1972. As the need for its services grew additional experts were added to ANACS staff. 
In 1976, ANACS was moved to Colorado Springs where the ANA had its headquarters. Three years later, ANACS began grading coins using the book    The Official American Numismatic Association Grading Standards for United States Coins,    that the ANACS staff helped to create. Coins were given a technical grade for each side, "the obverse" and "the reverse". The service became very successful and within a few more years ANACS was grading nearly 3,000 coins a month. Today the ANACS grades about that many coins in a single day.
American Numismatic Association's Web Site: www.anacs.com                                                                       -->
Birmingham,Ala rapper Rayzor Blade real name (Cordarel Ray)born Oct 1st 1986.He
Estabilished Kingdom Reign Records & Entertaiment in 2002.2 years later the rapper was shot in a fastfood resturant in which he was employed with in November 2004.He then released a track
Then he went on to retaliate with "The Deadly Combination" with a track entitled Jump Stupid.
He as of 2003 he released several hits with his former group "The Birmingham Predators.
Rayzor Blade Retaliated With Crime Mix 2006 for the sample "The Gator Boys" used.
The Crime Mix 2006 mixtape includes numerous Sexuall passes at "Ciara" & "Rihanna".It
Dylan ussaly plays the traditional instraments like the guitar or bass guitar or drums but since the band has a drum machine the drums are kinda usless Dylan tries to bring guitar into the danceish Dub type music he wants them to vary between Dub music and kinda more classic rockish type music  
Ayecove.com  was born on the web in March 2005. After many suggestions that we (a sound group of coves) really needed a place on the web to all be able to come to to interact and catch up, and with no idea where to start or what to call it, a google search was carried out. On finding out how easy it is to own a website for yourself I got going. Humming and Hawing on a name (cove had to be in there somewhere) I decided ayecove was the best pick of many (like nahcove, soundcove and bigcove!).
Why?
The site is aimed at keeping a close group of friends closer, though distance separates us further. The majority of the sites members are from the fair Isle Of Lewis, though we also have many members in the form of friends gained over our time served on the Mainland of Scotland.  The site gets visited by people on all continents of the world. Because so many friendly coves, back then and still today, work overseas and on ships we need this to be a home from home for them, to keep them in the loop and make them sure we haven't forgotten about them.'''
I have added a one liner for my site along with text copied from my sites 'Background' page. The material is not in any way copyrighted, i know this as i created the website and wrote all the text and took most of the pictures, all the other pictures/text on the site was provided to me by friends and family and is also not copyrighted. i hope this is enough, i'm not sure what else to say.
Thanks,
Derek Campbell
Jon Peddie is a man whose poorly written articles were rejected by wikipedia.
Ellesmerocerida comprise the ancestral nautiloid stock from which all other cephalopod orders were derived. All Cambrian and lower Canadian (Early Ordovician) nautiloids as well as many upper Canadian representatives are included.  
Ellesmerocerids exhibit wide morphologic variation. Primitive forms are minute cyrtocones with closely spaced septa and a marginal siphuncle bearing sort septal necks. Overall ellesmerocerids are characterized by moderate endogastric curvature, and a marginal siphuncle with irregular diaphragms, ellipochoanitic septal necks, and thick complex connecting rings. Variations include annulate orthoconic longicones, exogastric breviconic cyrtocones, forms with thin connecting rings, and those with subcentral siphuncle.
Ellesmerocerida have been divided into three suborders, Plectronoceratina, Ellesmeroceratina, and Cyrtocerinina. Plectronoceratina form the ancestral stock which originated in the Late Cambrian. Only two families are known. Ellesmeroceratina form the bulk of the order with six families, three of which,  the Ellesmeroceratidae, Baltoceratidae ,and Protocycloceratidae are major. Only three families, each represented by a single genus, are assigned to the Cyrtocerinina. 
Plectronoceratina consist of forms in which siphuncle material is expanded into the chambers where unbounded by septal necks, forming siphuncular bulbs. Siphuncles are fragile and poorly preserved, with rings composed mostly of organic material. Transverse partitions in the siphuncle known as diaphragms are irregular in form and erratic in distribution where found. Septa are close spaced, the siphuncle is small and ventrally located. Two families are assigned, the Plectronoceratidae for straight to endogastrically curved forms and the Balkoceratidae for those that are exogastrically curved. Plectronoceratina originated in the Late Cambrian and form the ancestral stock not only of the Ellesmerocerida, but of the entire cephalopoda. 
Ellesmeroceratina consist of ellesmerocerids in which the connecting rings are well calcified, are appreciably thickened, and may show layering. The siphuncle is ventral, diaphragms are rather common. The predominant and core family, the Ellesmeroceratidae, consists of laterally compressed shells with short phragmocones and rapidly expanding apices. They may be straight or endogastric.
Cyrtocerinina are ellesmerocerids with well calcified connecting rings that extend as bulbs into the siphuncle cavity. Necks may be short or long. The three recognized genera are quite distinct from one another and are each assigned to its own family. 
Septa, dividing the chambers in ellesmerocerids, are generally closely spaced. In Plectronoceratina as many as 35 may occur in a distance equal to the corresponding diameter of the conch. The opposite extreme is encountered in some baltoceratids were the cameral interval approximates the diameter of the conch. Ellesmerocerid siphuncles range in size from one-half to one-fifteenth the corresponding conch diameter. Forms in which the siphuncle occupies one-third to one-tenth the conch diameter predominate. An exception to the usual ventral position is found in the Shideleroceratidae, in which the siphuncle is central or subcentral. However the inclusion of this family in the Ellesmerocerida is of doubtful validity.
Five major nautiloid orders are derived from Ellesmerocerida. The Endocerida come most likely from within the family Endoceratidae with the lost of siphuncular diaphragms and the addition instead of endocones. Actinocerida came from the Cyrtocerinina, most likely from Bathmoceras, with further development of endosiphuncular deposits. Discosorida are though to be derived from Plectronoceratina. Michelinocerida (Orthocerida to some) are derived from the Baltoceratidae, a family of the Ellesmeroceratina. The fifth, Tarphycerida are thought to come from Bassleroceratidae, which are derived from Ellesmeroceratidae. Whether basslerocerids should be included in Tarphycerida or Ellesmerocerida (Ellesmeroceratina ) is debatable. Where the Barrandeocerida and Oncocerida fit with respect to Tarphycerida is yet uncertain although Tarphycerida seem to be the root stock. Oncocerida is considered the root stock of serious or orders leading to modern Nautilus .  Thus we can trace Nautilus back to the Ellesmerocerida in the Early Ordovician. 
The Michelinocerida gave rise to a completely different sort of cephalopod, first to the Bactritida and Ammonoidea, and ultimately to modern coleoids      cuttlefish, squid , and octopus. 
Finally, the Endocerida, Actinocerida, and Discosorida are dead end groups, with no derived orders.
Although the Ellesmerocerida are confined to the Ordovician Period, their progeny are still with us. 
Memoir 44, pp 15-25; New Mexico Bureau of Mines and Mineral Resources, Socorro, NM
Kirkcaldy Town JFC were formed in June 2005 by Ian Duff and Dean Kerr. Since then, the team has seen many players and coaches go by. The coaching staff now consists of Ian Duff and Stanislaw Ocimek who make a good partnership. The team play thier home matches at Ravenscraig Park in Kirkcaldy and play thier matches in a non-competitive Fife Football Development League (FFDL). In thier first season they played seven a-side in the Central and East Fife Soccer Sevens Association League (CEFSSA). Kirkcaldy Town have got a very healthy number of players, including team captain and central defender, Scott Donaldson and top goalscorer, Callum Stalker (19 goals). In this thier first season of 11 a-side, the squad hope to improve scorelines and performances. However, all our players enjoy themselves fully, no matter what the scoreline is!  
It is used along with ligand as a catalyst for Atom Transfer Radical Polymerization
Pookolathur is a village near Manjeri in Pulpetta Panchayathu. That is the commercial cultural and administration capital of Pulpetta. A place of scenic beauty enriched with different species on butterflies birds and other wild animals like foxes and wild cats.
The only high school in the panchayat CHM High School also situated in pookolathur 
Electro-Tron is an Electro-House production/DJ group from Edmonton, Alberta, Canada. Composed of DJ Electro and DJ Tron, who also go by B-Rad, B-Dub and MC Frosty, DJ Ocho, Forsty, Dylon; respectively. This band formed in 2006 from the destruction of former heavy metal group MarsMarine, also an Edmonton-based band.
I am the source, because I am a member of Electro-Tron. This article is not slanted or biased, and contains little information, so it should have no reason to be rejected. Thank you.
The plates, which enclose a gas, are subjected to a polarizing voltage.  When a radiation beam crosses the plates, it creates ionization in the gas.  The resulting ions will collide with the plates and create small currents that can be read by external amplifiers to which the plates are connected.
Linear Accelerators for Radition Therapy by D Greene and PC Williams 2nd edition      
Dmitry Grinberg is a Palm OS Programmer who was born in Astrakhan, Russia. He moved to the united states in 1999 and currently lives in Buffalo Grove, Illinois. 
Dmitry Grinberg currently attends a computer science knowledge and finances his education by creating Palm OS programs. His products are well received in the Palm OS community as they are very difficult, "lowlevel" things like WarpSpeed and SkinUI. He has a very detailled knowledge about the Palm OS and uses it to his advantage.
Dmitry Grinberg's main skill seems to be disassembly(using a (heavily customized) version of IDA Pro) and singlestepping handhelds in debug mode. His products can be purchased at http://www.palmpowerups.com/.
Roger C. Adams is the current U.S. Pardon Attorney.  The Office of the Pardon Attorney, in consultation with the Attorney General or his designee, assists the President in the exercise of executive clemency as authorized under Article II, Section 2, of the Constitution. All requests for executive clemency for federal offenses are directed to the Pardon Attorney for investigation and review. The Pardon Attorney prepares the Department's recommendation to the President for final disposition of each application. Executive clemency may take several forms, including pardon, commutation of sentence, remission of fine or restitution, and reprieve. 
The ability to make the world notice you for your unique style and your passionate pursuit of living life through your dreams.
Gshat one in bring graham shatford ------ -->
Multi-instrumentalist musician/ audio engineer associated with the Elephant Six Collective.
On August 22nd 2006 it was announced that there was to be a box set containing all 19 UK singles by the group The Clash released by Legacy/Columbia/Epic.
Collated by Mick Jones and Paul Simonon, the CD box is set to contain six bonus tracks which have previously been unavailable on CD. It is to be packaged in a 7" style sleeve with vinyl reproduction CDs.
The package is also set to include a 44 page booklet with extensive sleeve notes, rare and unseen photos and memorabilia, with sleevenote contributions from Mike D, The Edge, Bobby Gillespie, Irvine Welsh, Steve Jones, Damon Albarn, Stuart Pearce, Pete Townsend, Ian Brown and Bernard Sumner among others.
The UK release date of the boxset is 30th Augusut 2006.
In Australia the release date is 9th August 2006.
At this stage no US release date has been set.
The tracklisting is as follows:
Disc One
1. White Riot 
Disc Two
Capital Radio EP
1. Listen 
2. Interview 
3. Interview  
4. Capital Radio 
Disc Three
1. Remote Control 
2. London's Burning  
3. London's Burning  
Disc Four
1. Complete Control 
2. City Of The Dead 
Disc Five
1. Clash City Rockers 
2. Jail Guitar Doors
Disc Six
1. White Man In Hammersmith Palais 
2. The Prisoner 
Disc Seven
1. Tommy Gun 
2. 1-2 Crush On You
Disc Eight
1. English Civil War 
2. Pressure Drop 
Disc Nine
Cost Of Living EP
1. I Fought The Law 
2. Groovy Times 
3. Gates Of The West 
4. Capital Radio Two 
Disc Ten
1. London Calling 
2. Armagideon Time 
3. Justice Tonight  
4. Kick It Over  
5. Clampdown  
6. Card Cheat  
7. Lost In The Supermarket  
Disc Eleven
1. Bankrobber 
2. Rockers Galore...UK Tour 
3. Rudie Can't Fail  
4. Train In Vain 
Disc Twelve
1. The Call Up 
2. Stop The World 
Disc Thirteen
1. Hitsville UK 
2. Radio One 
3. Police On My Back  
4. Somebody Got Murdered  
Disc Fourteen
1. The Magnificent Seven  
2. The Magnificent Dance  
3. Lightning Strikes  
4. One More Time  
5. One More Dub  
6. Cool Out  
7. The Magnificent Seven  
8. The Magnificent Dance 
Disc Fifteen
1. This Is Radio Clash 
2. Radio Clash 
3. Outside Broadcast  
4. Radio 5  
Disc Sixteen
1. Know Your Rights 
2. First Night Back In London 
Disc Seventeen
1. Rock The Casbah 
2. Long Time Jerk 
3. Mustapha Dance  
4. Red Angel Dragnet  
5. Overpowered By Funk 
Disc Eighteen
1. Should I Stay Or Should I Go 
2. Straight To Hell 
3. Inoculated City  
4. Cool Confusion  
Disc Nineteen
1. This Is England 
2. Do It Now 
3. Sex Mad Roar  
Use a ". " (dot+space) or "    " (bullet+space) as first characters on a line to generate a bullet in a document lay-out.
Example: to force a line break with continued indentation:
Multi-instrumentalist musician associated with the Elephant Six Collective
Greek talented magician Dionysios Goulimis owner of the eshop of Streetmagic.gr and performer in many Greek TV shows. Mentalism, close up and art of illusion.
Kotor like other Serb-Montenegrin cities does have a soccer team. The football club is called FK Bokelj.
Ground  	Gradski
Capacity 	5000
Demographic Crisis
Madam, 
Sir,
Demographics: http://www.geocities.com/demographic_crash 
Black on an Angel, released in 2004 was written, directed, and produced by Faith Trimel and stars newcomer Sherry Richardson and veteran actress Deborah Calloway Duke.
Black Aura, based on a true story, is a romance thriller that depicts the devastating effects of a woman's mental illness on a blossoming affair. When Angel meets Phaedra, she is instantly captivated by such a beautiful, mysterious woman. The two embark on a torrid affair, and soon fall passionately in love.  Shortly after, Phaedra begins having jealous rages over Angel's imagined infidelities. Angel's dearest friend and psychic, Jennings, seeing what Angel can not, warns her to get out, but she is in too deep.  Black Aura on an Angel explores sensuality, insanity, and salvation and asks the question, "If you try to save someone, can you lose yourself?"
Written by: Faith Trimel
Directed by: Faith Trimel
Produced by: Faith Trimel
Starring:  Sherry Richardson
Cinematography by:  Orlando Vicente II
Running Time: 64 minutes
Release Date: June 12, 2004
Language:  English
Cast:
Sherry Richardson....Phaedra Dixon
Deborah Calloway Duke....Jennings
Faith Trimel....Angel Jackson
Kathy Johnson....Angel's Mother
Ketrenna Kirkland....Woman at reading
Quincentra Jacobs....Young Angel
Courtney Gresham....Young Phaedra
Paulette Britton....Melody
Devon D. Foy....Man at door
Meko....Woman kissing Angel
Tobias Alexander is the screen name used by an American teenager who is determined to help parents of teens deal with their struggles and conflicts. 
His goals are to give advice to parents about being a teen, and how they can better interact with them. Being a teen himself, he has vast understanding of living as a teenager in modern society.
He has a blog which is his main basis of communication with those who ask for his help, see below for link to his blog. (The Only True Answer For Parents With Teens)
Last Chance PowerDrive is a Power Metal band heralding from Nevada City, California. It was formed in February, 2006 by 5 highschoolers who wanted to show their town what they could do. However, the outcome was something much more amazing. Bands from all over the area wanted to play with LCPD and they became a local success. 
Band Members:
Andy Hendrikson: Vocals
Miles Buckley: Guitar
Nick Noto: Guitar
Dylan Hunter: Bass
Angelo Castiglioni: Drums
Wyoming Church of Christ is a small church in Wyoming, New South Wales, which is on the main road of Henry Parry Drive. The church meets on Sunday mornings and belongs to the Church of Christ denomination in Australia. The senior Pastor at the church is Peter Wakeley, and the youth Pastor is Gary Normyle. The church congregates at 9.30 AM every Sunday morning, and hosts special services on Christmas Day and Good Friday. 
The church has a number of groups, including an active youth group, a senior's group (OWLS: Older Wise Learners), a photography club, bible studies for all ages, and a soccer team.
The church can be contacted on (02) 4323 3327.
The Bulletin (Wyoming Church of Christ's weekly newsletter)
Anybody Killa
Axe Murder Boyz
Boondox
Blaze Ya Dead Homie
Claas
Dark Lotus
Drive-By
Esham
Fall Guy
House of Krazees
Insane Clown Posse
Intriznik
Lavel
Jumpsteady
Marz
Necro
Project Deadman
Prozak
Q-Strange
Tech N9ne
Twiztid
V-Sinizter
The site is linked to the webmaster's main page, silic0nsilence.com. The webmaster began the page in April 2006, after purchasing the fuckpaypal.net domain. The webmaster, who calls himself 'silic0nsilence', started the page after a buyer scammed him during a sale, and PayPal offered no assistance to gain back his money or property.
In October 2005, 'silic0nsilence' put a laptop up for bids on eBay. He had excellent feedback, and had sold in the past. The winning bid went to 'RH'. He uses this name to protect the buyer. After the buyer sent the payment via eBay's PayPal payment system, silic0nsilence shipped the laptop. When the buyer received it, he praised the seller. About a week later, the buyer placed a chargeback on his credit card stating the item was not as described. PayPal allowed the chargeback even though a return policy was not stated. The seller attempted contacting RH several times, with no luck. The seller was out $615, and the laptop. He contacted PayPal through email and their hard-to-find telephone number. He was continously told to 'wait 75 days' so that PayPal could attempt to get the funds back. After 75 days, he contacted PayPal again, only to have them tell him to 'wait 75 days.' Fed up, he contacted the Better Business Bureau.
In April 2006, the website was online. silic0nsilence began telling his story to the world, and offered PDF documents and names as evidence. A picture of him is shown holding a sign that says, "FUCK PAYPAL." Imposed on the picture are the words, "They may win.. But I'm going down swinging'" Under the image, the words "Justice will be served is displayed." The page then tells his story, and offers several updates, the first being added on April 7th, 2006. Around this time, he was contacted by NCO Financial Systems, a company PayPal hired to obtain the money. Frustrated and getting no answers from PayPal, he decided to sue the company.
In May 2006, silic0nsilence filed a Small Claims suit in Clarkstown Justice Court. The trial date was June 13th, 2006. 5 days before the trial, PayPal's Senior Litigation Paralegalist Michelle Squires contacted silic0nsilence. She argued that PayPal did attempt to get the property back, but failed. She also told him that a clause in the PayPal User Agreement stated that he would have to file a claim, and travel to California where PayPal was located to dispute and problem. She threatened that if he went on with the suit, their lawyer would file a 'Motion To Compel', which would halt the trial, and force silic0nsilence to pay PayPal's lawyer fees. 20 years old, and threatened by PayPal, he agreed to settle as long as PayPal gave him information about the buyer so that he could commence in a suit against him. They complied and did so.
In July 2006, silic0nsilence's article 'Getting Screwed by PayPal' was published in 2600 Magazine. This brought much attention and support to him and his site. Since receiving the buyer's information, he attempted contacting him several times with no luck. It was time to put an end to the frustration after almost a year, and file a suit with the buyer. silic0nsilence was contacted by The People's Court to show his case on television. He agreed to show the threat of PayPal fraud on national television. However, RH declined. The trial's set date was August 15th, 2006.
On August 15th, 2006, Clarkstown Justice Court Judge Flick awarded silic0nsilence default judgement against RH after he did not show in the amount of $671.12. This was the money silic0nsilence asked for, along with interest and court fees.
Murray School District has two High Schools: Murray High and Creekside High. They have two Middle Schools: Riverview Jr. High and Hillcrest Jr. High. They also have seven Elementary Schools including: Grant Elementary, Horizon Elementary, Viewmont Elementary, McMillan Elementary, Liberty Elementary, Longview Elementary, and Parkside Elementary. They are also the only independent school district in the Salt Lake Valley. Granite School District is the district for most of Salt Lake, and the other School District is Jordan School District. Murray School District is located in Murray, which is a suburb of Salt Lake City, capital of Utah. You can access their homepage by going to www.murrayschools.org 
Ma.Lourdes Pascual Manliclic(a talented girl). Born last September 10, 1990 in Cabanatuan City bloomed at last. It was the first baby girl, pregnancy of Dorotea Manliclic her mother. A daughter of a good man became a mayor of Gen. Natividad- Nueva, Ecija gained the throne for only one term. And admired to join politics again but unluckily, he lost his turn because of usual fraud. Her father   s named was Mario Manliclic. She had 6 brothers and 1 sister. She   s the 7th in the siblings. She studied nursery stage at the age of 4 but as her mother   s response,    Madessa, nah not yet ready for school. Still called a baby, always bringing a bottle of milk and nap at class time.    Moreover, she continues studying. At the preparatory stage, at the age of five she graduated at J.C.L.C (Jesus Christ Learning Center). 
At young age, her talent in singing sprouted. Her parents discovered it when,    hoy dad, tignan mo yung anak mo! She   s shaking her shoulder while at the same time the graceful music sounds.    That was it. The first song she learned was    Pearly Shell   . She danced while singing. Next song was Wooden Heart; Tomorrow; If We Hold On; Sulyap and move on through years she learned many songs   ECT. In the Politics Period: campaign, Madessa usually sang. The exposure blasted that time. She sang with no shyness. 
As time goes by, there was a confusing problem about family. Life brought a miserable thing. That was when her father addicted in gambling. No one can stop him from being addicted. He lost a lot of money. The time comes, when no money to lose. He tried to borrow from a bank, and it was over. Family increased many bills and it was bankrupt. Happiness turned over. No more money, all properties sold out. Her family transferred other residence to bring new life. Their destination went over in Silang, Cavite. Her family found once more the beginning not the ending. They made new business, a rice center with poultry supplies and reloading station. In addition, as I think it became successful. In one branch made it to 4 branches. (2 in Silang, 1 in Carmona and Rosario-Cavite). 
Nevertheless, another trial approached her. It was the saddest thing for her. The memorable date (first day of school) that was June 6, 2005, her mom transferred her from new school, Rosario Institute (R.I). It was so dispiriting. She dun no what to do. She really does not want to transfer other school. It was so disgusting. Pains are running all over through her veins. She wants to shout loudly, and tell the world what she felt when the destiny brought her to this miserable moment. The depressing insight conveyed into her life. She wanna tell all of you people, she do love you deep inside her heart. Hope to see you again. She really misses the bonds of Mahogany, now called Makiling. 
Aisla 8A is the aisle containing "feminine products" in the Arlen Mega-Lo-Mart on the TV Show King of the Hill. 