Andy Glazer grew up in Massapequa, New York. He graduated from Plainedge High School in 1973, and went on to attend the University of Michigan. His interest in sportswriting manifested itself early. At high school Glazer was the sports editor of the school newspaper; in college, he served as the Managing Sports Editor for the University of Michigan school newspaper, Michigan Daily, and as a sports commentator for the school radio station. After graduating from the University of Michigan in 1977, he was accepted at the Emory University School of Law. There he served as the editor in chief of the school newspaper until his graduation in 1980.
Glazer practiced law for only two years. He reportedly gave up law after representing a drug dealer in court that he knew was guilty. He won the case by bringing it to court before the district attorney was prepared; the case left Glazer feeling guilty and led to him retiring.
Glazer had often earned extra money during his education by taking trips to Las Vegas or Atlantic city to play poker.  After his aborted law career, he resumed this habit while he tried establishing himself as a writer. He soon found himself achieving greater success in poker than in writing. He later met and became close friends with Phil Hellmuth; his relationship with Hellmuth led to Glazer becoming the tournament reporter for the World Series of Poker. His tournament reports were widely liked for their regard to detail and emotion.
Glazer went on to become a columnist for Card Player Magazine and the Detroit Free Press. He also wrote the books ''Casino Gambling the Smart Way: How to Have More Fun and Win More Money'' and ''Complete Idiot's Guide to Poker (The Complete Idiot's Guide)''. He also helped Phil Hellmuth write ''Play Poker like the Pros'' and was mentioned several times in ''Positively Fifth Street''. Right before his death he started writing for finaltablepoker.com.
Though better known in the poker community for his writing; Glazer did achieve some success playing in poker tournaments. In 2002 Andy finished 22nd in the World Series of Poker Main Event. In 2003 Andy Glazer finished 6th in the World Poker Tour (WPT) Invitational. In 2004 he won two preliminary tournaments at the Crown Australian Poker Championship. By the time of his death from complications from a blood clot, Andy Glazer's total live tournament winnings exceeded $75,000.