In a nomadic career, Mitchell played for clubs in England, Scotland, The Netherlands, Germany, Turkey, Malaysia and Hong Kong, before returning to Australia to coach Sydney Olympic, Sydney United and Parramatta Power in the National Soccer League. He was the assistant manager to Ron Smith at A-League club  for the 2006/2007 season and the first half of the 2007/2008 season before taking the top position after Smith's sacking. 
He has appeared as a guest on several occasions for the Australian cable television channel Fox sports 1 which cover the English Premier League. He notably scored the winner in the 1995 Malaysia Cup final; this was a golden goal, the first golden goal to be scored in a Malaysia Cup final.
David's coaching career in the NSL spanned six seasons and 154 matches, in which he recorded 68 wins, 31 draws and 55 losses. When he returned from playing in Europe he was a player/coach for clubs Sydney Olympic and Sydney United. Some of the coaching achievements that he had in Australia was a Grand Final appearance in 1998/99 with Sydney United and also being the inaugural coach of Parramatta Power in 1999/00. 
He coached Malaysia second tier club Sarawak and left due to unpaid wages. He returned to Australia to coach Sydney Schoolboy side St Aloysius' College, before leaving to join Perth Glory as assistant to Ron Smith. He also used to be a scout for Feyenoord, acknowledging them about Brett Emerton, Brett Holman and Stephen Laybutt.
He has also been recruited by Australian Technical director Rob Baan as an assistant coach for the Australia national under-23 football team squad, who were preparing for the Beijing Olympics.
It was speculated that after the sacking of Sydney FC manager Branko Culina Mitchell would be the replacement.
Mitchell was appointed Interim Head Coach of Perth Glory after the sacking of Ron Smith in November 2007 and was then given a contract until March 2009. It was further extended to the end of the 2010/2011 season in November 2008.
Mitchell stepped down as  coach during the 2010-11 A-League season after an unbeaten run of 5 games until his side conceded four consecutive losses and was re-assigned to the role of Director of Football and Ian Ferguson was placed in charge of the club. On March 4 2011 Mitchell was sacked from the club after an intensive internal review of football operations at Perth Glory.