The series, conceived by Ellis as a parody, Warren Ellis official blog, 21 October 2008, is set in a dystopian version of the Marvel Universe.  The main character, Phil Sheldon, is also the central character of the ''Marvels'' series by Kurt Busiek and Alex Ross, and this series can be seen as a darker retelling of this story.  Like ''Marvels'', the comic was published in prestige format, with fully-painted artwork and acetate covers, further creating the impression that it is a more twisted companion piece.
In the first issue, after witnessing the destruction of the last Avengers Quinjet (in this reality, the Avengers are a radical secessionist rebel group rebelling against an oppressive American government led by 'President X'), which has killed both Captain America and Iron Man, and encountering a decaying Wolverine - whose flesh is slowly falling off from the toxicity of his adamantium bone structure - Sheldon proceeds to a Kree internment camp in Nevada, situated on a nuclear test site, where the last survivors of a Kree invasion fleet are  slowly dying of cancer. Sheldon interviews Captain Mar-Vell, one of the Kree prisoners, who tells him why their invasion failed. The Kree had encountered the Silver Surfer (who had gone mad and torn open his own chest in a futile attempt to experience respiration again) only to discover that the Power Cosmic emanating from the Surfer's body had been interfering with their scanners. This prevented the Kree fleet from detecting a nuclear barrage which subsequently destroyed ninety percent of the Kree warships. In Washington, D.C., Sheldon meets government agent Nick Fury, who attacks and almost shoots him, insisting that 'proved he was clean' and claiming that Captain America introduced him to cannibalism. They are interrupted by Jean Grey, here a prostitute, who offers herself to the two men for twenty dollars; but Fury shoots her dead and then kills himself. After his encounter with Fury, Sheldon visits Chicago and interviews Rick Jones, a morphine addict living with fellow addict Marlo Chandler, who tells the story of when Bruce Banner saved him from a gamma radiation blast - which did not turn Banner into the Hulk, but instead transformed him into a monstrous green mass of pulsating tumors. Leaving the apartment, Sheldon trips over the corpse of the Punisher in the snow, and the issue ends with him on his knees as he begs to be allowed to show the world how this state of affairs came to pass.
Issue two starts with Sheldon on a plane with Mystique, who begins to shapeshift uncontrollably.  As she is taken off the plane, a security guard bumps into Magneto, damaging a magnetic dampening device that Magneto carries to nullify his powers, which causes every metal object within radius to attach itself to him, killing him and several others. After this, Sheldon visits a special prison which houses many mutants, including X-Men Scott Summers, Kitty Pryde, Kurt Wagner and Quicksilver, all of whom have been mutilated and deformed in an effort to control their powers. Sheldon is given a tour by the warden, Wilson Fisk who says that the only reason Sheldon was allowed to see the prison was because President X knew Sheldon was dying, and wanted to grant a dying man his wish. After witnessing a carnival show with Johnny Blaze, who commits suicide by setting his skull on fire, and interviewing Ben Grimm, who describes the deaths of the rest of those who would become the Fantastic Four and Victor Von Doom when their space ship flew through a cloud of radiation (as Grimm refused to pilot the ship due to safety concerns, Reed Richards hired Von Doom instead), Sheldon decides to begin writing his book, which he will title ''Marvels''. However, he discovers that he has run out of the medication he has been taking; he has been infected with a virus passed on to him by Peter Parker (who had worked at the ''Daily Bugle'' alongside Sheldon), a virus caused by an irradiated spider. The virus overcomes Sheldon and he dies. As he lies on the ground, ignored by the passersby, his notes scatter in the wind.
In 2009 the series was collected into a one-shot.