The numeric engine referencing system used until the mid-1980s was simply the chronological sequence of engine development projects.  Thus, variants based on the same engine block may have unrelated numbers.
The system in use since the mid-1980s is of the format '''XnY-zzz''' where
The A engine was an all-aluminum overhead valve inline 4 designed in the mid-1960s for the Renault 16 and produced in three variants:
A 1000 cc D7D version was abandoned after early development.
The E family (for ''Energy'') is the successor to the larger versions of Type C.  It is a cast-iron overhead camshaft inline-4 introduced on the Renault 19 in 1988 and widely used in the Clio and Megane lineups:
The EF-serie was a 90   V6 TurbochargeD engine jointly developed by Renault and Gordini, the engine was used by Equipe Renault Elf in Formula One from 1977 to 1985.
This engine derived from the CH series designed by Francois Castaing,  the F1 engine was developed by Bernard Dudot.
The F inline-4 family (for ''Fonte'', French for cast iron) was the successor to the A family.  Launched in 1981 on the Renault 9 and Renault 11, it has been the mainstay of Renault's engine lineup through the early 2000s in a succession of increasingly powerful petrol and Diesel variants in overhead camshaft configurations.  It was also Renault's first production four-valve design.  It is being replaced by the M engine.
The G engine was designed in the late 1980s to be a modular family of overhead camshaft inline 4- and 5-cylinder petrol and Diesel engines. A G7R petrol and a G8T Diesel variant were in development when Renault announced a merger with Volvo who was designing its own modular family along exactly the same lines.  The group made the business decision to cancel all G development save for Diesel versions.  Despite the breakdown of the merger in 1993, Renault used Volvo petrol engines (Type N) in its mid- and full-size models until the early 2000s
The H engine is an overhead camshaft engine developed jointly with Nissan, who refers to it as the HR engine.
The J family (also referred to as the Douvrin engine) was an all-aluminum overhead camshaft inline-4 overhead camshaft design jointly developed with PSA.  Introduced in 1977, it was phased out in 1996 by the F series.
The K type is a major evolution of the E type.
Renault used this engine first in the Laguna in 1997, shortly after it became available in the Safrane, and the Espace rated . Engines after 2001 got a new injection system and variable valve timing, this variant is rated , was being used in the Avantime, and the Laguna II V6.
The engine was also used in the Clio V6, rated  in the phase 1 vehicles, and  after the facelift.
The M engine is an overhead camshaft engine developed jointly with Nissan, who refers to it as the MR engine.  Two  Diesel versions are in use at Renault as of mid-2009, though the petrol versions already launched by Nissan will almost certainly be used as well
Renault's N designation refers to the sourced all-aluminum Volvo modular 4-valve DOHC inline-4 -5 engines fitted in the Laguna and Safrane.
The P engine is an overhead camshaft Diesel V6 sourced from Isuzu and used in the Vel Satis sedan and Espace minivan:
The R engine was a 1.2L engine used in the Renault Clio until 1997.
The RS Prefix is Renault's internal designation for their Formula 1 racing engines.
The S engine was a cast-iron overhead valve inline-4 Diesel engine sourced from Italian engine manufacturer SOFIM.  It has been used in the Trafic and Master utility van and the Safrane sedan since 1981:
The V engine is Renault's internal designation for the Nissan VQ engine, an overhead camshaft V6 used in the Vel Satis sedan and Espace minivan. The V designation is also used for an unrelated diesel V6 engine jointly developed by Renault and Nissan, used in the Renault Laguna coupe and designated V9X.
The X engine (referred to as XZ and XY by PSA) was an all-aluminum overhead camshaft inline-4 jointly developed with PSA.  Introduced in 1974, it powered the ill-fated Renault 14 midsize car and was phased out in 1982 by evolutions of the C series:
The Z engine, also known as the PRV engine, was an aluminium overhead camshaft V6 developed jointly with PSA and Volvo in the early 1970s.  Introduced in 1975 on the Renault 30, it also powered the 25, Safrane, Laguna, Espace, and Alpine.