Born to parents Angus and Ruth and with one sister Mary, Mitchell moved to Australia at age 3, growing up in Albury, New South Wales. She attended The Scots School Albury. Beginning guitar lessons at 12 and leaning towards the folk and rock genres, she played in local cafes and events as well as with the cover band Chrome, taking inspiration from artists like Clare Bowditch and Joanna Newsom. She is now based in Melbourne, Victoria.
On 13 April 2007, Mitchell performed at a National Youth Week event in Parkes, NSW, supporting local and Australian Country/Folk family band The Lees, of which fellow Australian Idol Top 24 Contestant Raechel Lee is a member. She performed 8 original songs, and then later joined The Lees onstage, where they performed her originals "Alice" and "See It In Your Eyes" and a cover of Ben Harper's "Diamonds on the Inside".
Starting in March, Mitchell performed live from her home on her MySpace page, with her first performance reaching ten thousand viewers.
During that year she performed as the supporting act on tours for Old Man River, The Hampdens, Bob Evans, Ben Lee and Evermore. Retrieved 21 September 2008 She also embarked on her own headlining tour to release her first EP ''Said One to the Other'' which was released on 4 August 2007 via iTunes and physically one week later. It was released independently through Scorpio and Warner Music and peaked at #1 on the iTunes 'Top Albums' chart. It debuted in the ARIA Singles Chart on 20 August at #27. "Incomplete Lullaby" from ''Said One to the Other'' was used on the Australian dance reality TV show ''So You Think You Can Dance''.
Mitchell began writing for her debut album with Ben Lee, Kevin Mitchell and Clare Bowditch. Later in 2007 she moved to London to continue writing for her debut album  collaborating with Ant Whiting, Ed Harcourt and Sacha Skarbek.
Her song "Neopolitan Dreams" is featured on the platinum-selling ''Packed to the Rafters'' soundtrack.
On 5 January 2008, Mitchell appeared on an episode of ''RocKwiz'' and February 2008 saw Mitchell take on her second headlining tour with support acts Ashleigh Mannix and Leroy Lee. 
Her second EP entitled ''Welcome to the Afternoon'', was released on 31 May 2008, along with two singles; "Neopolitan Dreams" (as a digital single) and "See You When You Get Here". The "Neopolitan Dreams" official video made its debut on 5 September 2008 and was re-released on 6 September 2008 on iTunes. "Neopolitan Dreams" from the EP was used as the theme tune for popular online series The MySpace Road Tour. The song was also used in a 3 Mobile television advert in July 2008, in a UK Surf Detergent advert in September 2008, in a large Deutsche Telekom ad, and in Spain in the El Corte Ingles Christmas ad. "Far Far Far Away" from ''Welcome to the Afternoon'' was used to promote the Olympic cliffhanger episode of ''Home and Away''. Neopolitan Dreams has had considerable airplay on Australian youth radio station Triple J, FBi 94.5 and Nova 96.9.  It placed 91st in the Triple J Hottest 100, 2008.
Mitchell announced a 14 date national tour around Australia which will start in Canberra and finish in Perth.
In early 2010, Mitchell's song "Neopolitan Dreams" was performed by eventual Eurovision Song Contest winner Lena Meyer-Landrut, on the television show Unser Star fur Oslo, when she was competing for the opportunity to represent Germany at the contest. The exposure generated by Meyer-Landrut's performance saw Mitchell's single reach #33 on the German singles chart.
 and has since reached Platinum status in sales within Australia.
On 8 October 2009, it was announced that Mitchell has been nominated for 3 ARIA music awards.  Promotion for the album includes an extensive tour across Australia.  In October 2009, Mitchell toured with Newton Faulkner across the UK and RoI which included shows in Dublin, Belfast, Glasgow, Newcastle and several other cities across Britain and Ireland. Mitchell will also be playing at Australia   s Big Day Out festival in January 2010.
In April 2009, Mitchell opened for Jason Mraz in Melbourne. In May 2009, she toured again, with Andy Bull and Vanessa Jade supporting.
In August 2009, "Coin Laundry" was featured in a Bell Canada ad for the Palm Pre. In September 2009, "Neopolitan Dreams" was featured in both a Deutsche Telekom ad and a Unilever Surf ad. In 2009, Neopolitan Dreams was used in the game ''LittleBigPlanet (PSP)'' and is the song of the customer service of Chilean telco VTR.
Her song 'Coin Laundry' also placed number 7 in Triple J's hottest 100 for 2009.
Her song "Pirouette" is featured in an advertisement for the 2010 season of Bondi Rescue.
In the "To Have and to Hold" Season 2-Episode 11 airing of Showtime's "The United States of Tara" on 31 May 2010, her song "Neopolitan Dreams" begins playing at the end of the final scene, continuing for the entirety of the episode's final credits.
The APRA Awards are presented annually from 1982 by the Australasian Performing Right Association (APRA).
The ARIA Music Awards are presented annually from 1987 by the Australian Recording Industry Association (ARIA). Lisa Mitchell has three nominations.