A descendant of the last Gaelic Lords of Eile in Ireland, Charles Carroll was born in Annapolis, Maryland and was a distant cousin of Charles Carroll of Carrollton and Daniel Carroll. His father, also Charles Carroll, took him to Europe in 1733 for his education. Young Charles spent six years at the English House school in Lisbon, Portugal. He then went to England to complete his education at Eton and Cambridge. After graduating Cambridge in 1746, Charles returned to Annapolis. He took up residence there. He busied himself learning to manage the family's farm and mills at Carrollton.
In 1751 Charles decided on a more specific career. He journeyed to London, took up residence at the Middle Temple, and studied law. He was admitted to the bar at the Inns of Court there before returning to Maryland early in 1755. Since there were now three other relatives named Charles active in public affairs in the area, he began to call himself  ''Charles Carroll, Barrister''. Three months later his father died, leaving Charles, at 32, one of the wealthiest men in Maryland. He was elected to his father's seat for Anne Arundel County in the Maryland Assembly. 
In 1760 he completed construction of his summer home and estate at Georgia Plantation, west of Baltimore. He named the home "Mount Clare" after his grandmother. In June of 1763 Charles married, to Margaret Tilghman (1742   1817), daughter of Matthew Tilghman of Talbot County. Although the couple had no children who reached maturity, they remained together until his death. She became the mistress of Mount Clare, and earned a reputation for her greenhouse and pinery, where she grew oranges, lemons, and pineapple.
Charles was one of the committee of the convention that drafted the '' Declaration and Charter of Rights and form of government for the state of Maryland'' which served as Maryland's first new constitution after it was adopted on November 3, 1776. When the convention voted to expel the royal governor, Robert Eden, he delivered the message as the chairman of the Convention. Then, in an action typical of his style, he entertained the governor and his wife as house guests at Mount Clare until they sailed for England.
Later in November of 1776, the Convention sent Carroll as a delegate to the Continental Congress to replace his cousin, Charles Carroll of Carrollton. He served in that Congress until February 15, 1777. He declined the position of Chief Justice in the new revolutionary government. But when he returned, he was elected to the first state Senate in 1777. Later he was re-elected and served in that office until his death, on March 23, 1783, at Mount Clare. His funeral was held at Old St. Paul's Episcopal Church in Baltimore.  He was buried there but later his body was moved to St. Anne's Churchyard in Annapolis.
In the early 1760s, Carroll took the lead and encouraged a group of his business associates to build a fund for a young saddler, Charles Willson Peale, so that he could go to Europe and study painting.
After Charles' death, his wife Margaret stayed at Mount Clare until her death there on March 14, 1817.  Their home today is a museum, operated since 1917 by the National Society of the Colonial Dames in the State of Maryland, and owned by the city of Baltimore. The core of the home is the refurbished main block. The wings, which had been lost over the years, were rebuilt in 1908. A great deal of the family furniture and possessions are preserved there. The home is a fine example of Georgian architecture, and stands on a rise in the center of Carroll Park in southwest Baltimore. Mount Clare Museum House is open to the public year round.