The '''Associated Students of the University of California-Irvine''' ('''ASUCI''') is the undergraduate student government representing the undergraduate students of UC Irvine. The organization is split into 3 branches: Executive Branch, Legislative Branch, Judicial Branch.  ASUCI is also a member of UCSA and USSA.
Legislative Council is responsible for approving the budget for the fiscal year, approving or rejecting any legislation that is brought to them, approving or rejecting the recommendations for amending the ASUCI Constitution, Legislative Council By-Laws, and the Elections Code. The members are also responsible for meeting with the dean of their respective school at least twice per quarter and holding bi-monthly office hours to address any concerns their constituents may have. 
The Associated Students Undergraduate Student Programming Funding Board is responsible for managing and allocating the Legislative Council approved program funding allocation for undergraduate organizations. The Board shall make available funding applications, reviewing funding requests and approve the allocation of funds in whole or in part to campus undergraduate organizations.
The purpose of the Undergraduate Student Programming Funding Board is to ensure through the review and approval process that the selected undergraduate organization programs are open to the entire campus community, have broad campus appeal, and promotes social, cultural and educational activities that are of interest to the greater campus community.
The Student Fee Advisory Committee (SFAC) is a campus committee of students, faculty, and staff reporting to the Executive Vice Chancellor and Provost (EVCP) and is charged with the following objectives:
To assist the EVCP in regular efforts to ascertain attitudes of the student body, faculty on matters pertaining to Student Fees. 
To provide a continuing study of the Registration and Educational Fees. 
To recommend Registration Fee funding allocations to the EVCP. 
To review Registration Fee budget changes implemented by the EVCP. 
To recommend a campus Registration Fee level to the EVCP 
To review new and existing Course Materials Fees and make a recommendation to the EVCP.
Student members of this board work with Student Center Staff to implement policy affecting the building. Members also assist staff in determining the design and decoration of certain areas of the center, as well as the operational efficiency of the dining courts. Board members are directly responsible for oversight of student fee funded campus facilities and liaison with campus administration to ensure student participation and representation. Students are required to attend regular meetings and make recommendations towards the center.  The Board is currently chaired by Logan Frick.
The Bren Events Center Advisory Board is composed of student representatives and key faculty and staff and is responsible for making advisory decisions about policies, space assignment, fee waivers, budget adjustments, and rent assessments for the Bren Events Center. Board members are directly responsible for oversight of student fee funded campus facilities and act as liaisons with campus administrations to ensure student participation and representation.
Student members of this board work alongside ARC and student affairs administrators to ensure that eh building continues to serve the interests of students while maintaining University goals and values. Members discuss issues affecting the building and its staff and to implement new ideas to improve student utilization.
SPOP, the Student-Parent Orientation Program, is one of UCI's most successful traditions. Held in the mid to late summer, it invites freshmen to a 2 day program to stay in a dormitory for one night while hosted by energetic student facilitators known as "SPOP Staffers". Parents attend a session on the second day, the parent program is aimed at addressing concerns or questions about college. For students, SPOP emphasizes events designed to get participants excited about college life, culmunating in a talent show and several other activities put on by the SPOP staffers. Meant to be fun, it acts as an eye-opener and is designed to be a hands-on experience for the incoming freshmen.  The well rounded orientation includes some activities such as academic advising, enrollment, and a resource fair.  A close relative of this program is UCI's Stay-Over Program (SOP), which is held in March. It invites current high school students to stay as a guest of on-campus undergraduate residents for one or two days.
Welcome Week, held each September, takes place the first week of fall quarter and offers many academic and social events. Academic programs include the traditional Chancellor's welcome (an event specifically aimed towards freshmen) school and major orientation seminars, a campuswide open house, and ongoing campus tours. Social programs include a strong outreach effort by UCI clubs and organizations on Ring Road and during a day-long club fair (traditionally held in Aldrich Park), movie nights in the school's common areas, games and activities hosted by student housing, the ARC All-Nighter (when the Anteater Recreation Center is open all night for social activities), and the ASUCI Foam Party.  
Wayzgoose, which is also held each April by ASUCI, is a popular university event as well. This medieval fair and open house features student organization booths, live bands, food, car show, and costumed people in the university community.  
Celebrate UCI, held each April, has been the university's formal open house for the past 28 years. It is scheduled around ASUCI's Wayzgoose fair, and celebrates environmental awareness through a series of educational programs. It caters mainly towards incoming freshmen, offering day-long academic information sessions, tours of various UCI departments, and campus tours within a lively and active atmosphere.
Care-A-Thon is an annual Dance Marathon which was founded by Andrew Thien Vo and put on by the ASUCI Spirit Commission in its inaugural year.  It is currently headed by Curt Brown, Armeen Komeili, Jeannine Yap, and Jon Rawlings.  Care-A-Thon is a 6-hour event that generates funds and raises awareness for the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit at the UCI Medical Center. 100% of all monies raised from UCI Care-a-thon efforts     every penny     will be donated to UCI's NICU. These funds will not only benefit newborn patients in Orange County, but across the globe. Through its research and teaching programs, UCI is improving the standard of care at NICUs everywhere by training the nurses and doctors who will save the lives of countless babies in crisis     locally, nationally and globally. It gives the students a chance to come together in an act of solidarity by staying their feet for 6 hours and participating with families and children from UCI NICU in games, dancing, and lots of fun! In its inaugural year, 2008, Care-A-Thon raised $5,923.86 for the Hospital. This event has become one of the biggest philanthropic event at UCI and has made history. Since its inaugural year, Care-A-Thon has raised over $35,000 dollars for local hospitals which also includes CHOC, Children's Miracle Network, UCI Medical Center, UCI's NICU.
Another tradition, the Campuswide Honors Program's "Battle of the Brains," pits students against UCI faculty and administrators in a trivia contest. Ties in trivia categories are broken with contestants arm-wrestling each other. The CHP is also responsible for hosting a long-standing Coffee Hour, a networking session held every Friday that allows honors students to interact with one another.  Faculty are invited once per quarter, allowing networking with numerous professors, including those teaching honors core courses. The CHP is also responsible for a number of social activities throughout the year through its social organization, the Campuswide Honors Student Council, as well as through Campuswide Honors housing located in Mesa Court, Middle Earth, and Arroyo Vista.
Each School also has its own keynote social events. For instance, the School of Social Sciences hosts a "Cafe Social" every quarter, which attracts many students and faculty for free food, lectures, and performances. Also, during the annual E-Week celebrations held by the Engineering Student Council, several engineering related contests are held including an egg-dropping contest from the roof of the  Engineering Tower (the tallest building on campus) and the construction of Rube Goldberg machines.
Despite being located in a relatively quiet college town, UC Irvine remains a vibrant center for student activism. A large number of lectures on campus invariably leads some students to debate strongly with professors or teaching assistants. Events featuring controversial guest speakers (such as John Yoo and Viet Dinh, co-authors of the USA Patriot Act who appeared for separate lecture events) have been known to attract large crowds of demonstrators.
All large-scale protests, sit-in, political activities, and awareness campaigns occur on the portion of Ring Road between the School of Humanities and Langson Library in an area known as the "free speech zone". Such activities tend to gravitate near the Student Center or Gateway Commons to the north of the campus. The Gateway Commons entrance faces a portion of Ring Road with a brick tile representation of a huge anteater, an alumni gift that marks the spot of many large protests. The free speech zone is also where most student clubs and organizations traditionally set up booths promoting their missions or fundraisers. It is also where, on any given day, Greek organizations will have tents and barbecues. This area of Ring Road is also popular for those seeking support for petitions, upcoming elections, and publicity for upcoming events. ASUCI famously locates a very large inflatable anteater in this area when publicizing its events.
Some major recent and ongoing activism efforts include support for demands to increase wages and benefits for campus labor unions, support for Tagalog and Filipino Studies (TAPS), awareness for the situation in Israel by Anteaters for Israel, awareness for the crisis in Darfur, protests against the conflict in Iraq, ASUCI-sponsored political debates, and lectures sponsored by the Muslim Student Union.
Orange County itself hosts a variety of attractions popular with UCI students. Newport Beach, which is less than 10 minutes away, is home to a vibrant night life and the famous Balboa Island. Newport Harbor is perfect for water sports such as rowing or sailing. The UCI Crew team headquarters its operations in the city's Upper Back Bay; similarly the UCI Sailing Association operates out of in Newport Beach, both teams participate in regular regattas and have classes through the ARC.
The idyllic shell-lined beaches of Newport Beach (notably its Balboa Peninsula and Corona del Mar neighborhoods), Huntington Beach, Crystal Cove State Park, and Laguna Beach are popular local attractions for students, many of whom visit after a day of lectures. Balboa Peninsula and Corona del Mar are particularly known for hosting numerous bonfire pits for late-night parties, with the Balboa Peninsula also hosting two restaurants on its historic piers and a boardwalk. And for students interested in scenic cliffside views and renting jetskis, Dana Point and San Clemente a short drive away from Laguna Beach, south of Pacific Coast Highway.
In terms of major shopping areas, the University Center has been heavily developed to provide shopping, entertainment, and dining, and is accessible from UCI via the Watson Bridge. The campus is within driving distance of the Irvine Spectrum Center, South Coast Plaza, The Block at Orange, Downtown Disney, and local shopping centers. Additionally, the city of Irvine itself has many well-known student hangouts, such as the Irvine Lanes bowling alley, Boomers!, the Verizon Amphitheater, and the local Target.
In the greater Orange County area, Disneyland and Knott's Berry Farm are popular for large student group events. Wild Rivers, a water-based amusement park, is located in Irvine south of UCI. Nearby Anaheim also hosts Angel Stadium and the Honda Center. Furthermore, day trips to Los Angeles or San Diego are far from uncommon, and since most UC Irvine students have access to vehicular transportation, such getaways are feasible and affordable. In good traffic conditions, Los Angeles and San Diego are approximately one hour away.