Elected to New Jersey Inventors Hall of Fame, June 22, 2006, for Development of the Semiconductor Photovoltaic Solar Cell.
Winner of Alfred Krupp Award, Heidelberg University, Germany.
Received the John Price Wetherill Medall in 1963.
Calvin S. Fuller attended the University of Chicago where he earned his PhD in 1929. His mentor was Professor Hawkins, a chemistry professor. During World War II, Calvin S. Fuller traveled all over the U.S. by train as the Head of synethic rubber for the United States Government, because the sources of real rubber, from trees, were threatened.
Working with Bell Telephone scientists Daryl Chapin and Gerald Pearson, Fuller diffused boron into silicon to capture the sun's power. In doing so, they created the first practical means of collecting energy from the sun and turning it into a current of electricity. The invention of the solar battery resulted in a 600% improvement in the ability to harness the sun's power into electricity.  First, Fuller ensured that silicon was uncorrupted and pure. Then Fuller accomplished the diffusion of boron into silicon. The inventors used several small strips of silicon to capture sunlight and render it into free electrons. Bell Laboratories, who had funded the research, announced the prototype manufacture of a new solar battery.
In spite of the patents, Fuller never got rich from this invention. Most intellectual property in those days belonged to the research lab and the silicon solar cell was no different. Fuller invented for purist reasons and never sought large monetary gains from his invention, instead preferring the love of conducting science for science's sake.
Here is a story told by Calvin S. Fuller's oldest son Robert W. Fuller as part of the speech preparation for Calvin S. Fuller's May 2008 induction to the National Inventor's Hall of Fame: "In 1954 I was home from vacation from college to visit my parents. That night my father, Calvin Souther Fuller, came home with something that looked like a quarter with wires sticking out of it. This was a device that connected to a small electric windmill that stood on the table. He shined a bright flashlight on the quarter-like object, which was actually silicon solar cell, and the blades of the windmill started turning. It was so exciting to see the flashlight power the tiny windmill. While this device looked like a quarter to anyone else, it was actually the world   s first silicon solar battery - a device that later become known as the silicon solar cell."
The first public service trial of the Bell Solar Battery began with a telephone carrier system in 1955 in Americus, Georgia. By 1958, the US Department of Defense realized an extremely valuable application of this device as it deployed self-sufficient, power to vehicles and satellites in space.
Calvin S. Fuller was married to Willmine Fuller. They had three children, Robert W. Fuller, Stephen Fuller, and John Fuller and eight grandchildren including Ben Fuller, Vice President of Link TV. Fuller moved to Vero Beach, Florida after he retired from Bell Labs. When he wasn't in Vero Beach, Florida, he spent his time traveling around the United States in a Silver Stream Camper with his wife. Fuller died in Vero Beach, Florida. He was 92.
Calvin Fuller died in 1994, having lived to see his invention significantly improve the quality of life on our planet. Today, solar cells and panels can be found all over the world.
Fuller's legacy remains today. Fuller was granted 33 patents. Some, including renowned solar historian John Perlin, have called his inventions a pivotal step in the founding of semiconductors and the evolution of the personal computer. Before Fuller figured out how to purify Silicon, a rare element called germanium was seen as the key material for creating semiconductors. Fuller's purification and use of one of the world's most ubiquitous substances sand (silicon), provided the key material for the creation of silicon-based technologies.