Built over 75 years ago, James Madison has graduated four Nobel Prize winners, famous musicians, authors,  sports players, and a United States Supreme Court Justice.
Following the 2008 election there are two sitting U.S. Senators, Bernard Sanders (I-VT) and Charles Schumer (D-NY), who are  graduates of James Madison. Supreme Court Associate Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg is also a graduate, as is former Senator Norm Coleman (R-MN).
James Madison High School is organized in accordance with the House system. There are eight houses, each having a Teacher Coordinator, a Guidance Counselor, and an Assistant Principal assigned to supervise and assist students.
Most students who apply to James Madison High School have the opportunity to apply into a specific "House". The most notable houses in Madison are:
Some of the other Houses include:
There are many AP classes offered at James Madison High School. These classes include
Along with these AP classes, Madison offerers a wide number of Honor/elective classes. Some of these include
Madison also offers a wide number of music/art electives, which students are allowed and encouraged to take.
James Madison High School will be a learning community that embodies Madison   s philosophy that,    Education is the true foundation of civil liberty.    Through an instructional program that promotes high achievement and provides equal access through motivation, academic rigor, appreciation of the strength of diversity, inquiry, scholarship a celebration of originality and the development of nobility of character, we will nurture and support a community of life long learners.
James Madison High School is a 6 floor red brick building located at 3787 BEDFORD AVENUE, BROOKLYN, NY 11229. The 75 Year old massive building plays host to a large number of rooms.
Subbasement:Boiler Room and storage areas.
Basement: The cafeteria is located in the buildings basement. 
1st Floor: On the first floor Main offices such as guidance and programming are located. As is the main entrance to the theater. The Music Department is in the back on the 1st floor. The library and Swimming Pool are also located on this floor.
2nd Floor: English Department, Access to Gym 1
3rd Floor:Science Department, IT House, Language Department, Teachers Cafeteria access to Gym 2.
4th Floor: Science Department, Math Department, Social Studies Department, Law Department.
5th Floor: Science Department, Computer Repair Room, Art classes, Social Studies Department.
6th Floor: Offices and Photography. 
Field: Football Field, Soccer Field, Baseball Field, Tennis Courts, Track, Lacrosse Field, Roller Blading, and several more athletic facilities. 
James Madison High School has a number of clubs which are listed here in alphabetical order:
Akiva Jewish Culture club
Art Journal
Art Squad
Attendance Committee
African Heritage Club
Art Journal
Art Squad
Attendance Committee
Asian Student Union
Baseball Club
Business Journal
Cheering Squads: Twirlers Cheerleaders Boosters 
Chess Club
Christian Culture Club 
Chinese Cultural Services 
Club Hispanic 
Consultative Council
Crochet club
Drama Club 
Environmental Club 
Executive Internship 
Fidelitas
Flag Squad
Gay Straight Alliance
Law Journal 
Leadership 
Library Pagemasters 
Lighting Squad
Marching Band
Math Team
Mock Trial
Peer Mediation
Peer Tutoring
Performing Arts Club
Photography Club
Project Gap
Project REACH
Recycling Club
Senior Council
Softball Club
Stepping Club
The Moment (Newspaper)
Science Research Club
S.A.V.E. Leaders Corps
Sing
Spring Musical
Student Government
NYS Science Honor Society
The End Hate Project is a campaign made up of high school and college students encouraging the reduction of bullying and discrimination within schools. Inspired by the 2010 Gay Teen Suicide Epidemic, The End Hate Project's mission is to provide a safe and welcoming environment where everyone is accepted. Whether it be race, religion, color, ethnicity, national origin, gender, gender identity, gender expression, sexual orientation, disability, dress, body type (etc.), this club dedicates itself to raise awareness and provide resources for students bullied and undergoing hate activity.
In May 2010, The James Madison High School Mock Trial team, became the New York State Champions, while representing their region of New York City in Albany. The team beat out about 600 schools, also competing for first place. It was Madison's second time appearing in Albany after 5 years, and their first time, actually winning. It was also the first time ANY New York City school, had ever won for the State. The team accomplished their spectacular achievement with the help of attorneys from Cadwalader, Wickersham & Taft LLP, who always had a long standing solid relationship with James Madison.
Madison also offers a wide range of Boys And Girls PSAL Varsity and Junior Varsity Sports  Football, Soccer, Basketball, Track and field, Wrestling, Baseball, Softball, Tennis, Volleyball, Swimming, Cross Country, Handball, and Lacrosse.
The James Madison Baseball Team is the most successful team in the school ranked fourth in the New York City PSAL and sixth including Catholic High Schools. They have been in the final four 3 years in a row. In 2008, the team made it to the finals but fell short. The program has put a lot of their players into college baseball and three professional players Frank Torre, Cal Abrams, Harry Eisenstat. 
James Madison High School is home to an very successful Swim Team. It has won countless competitions. It is currently coached by Mr.Davis who is retired but continues to train the swim team for each winter swimming season. He was retired in 2009. Mr.Tigre is the current swimming teacher at James Madison High School and has been for 2 years now. This is one of Madison's most prosperous teams. 
SING!, a musical competition between the grades, has been a Madison tradition for over 50 years. On November 15, 2008, the Senior/Sophomore team lost to the Junior/Freshman team for the first time in 6 years, on the 60th anniversary of SING!. The SING! theme that year was    It   s Never Too Late to Change.    It is one of Madison's Most popular clubs.
Distinguished alumni of James Madison High School include:
Mr.T Engelson, IT, Art Depart
Mr.Mahl   
Mr. Edelman, English Department
Ms. Goldschmidt, Social Studies Department
Mr. Inoa, Science Dept. / Technology Dept.
Mr. Intravaia, Foreign Language Department
Ms. James, Foreign Language / ESL Dept.
Ms. Wayne, E2, English Department
Mr. Clarke, Math Dept
Mrs. Weinstock, Science Department
Ms. Wayne, EET Class, English Department
In the beginning of December 2009, it was reported that two female teachers, Alini Brito and Cindy Mauro, had been found naked in a classroom by a janitor in November, while most students had been attending a talent show elsewhere in the building. Department of Education spokeswoman Margie Feinberg stated that the teachers were reassigned pending an investigation.
The following day it was reported that another teacher, 31 year-old Allison Musacchio, was having an inappropriate relationship with a male student. The school learned of the relationship in March 2009, when a female student saw that Musacchio's cell phone contained the phone number of the male student, in addition to several text messages to and from him. School officials found over 200 phone calls and text messages to the student in the teacher's cell phone. Musacchio adamantly denied these allegations. As with Brito and Mauro, spokeswoman Margie Feinberg stated that Musacchio was reassigned pending an investigation.
A week later, it was reported that Assistant Principal Michael Edelman was under investigation for allegations of sexual harassment which have been brought forward by a teacher in the school. The 62 year-old, who had been working at the school since 1971, denied any knowledge of the accusations. It is unclear  if the school board has taken any action against Edelman. As of February 5, 2010, Edelman remains in the school. (Blog)
On January 28,  2010, it was reported that Lisa Guttilla, a 37 year-old physical education instructor, was being investigated for allegations of sexual contact with a 14 year-old female student who attends Poly Prep Country Day School. The student's mother had asked her questions about a hicky on her neck, and the student admitted that on several occasions from January 4 through January 9, Guttilla had kissed and groped her. The New York City Police arrested Guttilla on January 22, 2010, charging her with sexual abuse and child endangerment with a court filing stating that she did "touch, grab, squeeze and kiss the  about the breast and buttock." Guttilla was a part time volleyball coach at Poly Prep Country Day School, but as a full time teacher at James Madison High spokeswoman Margie Feinberg stated that she would be reassigned pending an investigation as was the case with the other teachers.
 A number of blogs have also been commenting about the spate of incidents at the school. (Blog) Additionally, several newspaper editorials have commented on the incidents, many having taken to dubbing the school "Horndog High".