Approximately 1,100 mappae mundi are known to have survived from the Middle Ages. Of these some 900 are found illustrating manuscripts and the remainder exist as stand-alone documents.
Medieval world maps which share some characteristics of traditional mappae mundi but contain elements from other sources, including Portolan charts and Ptolemy's ''Geography'' are sometimes considered a fifth type, called "transitional mappae mundi".
Of these, only the two temperate zones were believed to be inhabitable, and the known world was contained entirely within the northern temperate zone's Eastern Hemisphere.  Because most surviving Zonal maps are found illustrating Macrobius' ''Commentary'' on Cicero's ''Dream of Scipio'' (an excerpt of Cicero's ''De Re Publica''), this type of map is sometimes called "Macrobian".  In their simplest and most common form, Zonal mappae mundi are merely circles divided into five parallel zones, but several larger Zonal maps with much more detail have survived.
The "complex" or "great" world maps are the most famous mappae mundi. Although most employ a modified T-O scheme, they are considerably more detailed than their smaller T-O cousins. These maps show coastal details, mountains, rivers, cities, towns and provinces. Some include figures and stories from history, the Bible and classical mythology. Also shown on some maps are exotic plants, beasts and races known to Medieval scholars only through Roman and Greek texts. Prior to its destruction in World War II, the Ebstorf map at  across was the largest surviving mappa mundi. Today that honor is held by the Hereford map which is  across. Other important maps in this group are the Cotton or Anglo-Saxon map, the Psalter map and the Henry of Mainz map. The somewhat later mappae mundi that accompany the popular ''Polychronicon'' of Ranulf Higden should probably be viewed as degenerate form of the earlier complex maps.
Complex mappae mundi include:
To modern eyes, mappae mundi can look superficially primitive and inaccurate.  However, mappae mundi were never meant to be used as navigational charts and they make no pretense of showing the relative areas of land and water.  Rather, mappae mundi were schematic and were meant to illustrate different principles.  The simplest mappae mundi were diagrams meant to preserve and illustrate classical learning easily.  The zonal maps should be viewed as a kind of teaching aid   easily reproduced and designed to reinforce the idea of the Earth's sphericity and climate zones.  T-O maps were designed to schematically illustrate the three land masses of the world as it was known to the Romans and their medieval European heirs.
The larger mappae mundi have the space and detail to illustrate further concepts, such as the cardinal directions, distant lands, Bible stories, history, mythology, flora, fauna and exotic races.  In their fullest form, such as the Ebstorf and Hereford maps, they become minor encyclopedias of medieval knowledge.
In her study, Brigitte Englisch shows that the medieval world maps (the mappae mundi) both from their concept and in their concrete practice are founded on a systematically geometric projection of the known world. The basis of this projection, however, is not geographical surveying but the harmonious order of God   s creation. Using regular geometric forms like circles and triangles which are also regarded as religiously perfect, they created a coherent planispheric system. This quite basically presents the known world in its real geographic appearance which is visible in the so called Vatican Map of Isidor (776), the world maps of Beatus of Liebana   s ''Commentary on the Apocalypse of St John'' (8th century), the Anglo-Saxon Map (ca. 1000), the Sawley map, the Psalter map, or the large mappae mundi of the 13th century (Hereford/Ebstorf).
In the central Middle Ages a new type of map developed as an aid to navigating the Mediterranean Sea.  Known as "Portolan charts", these maps are characterized by extremely accurate coastlines with criss-crossing rhumb lines.  A particularly famous example is the Catalan Atlas of Abraham Cresques.  During the late Middle Ages and with the coming of the Renaissance, western Europeans became reacquainted with the work of many ancient Greek scholars.  In the field of geography and map-making, the coordinate system which Claudius Ptolemy outlined in the ''Geographia'' became extremely influential.  Over time maps influenced by these new ideas displaced the older traditions of mappae mundi.  The last examples of the tradition, including the massive map of Fra Mauro, may be seen as hybrids, incorporating Portolan-style coastlines into the frame of a traditional mappamundi.