Set a year after the original, ''One Missed Call 2'' introduces Kyoko and her friend Madoka. Both women are teaching assistants at a kindergarten in the middle of Tokyo. Madoka persuades Kyoko to visit a restaurant where her (Kyoko) boyfriend Naoto works part-time at.  Mei-Fueng is the daughter of the cook, and her cellphone rings with the "ringtone of death".  However, she is out buying groceries and her father answers it.  The call was meant to be for Mei-Feung, but since her father answered it, he hears his own death instead.  Later, when the restaurant is closed, Mei-Feung gives Kyoko and Madoka her phone number since she has gotten a new phone number (as well as a new cellphone).  Seconds after exchanging numbers, Madoka gets a call with the "ringtone of death". 
Naoto is in the kitchen looking for the cook, and discovers him dead with half his face burned off.  The police are then alerted.  Detective Motomiya comes to the scene first and question Naoto about the death.  However, Naoto doesn't mention anything that relates to Mimiko's way of killing.  Naoto is then confronted by Detective Takako, who also questions him about the incident.  She finds out that the cook heard the "ringtone of death" before his death, and that Naoto heard it right before he found the body (coming from Madoka's phone). Meanwhile, Kyoko and Madoka are video chatting with their phones.  Kyoko sees a strange figure behind Madoka, and asks is someone was over.  Madoka says that she is with Naoki but he's sleeping alone, but Kyoko sees the figure coming closer.  She keeps asking Madoka if she sees something behind her, but Madoka doesn't see anything. The figure reaches for Kyoko through the phone, and in a panic she throws it at the wall, disconnecting her and Madoka.  Kyoko rushes to Madoka's apartment to save her, but finds Madoka's twisted body in the shower.  Naoto and Takako come in soon after (discovering Madoka was about to die).  Naoto goes to embrace Kyoko after looking at Madoka's body.  Then, Kyoko's phone suddenly rings with the "ringtone of death".  
Takako and detective Motomiya investigate the original cellphone murders, searching for Mimiko's grandparents. The find Mimiko's grandmother, who is a Hispanic woman working at a restaurant, she tells Takako that her husband has become mentally ill and was sent to Taiwan.
Takako visits Taiwan and finds Mimiko's grandfather dead with his cellphone in his hand. She discovers from her ex-husband, Yuting, that similar mysterious deaths occurred here, and that both he and she are slated to die within an hour of one another. Kyoko and Naoto decide to go to Taiwan to figure out how to save Kyoko. Takako finds out that the murders actually started from an old mining town, which is now a ghost town but when they are one the street (Kyoko, Naoto, Naoki, And Takako) Naoki thinks that all is a joke but Takako tells him to be afraid and when he tells the trio to go to hell a bus runs him over covering the three of blood and Kyoko starts crying and Takako's face is like of strangeness and of scared. The trio visit an old woman, who is the last person that lived in that town.  The old woman tells them that the curse started with a girl named Li Li.  Li Li was a "creepy child" who was bullied by the other children of the town. One day, while she is getting bullied, Li Li finally snaps and "curses" everyone in the town.  The relatives of the dead became enraged by Li Li's curse, and takes her into the mine where they sew her mouth shut so she can't foretell any more deaths.  Li Li is then sealed alive in the mines.  Takako, Kyoko, and Naoto then go to the town to investigate the mine.
When they get there, they find the mine locked.  Then Takako goes to find another way into the mines, in which she does.  However, her flashlight breaks, and she is then knocked out.  Takako then dreams about her sister, and saves her from answering the call on the payphone.  Takako asks for forgiveness and hugs her sister.  When she opens her eyes, her sister has disappeared.  Takako then wakes up in the mine. Kyoko is trapped by the vengeful spirit of Li Li, but Naoto is able to bring her to safety. They are pursued by the ghost, and Naoto sacrifices himself by answering Kyoko's ringing cell-phone.
Some time later, Kyoko recovers in a hospital bed.Takako checks her messages and discovers she has one missed call. Some officers from the Taipei Police show up in Kyoko's room and reveal that two bodies were found in the abandoned mine. Confused, Takako goes to Yuting's apartment and discovers his corpse, as well as a video camera which seems to show herself stabbing him. She opens her cellphone, and notices she has a missed call from herself, stamped with a time that passed hours ago (5:58pm is her death time but the current time is 8:05pm on that same day), she looks at her watch this time and notices it has stopped at nothing to become white, the time that she had fallen in the cave. She realizes that Mimiko had stabbed her, and that she had already died at the hands of Mimiko. Spitting out a red hard candy, she is seen smiling as the death ringtone is heard. The ending song is Ai no Inori by Aki.