The Spektr module was originally developed as part of a top-secret military program code-named "Oktant."  It was planned to carry experiments with space borne surveillance and test antimissile defense. The surveillance instruments were mounted on the exterior of the module opposite the docking port.  Also in this location were two launchers for artificial targets.  The heart of the Spektr payload was an experimental optical telescope code-named "Pion    (Peony).
Instrument list:
These experiments would have been a continuation of the research a top-secret TKS-M module, which docked to Salyut 7 in 1985.  However, with the end of the Cold War and the shrinking of Russia   s space budget, the module was stuck on the ground.
In the mid-1990s with the return of US-Russian cooperation in space, NASA agreed to provide funds to complete the Spektr and Priroda modules in exchange for having 600 to 700&nbsp;kg of US experiments installed.  The Oktava military component was replaced with a conical mounting area for two additional solar arrays.  The airlock for the Oktava targets to be used instead to expose experiments to the vacuum of space.
Once in orbit, Spektr served as the living quarters for American astronauts until the collision in late June 1997
On June 25, 1997, the Progress M-34 spacecraft crashed into Spektr while maneuvering for a docking with  the Kvant-1 module. The collision damaged one of Spektr's solar arrays and punctured the hull, depressurizing the module. The module was sealed off from the rest of the station to prevent depressurization of the entire Mir station, but required cutting off the power cables from Spektr's solar panels, which had to be cut manually with fire axes. An internal spacewalk in the Spektr module in August 1997 by cosmonauts Anatoly Solovyov and Pavel Vinogradov, from Soyuz TM-26, succeeded in restoring those connections by modifying the hatch to allow them to pass through in the closed position.  
In a second internal spacewalk in October they connected two of the panels to a computer system to allow them to be controlled remotely and align with the Sun. These modifications allowed power generation to return to approximately 70% of the pre-collision generation capability.
Spektr was left depressurized and isolated from the remainder of the Mir complex.
Image:Spektr.jpg|Overall view of Spektr before the collision
Image:Damaged Spektr solar array.jpg|Damaged Spektr solar array
Image:Damaged Spektr radiator.jpg|Damaged radiator on Spektr