I once heard that 20 minutes of meditation in the right state of mind is equivalent to 6 hours of sleep.  Is this true? --  00:13, 18 September 2006 (UTC)
Who is tubgirl? Who is goatse? And why would they do those things to themselves? --  00:43, 18 September 2006 (UTC)
Herning is a city in Jutland and also my friend surname, I wonder if this is coincedence or is there a historical connection,where did the name come from?
Herning is also a very common first name in Denmark so I doubt it means anything at all.   15:36, 18 September 2006 (UTC)
What is the name of a talk show in Japan that involves with people sitting in chairs while they have naked ladies sitting above them?
James J. Jackson, former vice president of legal affairs, was found liable for damages in a civil trial brought by his former housekeeper Nena Ruiz.  The jury found him and his wife had held the housekeeper against her will - essentially in slavery.  Have there been any criminal charges filed against either Mr Jackson or his wife?  There has been speculation that a grand jury was meeting to consider indictments on slavery charges.  Is there any truth to this?
I was referred to you by Wikipedia Information Team.
What is the altitude (elevation) of Ubud, Bali, Indonesia?
Thanks for any help.
Would be helpful, if you find it, for the answer to be emailed to me.
Thank you~
Rick Adams
I like this girl, but have no clue how to tell her, nor do I know if she likes me. Can anyone help?
It's me again. She could have the same problem as me. Not know how to tell me in this instance.
Ok. One last thing, just how will I know if she likes me back? (BTW, I didn't know how to sign, sry bout that)  03:01, 18 September 2006 (UTC)
Seriously, I have absolutely no clue about anything when it comes to relationships.   03:22, 18 September 2006 (UTC)
Yea, well. I'll try it. Hopefully I won't end up looking like a complete idiot.   03:30, 18 September 2006 (UTC)
Ha, yea. Makes sense. What I really don't like is that it's so subjective, with no "yes" or "no". No clear distinctions   03:37, 18 September 2006 (UTC)
First of all you should compliment her and flatter her. Depends on the situation, but if you're for example students in a group tutorial you could tell her afterwards how great her answers or presentation was. Or if she's wearing a some new clothes you could tell her briefly that you like them. eg if shes got a new bag you could say something like "Nice bag" or "like your bag". And you could also do her small favours. Only then, when she begins to think that your nice, should you tell her you like her.
Can anyone tell me how to customise my signature (like so many others have done) and still get it automatically printed with ~~~~? THanks
Why does the priest take more than one sip of the blood? Why is his wafer like 5 times bigger than all the others?
Who aree the weomen with the white lace over their hair? pre-nuns ?
A friend of mine went on an anti-fascist rant today about how his cell phone provider made him turn in his phone for a new one with enabled "GPRS".  He claimed that every new cell phone has a GPS (which is called "GPRS") system in it and that they can all be tracked, but that the regular consumer does not have access to the GPS system, (he didn't specify who did have access, but presumably the police and the cell phone providers). 
So....after reading GPRS I know he's full of shit (he was probably pulling my leg), but is there any truth whatsoever to this? I can't see this guy getting these paranoid ideas from nowhere..   04:34, 18 September 2006 (UTC)
You can buy a cell phone without a contract, where you just buy cards to recharge it periodically.  That way, they can trace the phone, but have no idea who owns the phone, so this doesn't do "Big Brother" much good.   05:31, 18 September 2006 (UTC)
What opening does not cramp black's game, does not demolish black's pawn structure like the sveshnikov sicilian and give black lots of mobility against whites e4?
Eyelids ?   08:24, 18 September 2006 (UTC)
Can anyone help identify the unit from which the soldier shown right comes? He's clearly a medic, I'm almost certain he's US Army, and his comments on   suggest he was in Baghdad in July 2006. He's not logged in since then (so there's no point in asking him) but maybe someone can help me clarify the caption on that article. Thanks. --   |   13:57, 18 September 2006 (UTC)
1. japan
2. music
3. french fashions
1. has to ask a "why" or "how" question
2. can't involve corporate history (history on companies)
3. i can't do anyting with celeb. history
4. finally, i can't have anything that books can't directaly answer ie: who shot John Kennedy?
Two of those three topics sound like Japanese and French history.  Here's one suggestion: ''How did jazz develop from ragtime?''   17:46, 18 September 2006 (UTC)
In addition, a related topic would be something related to the massive takeoff of jazz in Japan during the 30s and 40s, and how it started the whole "traditionalist vs. modernist" problem in Japanese society.   18:18, 18 September 2006 (UTC)
This is a gated community, where you buy your lot and and you are allowed to build your home, have acess to the community pool, tennis court, you pay HOA DUES, I'm also referred to as a 
USUFRUCTUARY, the Gated Community is also located in City of Playas de Rosarito,B.C. Mexico. 
My question is what is , what is a Grant Deed in the form of a Public Deed ? Sincerely thanking you in advance, I have researched the information requested to no avail.
Mexican real estate law is incredibly complicated.  I suggest you retain a Mexican attorney and have that person investigate the offering thoroughly before you invest.  If (as I suspect) you are a U.S. citizen, there have to be special legal mechanisms in place because foreign nationals don't actually own land in Mexico the same sense as people own land in the States.  Although the worst case scenario is rather rare, entire residential developments have been evicted after a court ruled that another party actually had a superior claim to ownership.  By posting here you're basically asking a bunch of nonexperts who have no stake in the outcome whether you should invest what is probably your life savings.  Free advice is worth what you pay for it.   18:51, 18 September 2006 (UTC)
I was listening to a man talking to me about veganism etc. He said that eating meat and other corpses can attract some kind of low spiritual force, so you will be born in the next life as an animal, most likely. Because, as we eat it, the suffering and everything the animals went trough, just so they could end up as a meal on our dinner table, somehow all that comes into us, and attracts bad karma. I believe I didn't quote exactly what he said, but this is the point mostly... It had an impact on me, and I was wondering, if you ever heard of that, and perhaps you can point me to some reading about that? I read a lot about veganism etc., but never have I read anything like that...--  18:52, 18 September 2006 (UTC)
Well no offense, but the thing you said doesn't make a whole lot of sense to me either. If you are Christian, than you believe in God, and that Jesus was the Son of God. If that is so, Jesus knew what will hapen to him, and He resurrected back to heaven afterwards, everything as God, should I say, planned. If not, and if He was just an ordinary man, than maybe it was a punishment because of the things he did in his past lives.--  12:38, 19 September 2006 (UTC)
What confuses you about Christianity, Wakuran? '''''  02:29, 26 September 2006 (UTC)'''''
What am I going to be when I grow up?  19:14, 18 September 2006 (UTC)
Whatever Will Be, Will Be ,as Performed by Doris Day: 
Also see "When I grow up to be a man;"   20:48, 18 September 2006 (UTC)
Hey, I'm trying to go from New Haven, CT to Cambridge MA, and then back again, using public transportation. Does anybody happen to know the cheapest way to do this? Also, you could probably substitute "Cambridge" with "Boston," since it's easy to get from Boston to Cambridge with the subway. Thanks! --  20:07, 18 September 2006 (UTC)
How many English-language songs will RBD have on their CD titled Celestial (RBD album)?
I am one of four guys living in a cozy aparment.  No matter how hard I barely try the apartement is always a mess.  Part of the problem is no one does any work because they don't want to be ''the'' guy who cleans everything.  I read Game theory but it didn't help. Do you have any suggestions to keep it clean?   20:36, 18 September 2006 (UTC)
There are several options:
There's no real magic answer here: adult slobs are generally uncurable.  A baseline method, if you don't have at least this much already, is to start a kitty where everyone chips in a small amount of money toward basic supplies.  ($5-$10 each month, or the equivalent in your local currency).  Possibly try a housecleaning party with pizza and sodas or beer. ''' ''' 20:58, 18 September 2006 (UTC)
I'm trying to find a stat for the proportion of eligible families in the UK that are claiming child tax credit. All I seem to be able to find is a raw figure of 6 million families who are claiming. Can anyone help? --  21:44, 18 September 2006 (UTC)
Yes, they have had problems with fraudulent claims, lol. But can anyone help me find a reputable (and serious!) percentage? I'm really hitting a brick wall here. --  08:59, 19 September 2006 (UTC)
What is a rusty trombone? A kid keeps telling me that I give my mom rusty trombones. --  21:45, 18 September 2006 (UTC)
I didn't want to post this here, but Allexperts.com couldn't help.
Got a 2004 Volkswagen Cabriolet that has a problem with its convertible cover.  Part of the rear window has separated from the rest of the cover at the seam so that water seeps into the backseat.  What's the best method to fix the problem?  I've got a hunch that good epoxy would work if there were a way to clamp things while it dries...  Suggestions welcome. ''' ''' 22:04, 18 September 2006 (UTC)
Football question: What is the difference between insurance touchdown and 'regular' touchdown?