9800 International Drive
9899 International Drive
9400 Universal Boulevard
The '''Orange County Convention Center''' (OCCC) is the primary public convention center for the Central Florida region. The center currently ranks as the second largest convention center in the United States (the first is McCormick Place in Chicago). The OCCC offers  of total space,  of which is exhibit space. The large complex is located on the South end of International Drive, a major tourist area in Orlando, Florida. Solar panels on the roof of the South Concourse provide 1 MW of power.
The Orange County Convention Center consists of two buildings joined together by a covered pedestrian sky-bridge. The West Building, completed in four phases between 1983 and 1996, is located on the south side of International Drive. The North/South Building, located on the north side of International Drive, was completed in 2003.
In its entirety, the Orange County Convention Center features:
On average, the Orange County Convention Center (OCCC) hosts approximately one million delegates annually and provides a $1.9 billion dollar total economic impact annually to the Central Florida economy, all at no cost to Orange County Citizens.
In addition to the $1.9 billion dollar annual impact, convention-related businesses and educational events known as "conventions" contribute the following to the Orange County economy:
Originally the '''Orange County Convention and Civic Center''' (OCCCC), it was an idea born out of a 1977 law passed by Florida's State Legislature that permits counties to collect a "Tourist Development Tax" on top of regular sales tax on hotel room stays, with the approval of the county's voters, for state-approved purposes.  In April 1978 in a special election, the voters of Orange County approved a 2% Tourist Development Tax (the limit set by the state) for the purpose of building a Convention and Civic Center.  That August, the Orange County Board of County Commissioners (BCC) approved a location for the OCCCC in Orlando Central Park, on International Drive, and drew up plans for a  gross area facility.  In 1979, Orlando Central Park and the BCC came to a deal whereby the Orlando Central Park would donate land for the initial facility, and give the county an option on  additional for future expansion.  Orlando Central Park agreed to commit adjacent lands for hotel and tourist development, with an incentive of one cent per taxed dollar of the TDT each year for 30 years.
Phase I was completed in February 1983 at a cost of $54 million.  The Boston Pops Orchestra played at the Grand Opening, and 14,000 people attended the Open House.
In June 1984, the BCC exercised its  option for $2 million and began planning Phase II.  The TDT was raised to 3% by a State Law in 1986, and groundbreaking occurred in February 1987 on Phase II.  It was completed in January 1989, adding  of exhibition space to increase it to  of total exhibition space, and adding an additional  of meeting and support space.
That very month, an additional 1% was permitted for the TDT, increasing it to 4%  The BCC approved an additional three phases to the OCCCC (Phases IIA, III and IV), and improvements to the Citrus Bowl, its first non-Convention Center TDT project.
Phase IIA, completed in December 1990, added  more support space, used largely for office space and registration.  The next month, planning for Phase III was begun.  By December 1992, "Civic" was dropped from the name, and the area became the Orange County Convention Center.
Phase III was completed in January 1996, adding  of exhibition space, at a cost of $219.5 million.  Phase IV followed that August at a cost of $198.7 million, adding another  of exhibition space and about  more meeting space.  A retrofit of Phase I, completed in December 1997 at a cost of $32 million, opened up  more.  By 1998, the OCCC had  of exhibition space over a total building space of over 4 million ft  .
In June 1998, the BCC got a fifth cent approved for the TDT, partly for a grand Phase V, which would add a total of 3 million ft   of space to the OCCC.  That December, they paid Universal Orlando Resort $69 million for  of land across International Drive from the original OCCC.  The Martinez Convention Center Commission, named after then-Orange County Chairman Mel Martinez, was created to oversee planning and construction of Phase V.
Ground broke on Phase V in August 2000 after a large convention organizer, Reed Expositions, agreed to move 42 conventions to Orlando into the new phase.  It opened one month ahead of schedule in September 2003.  Today, the first four phases are referred to as the "West Building", and Phase V is referred to as the "North/South Building", as it is divided into North and South Exhibition Halls which can be joined to form one large exhibition space or subdivided into six different halls (North A1, North A2, North B, South A1, South A2, South B).  The North/South Building has over  of exhibition space.  Around the same time, an elevated walkway was built over International Drive connecting the two buildings.
In 2004, OCCC acted as a staging area for relief operations following Hurricane Charley, and Frances and Jeanne thereafter.  Disruptions to convention operations were minimal, and a feared reduction of convention booking did not occur afterward.
In 2009, The Hilton Orlando, a 1400 room luxury hotel, opened which adjoins with the South Concourse of the Orange County Convention Center's North/South Building via an elevated, covered pedestrian walkway. Expansions to the Peabody are currently underway and will connect directly to the Orange County Convention Center via the elevated pedestrian walkway as well. The elevated walkway currently connects the North, South and West concourses over International Drive to each other and the Hilton Orlando.