The '''Portland Metropolitan Exposition Center''', usually referred to as the '''Expo Center''', is a convention center located in the Kenton neighborhood of Portland, Oregon.  Opened in the early 1920s as a livestock exhibition and auction facility, the Expo Center now hosts over 100 events a year, including green consumer shows, trade shows, conventions, meetings and other special events. Located on the north side of Portland near Vancouver, Washington, it includes the northern terminus for the Yellow Line of Portland's light-rail transit system.
The complex was originally built in the early 1920s as the '''Pacific International Livestock Exposition''', and operated as a livestock exhibition, cattle grading, and auction facility, as well as a rodeo venue, during its early years.  
In 1942, the Center suspended livestock exposition operations and served as a Civilian Assembly Center under President Roosevelt's Executive Order 9066, which allowed for the internment of Japanese and Japanese Americans. Three thousand five hundred people of Japanese descent were confined there for a period of five months, while they awaited transfer to internment camps in California and Idaho. ''Torii Gate'', an installation piece by Portland artist Valerie Otani, acts as a memorial honoring the people held at the Portland Assembly Center in 1942.
Multnomah County acquired the facility in 1965; it was renamed the Multnomah County Exposition Center.  It became home to the annual Multnomah County Fair in 1970, and the fairs were held there through 1990.  After the Metropolitan Exposition and Recreation Commission of Metro, the regional government for the Portland metropolitan area, took over ownership and management of the facility in 1994, the complex was renamed Portland Expo Center. It has since undergone major renovations.
Halls A, B, and C are currently the oldest buildings in the complex.  Halls A and B have  ceiling heights, and hall C has a  ceiling height.  Hall A features  of space and can accommodate up to 2,726; Hall B features  of space and can seat up to 2,700.   Hall C, which has  of space, seats up to 4,736.
Hall D, the newest building in the complex (built in 2001), replaced an older exhibit hall.  It has  of space, a  ceiling height, can be divided into two exhibit halls and can seat up to 7,000. Hall E, built in 1997 is the largest exhibit hall in the complex with  of space and a  ceiling height. It seats up to 9,000. Halls D and E are connected by a  connector. East Hall, another building at the center, has  of space. The complex has many meeting rooms and a total of  of exhibit space.