In a letter to his publisher, Zola stated his goals for the Rougon-Macquart: "1   To study in a family the questions of blood and environments.  2   To study the whole Second Empire, from the coup d'etat to nowadays." . Text available online 
Since his first goal was to show how heredity can affect the lives of descendants, Zola started working on the Rougon-Macquart by drawing the family tree for the Rougon-Macquart. Though it was to be modified many times over the years, with some members appearing or disappearing, the original tree shows how Zola planned the whole cycle before writing the first book.
The tree provides the name and date of birth of each member, along with certain properties of his heredity and his life:
Image:Tableau heredite.jpg|An early tree showing the heredity. Each family has a color, and each child is influenced by one or more families.
Image:Zola - Arbre genealogique.jpg|The 1878 tree, published in a note included in ''Une Page d'amour''
Image:Arbre_genealogique.jpg|The 1892 and final tree, as part of the preparation work for ''Le Docteur Pascal''
For example, the entry for Jean Macquart on the 1878 tree read : ''Jean Macquart, ne en 1831 - Election de la mere - Ressemblance physique du pere. Soldat'' (Jean Macquart, born in 1831 - Prepotency of the mother - Physical likeness to his father. Soldier)
Indeed, at the beginning, Zola didn't know exactly how many books he would write. In the first letter to his publisher, he mentioned "ten episodes". In 1872, his list included seventeen novels, but some of them will never be made (such as the one on the war in Italy) and others will be added later on. In 1877, in the preface of ''L'Assommoir'', he stated that he was going to write "about twenty novels". In the end, he settled for twenty books.
Almost all of the main protagonists for each novel are introduced in the first book, ''La Fortune des Rougon''. The last novel in the cycle, ''Le Docteur Pascal'', contains a lengthy chapter that ties up loose ends from the other novels. In between, there is no "best sequence" in which to read the novels in the cycle, as they are not in chronological order and indeed are impossible to arrange into such an order. Although some of the novels in the cycle are direct sequels to one another, many of them follow on directly from the last chapters of ''La Fortune des Rougon'', and there is a great deal of chronological overlap between the books; there are numerous recurring characters and several of them make "guest" appearances in novels centered on other members of the family.
The Rougon-Macquart family begins with Adelaide Fouque. Born in 1768 in the fictional Provencal town Plassans to middle-class parents (members of the French "bourgeoisie"), she has a slight mental deficiency. She marries Rougon, and gives birth to a son, Pierre Rougon. However, she also has a lover, the smuggler Macquart, with whom she has two children: Ursule and Antoine Macquart. This means that the family is split in three branches:
Because Zola believed that everyone is driven by their heredity, Adelaide's children show signs of the their mother's original deficiency. For the Rougon, this manifests as a drive for power, money, and excess in life. For the Macquarts, who live in a difficult environment, it is manifested by alcoholism (''L'Assommoir''), prostitution (''Nana''), and homicide (''La Bete humaine''). Even the Mourets are marked to a certain degree; in ''La Faute de l'Abbe Mouret'', the priest Serge Mouret has to fight his desire for a young woman.
Adelaide Fouque           Ursule Macquart              Helene Mouret                    Jeanne Grandjean
As a naturalist, Zola also gave detailed descriptions of urban and rural settings, and different types of businesses. ''Le Ventre de Paris'', for example, has a detailed description of the cheese market in Paris at the time.
As a political reflection of life under Napoleon III, the novel ''La Conquete de Plassans'' looks at how an ambitious priest infiltrates a small Provence town one family at a time, starting with the Rougons. ''La Debacle'' takes place during the 1870 Franco-Prussian War and depicts Napoleon III's downfall. ''Son Excellence'' also looks at political life, and ''Pot-Bouille'' and ''Au Bonheur des Dames'' look at middle class life in Paris.
Note that Zola wrote the novels after the fall of Napoleon III.
In an "Introduction" of his last novel, ''Le Docteur Pascal'', Zola gave a recommended reading order, although it is not required, each novel stands on its own.The reading order recommended by Zola can be found in Ernest Alfred Vizetelly's  '''' (1904),  .
All 20 of the novels have been translated into English under various titles and editions, but many of the translations are out of print, outdated and/or censored.
1. ''The Fortune of the Rougons'' (''La Fortune des Rougon'')
2. ''The Kill'' (''La Curee'')
3. ''The Belly of Paris'' (''Le Ventre de Paris'')
5. ''The Sin of Father Mouret'' (''La Faute de l'Abbe Mouret'')
7. ''The Dram Shop'' (''L'Assommoir'')
9. ''Nana''
10. ''Pot Luck'' (''Pot-Bouille'')
11. ''The Ladies Paradise'' (''Au Bonheur des Dames'')
13. ''Germinal''
14. ''The Masterpiece'' (''L'Oeuvre'')
15. ''The Earth'' (''La Terre'')
16. ''The Dream'' (''Le Reve'')
17. ''The Beast Within'' (''La Bete Humaine'')
19. ''The Debacle'' (''La Debacle'')