Yahoo Serious was born in Cardiff, City of Lake Macquarie in the Hunter Valley, New South Wales, Australia. He went to , then worked as a tyre fitter to pay for his tuition at the National Art School in Sydney. After being expelled, Serious co-wrote, co-produced, and directed his first film at age 21, a documentary called ''Coaltown'' which explored the social and political history of coal mining. The following year, his television series ''Lifestyle'' won the Australian Penguin Award for Best Educational Documentary.
In 1988, Serious co-wrote, produced, and directed ''Young Einstein'', an intentionally inaccurate movie portraying Albert Einstein as a young farmer in Tasmania who discovers rock music and surfing, romances Marie Curie, and derives the formula E=mc   while trying to discover a means of creating beer bubbles.  The movie was an international hit, grossing over $100 million worldwide, and propelling Serious to stardom.
In 1993, Serious released his next film, ''Reckless Kelly'', a satire about a modern descendant of the notorious Australian bank robber Ned Kelly who also becomes a movie star in Hollywood.  While ''Reckless Kelly'' was a hit in Australia, it failed outside of the country and ended Serious's bid for mainstream international popularity. In 2000, Yahoo Serious released his third film ''Mr. Accident'', about the most accident-prone man in the world.  Like ''Reckless Kelly'', the film was not a commercial success.
Yahoo Serious received an honorary doctorate from the University of Newcastle in 1996.
He is also a director of The Kokoda Track Foundation, and has trekked the Kokoda Track a number of times. As of December 2008 he is working on his 4th feature, a war movie about the Kokoda Track campaign.
Shortly after the production of ''Young Einstein'', Yahoo Serious married Lulu Pinkus. Their relationship ended in 2007.
In August 2000, Yahoo Serious tried to sue the search engine Yahoo! for trademark infringement. The case was thrown out because Serious could not prove that he sells products or services under the name "Yahoo" and therefore could not prove that he suffered harm or confusion due to the search engine.