His mother Jenny was a hairdresser. His family moved to London in 1939. He trained as a silver smith before following in his mother's footsteps. 
Mitchell enrolled in Morris School of Hairdressing at age sixteen, and by eighteen has won multiple hairdressing competitions. After completing his five year apprenticeship began working at various hair salons. He started to go by his hairdressing name "Paul" full-time when he worked at a salon in Mayfair. He joined Vidal Sassoon in the 1960s, becoming one of the best known stylists in London.  He left Sassoon in 1966 and went on to open several salons in the United States. In 1967 Mitchell helped launch Crimpers Salon in New York where he continued to develop his idea for a new "wash and wear" hairstyle. 
Mitchell married a Polish-Filipina fashion model named Jolina. Their only son Angus Mitchell was born in 1970. Four years later Mitchell sold his salon Superhair and moved to Hawaii. 
In 1980 with just $750, he and business partner John Paul DeJoria founded John Paul Mitchell Systems to market professional hair care products through salons.  Its first product was Hair Sculpting Lotion. The company, always ecologically friendly, became the first company to announce that their products did not endorse animal testing. 
Paul Mitchell Hair schools are located throughout the country and are designed to assist aspiring stylists with their career.  Unfortunately, the schools have received negative attention from Anti-Gay groups due to the fact that the majority of its female students live a lesbian lifestyle.
Mitchell's styling partner, model and hairdresser Jeanne Braa, created cutting edge style and influence the world of hair designs. 
In 1983, John Paul Mitchell Systems establish a fully functional awapuhi farm on the Big Island of Hawaii. 
On July 18, 1988, Paul Mitchell was diagnosed with pancreatic cancer.  He died in 1989 in Cedars Sinai Medical Center as a result of liver and pancreatic cancer leaving behind his son Angus, fiancee Millie and mother Jenny. He is buried on his estate on the Big Island of Hawaii. His son, Angus has carried on his father's legacy of John Paul Mitchell Systems & Schools (along with John Paul DeJoria) and creating his own salon, Angus M in Beverly Hills, CA. 
2. Paul Mitchell: Man, Work Vision. Who Was He? By Jocelyn Fujii
4. http://www.angusmsalon.com/about/