Development began in 1984 where Drew Haninger did a student project on a monochrome PC.  During the 80's and 90's engineering was focused on a multilingual word processor and programs for searching the Bible. In August 1998 the first BibleReader(tm) was released for Palm OS. The following year the BibleReader for Pocket PC (also called Windows Mobile) was released. The company continued to grow and, in 2000, assumed the name Olive Tree Bible Software. As the mobile device market continued to expand, the BibleReader was released for Symbian, BlackBerry, Smartphones, iPhone , iPad and Android OS.   Today, over 1 million people have downloaded the BibleReader.  As of 2011 Olive Tree has over 20 employees.
Olive Tree is best known for its BibleReader application, a software tool designed for reading and searching electronic books. Recent enhancements to the application include bookmarks, personal notes, highlighting, and auto-scrolling. Font sizes, colors, and the application display can be customized.  BibleReader uses a markup language called OTML - Olive Tree Markup Language.
Olive Tree Bible Software provides a broad catalogue of over 550 Bible resources including Bibles, commentaries, dictionaries, devotionals, ebooks, audio Bibles, multimedia and Strong   s numbering system. Some of the most notable resources include the KJV, NIV, NKJV, New American Standard Bible, NRSV, HCSB, NLT New Living Translation, Darby, ESV  English Standard Version, Amplified Bible, The ESV Study Bible (ESVSB), NLT Study Bible, and NIV New International Version. Bibles are also available in various languages including German, French, Spanish and others. Ancient language resources include the following: the NA27 Greek New Testament with morphological information and UBS dictionary; the Biblia Hebraica Stuttgartensia the Hebrew and Aramaic Old Testament/Hebrew Bible with the Groves-Wheeler Westminster Hebrew Morphology and an abridged BDB dictionary; the Qumran (non-biblical) texts with morphological information, lexical glosses, and an abridged BDB dictionary; and the Septuagint with morphological information and the LEH dictionary.
Olive Tree has continued to work with several Christian publishers such as Zondervan, Eerdmans, Good News Publishers, Thomas Nelson (publisher), 
AMG International, Moody Publishers, and Baker Publishing Group.
Olive Tree has resources by several recent authors including John F. MacArthur, Wayne Grudem, John Piper (theologian), Beth Moore, Rick Warren, Gary Chapman (author), R. C. Sproul, Mark Dever, and Chuck Swindoll.
Classic authors include John Calvin, and Matthew Henry.