On 8 June 2005, the discovery of an X-Acto knife on the floor of the reading room in the Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library at Yale University led to his arrest.  Although three maps on his person matched those missing from books he had just examined in the Beinecke, he protested his innocence.  It was not until his court appearance a year later (22 June 2006) that he confessed to having stolen a total of 97 maps from six institutions&nbsp;&mdash; Boston Public Library, Harvard University (Houghton Library), Newberry Library (in Chicago), New York Public Library (the Rare Book and Map Divisions) and Yale University (Beinecke Library and Sterling Memorial Library) in the United States, as well as the British Library in London.  At the time of his arrest the British Library had already identified him as a suspect and was about to call in the police. Smiley originally said he had been stealing maps for approximately seven years but later reduced that figure to four years.
The case was widely covered across the United States and elsewhere.  Because Smiley pled guilty, he was never cross-examined.  Apart from the details he supplied himself, much of the available information came via journalists. The most incisive reporting was by Kim Martineau in the ''Hartford Courant'' and an article by William Finnegan in the ''New Yorker''. A comprehensive  includes various claims that Smiley had taken more maps than he admitted.  Each of the affected libraries issued lists of missing maps.  Several of the entries matched copies of books, now without their maps, which Smiley had examined. One example can be given. Smiley had admitted stealing from Harvard University an example of the map of the Aztec capital Tenochtitlan, illustrating a letter from Hernan Cortes (1524), but a prior photograph of the example missing from Yale's Beinecke Library proved instead that it was theirs.
Several questions remain unanswered, in particular about the origin and purpose of high quality facsimiles of early maps, some found on Smiley's person when he was arrested, others in books he examined.
As a result of Smiley's thefts, research libraries are now more aware of the vulnerability of maps illustrating volumes in their rare book collections and are tightening up their documentation and security procedures. At the same time they appreciate the importance to scholars of continued access to such works. The changes are most noticeable at Yale's Sterling Memorial Library, where a comprehensive program of cataloging and digitizing the early map collection is under way, funded largely by a donation of US$100,000 from William Reese, who had acted as Yale's advisor throughout the Smiley affair.
Smiley was not the first major map thief. Miles Harvey's book ''The Island of Lost Maps''&nbsp;&mdash; notionally about Gilbert Bland&nbsp;&mdash; describes a number of still earlier thieves, and the  document the activities of two European thieves in or before 2001. However, Smiley was almost certainly responsible for more financial and cultural loss than any of his predecessors. 
Smiley was released from prison on January 15, 2010.