It is also a fashionable shopping destination, and home to some of Boston's tallest office buildings, the Hynes Convention Center, and numerous major hotels.  
Prior to a monumental 19th-century filling project, the Back Bay was an actual bay.  Today, along with neighboring Beacon Hill, it is one of Boston's two most expensive residential neighborhoods. 
The Neighborhood Association of the Back Bay considers the neighborhood's bounds to be "Charles River on the North; Arlington Street to Park Square on the East; Columbus Avenue to the New York New Haven and Hartford right-of-way (South of Stuart Street and Copley Place), Huntington Avenue, Dalton Street, and the Massachusetts Turnpike on the South; Charlesgate East on the West."
Before its transformation into buildable land by a 19th-century filling project, the Back Bay was literally a bay, located west of the Shawmut Peninsula (on the far side from Boston Harbor) between Boston and Cambridge, with the Charles River entering from the west. This bay was tidal: the water rose and fell several feet over the course of each day, and at low tide much of the bay's bed was exposed as a marshy flat.
As early as 5,200 years before present, Native Americans built fishweirs here, evidence of which was discovered during subway construction in 1913 (''see'' Ancient Fishweir Project and Boylston Street Fishweir).
In 1814, the Boston and Roxbury Mill Corporation was chartered to construct a milldam, which would also serve as a toll road connecting Boston to Watertown, bypassing Boston Neck. However, the project was an economic failure, and in 1857 a massive project was begun to "make land" by filling the area enclosed by the dam.
The firm of Goss and Munson built  of railroad from quarries in Needham, Massachusetts; 35-car trains arrived in the Back Bay 16 times each day, carrying gravel and other fill. (William Dean Howells recalled "the beginnings of Commonwealth Avenue, and the other streets of the Back Bay, laid out with their basements left hollowed in the made land, which the gravel trains were yet making out of the westward hills.")  Present-day Back Bay itself was filled by 1882; the project reached existing land at what is now Kenmore Square in 1890, and finished in the Fens in 1900.  Much of the old mill dam remains buried under present-day Beacon Street.
The project was the largest of a number of land reclamation projects which, beginning in 1820, more than doubled the size of the original Shawmut Peninsula. (It is frequently observed that this would have been impossible under modern environmental laws.)
Completion, in 1910, of the Charles River Dam converted the former Charles estuary into a freshwater basin; the Charles River Esplanade was constructed to capitalize on the river's newly-enhanced recreational value.  The Esplanade has since undergone several changes, including the construction of Storrow Drive.
The plan of Back Bay, by Arthur Gilman of the firm Gridley James Fox Bryant, was greatly influenced by Haussmann's renovation of Paris, with wide, parallel, tree-lined avenues unlike anything seen in other Boston neighborhoods. Five east-west corridors -- Beacon Street (closest to the Charles), Marlborough Street, Commonwealth Avenue, Newbury Street and Boylston Street -- are intersected at regular intervals by north-south cross streets: Arlington (running along the west boundary of the Public Garden), Berkeley, Clarendon, Dartmouth, Exeter, Fairfield, Gloucester, and Hereford.
All Back Bay streets are one-way with the exception of Commonwealth Avenue, which is actually two one-way thoroughfares flanking the tree-lined pedestrian Commonwealth Avenue Mall. 
Copley Square contains Trinity Church, the Boston Public Library, the John Hancock Tower, and other notable buildings.  The Prudential Center was awarded the Urban Land Institute's Award for Best Mixed use Property in 2006.
Back Bay has at times been home to some of the area's leading institutions.
The St. Botolph neighborhood, stretching from Huntington Ave. to the north, the Southwest Corridor to the south, Harcourt Ave. to the east, and Massachusetts Ave. to the west, is a lesser known part of the Back Bay.  Residential parking is available to those with a Back Bay parking sticker. Consisting almost entirely of brownstones (row houses), with many dead-end streets abutting the Southwest Corridor, the neighborhood also borders the South End.
Cross streets in the St. Botolph neighborhood, like those that cross Newbury Street, are alphabetical with the exception of West Newton (Albermarle, Blackwood, Cumberland, Durham, West Newton, Follen, Garrison, Harcourt). Unlike the alphabetical streets in northern Back Bay, where Arlington is to the east and Hereford to the west, Albermarle is located to the west and Harcourt to the east.
Back Bay is home to many boutiques and stores, primarily on Newbury and Boylston Streets and in the Prudential Center and Copley Place malls. 
The Hynes Convention Center is complemented by numerous hotels, including the Lenox, Colonnade, Westin, Fairmont,  Marriott, Four Seasons, Park Plaza, and Mandarin Oriental.
The  Berklee College of Music and the Boston Architectural College are located in the Back Bay. 
Back Bay is served by Back Bay station (MBTA Commuter Rail and Orange Line, and Amtrak) and the Arlington, Copley, and Hynes Convention Center stations on the Green Line. 
Because of extensive use of landfill, the Back Bay neighborhood is extremely vulnerable to soil liquefaction in a severe earthquake.  This could cause disastrous soil movements and building damage, as was seen in the similarly landfilled Marina District of San Francisco after the Loma Prieta Earthquake of 1989. Note that the very names of these two popular neighborhoods refer to their underwater origins.
Many people are not aware that New England is considered by insurance companies to be a high earthquake risk area.  In 1755, a severe earthquake estimated above 6 on the Richter Scale and centered near Cape Ann caused extensive building damage in Boston.  Severe seismic events are rare in New England, but they are historical fact, and can be expected to recur with an unknown frequency.
The building code in Boston has been modified to require better seismic resistance, but many older buildings do not conform, and are at risk for major damage.