The '''Amway Center''' is a sports and entertainment venue in Orlando, Florida, located in the Downtown area. It is part of Downtown Orlando Master Plan 3: a plan that also involves improvements to the Citrus Bowl and a new performing arts center. The arena is home to the Orlando Magic of the NBA, the Orlando Predators of the AFL, and will host the 2012 NBA All-Star Game. As well as many other concerts and events, the popular WWE Monday Night RAW debuted at the Amway Center on November 22, 2010 and WWE Smackdown debuted on May 3, 2011 to host the May 6 episode. It is also a candidate to host ArenaBowl XXIV in 
Prior to Downtown Master Plan 3, the Orlando Magic's ownership, led by billionaire Amway founder Richard DeVos and son-in-law Bob Vander Weide, had been pressing the City of Orlando for a new arena for nearly ten years. Amway Arena was built in 1989, prior to the recent era of technologically-advanced entertainment arenas. With the rush to build new venues in the NBA (and sports in general), it quickly became one of the oldest arenas in the league. During various times in the late 1990s, the team even threatened to move elsewhere, though threats of imminent departure died down after the September 11 attacks and remained merely speculation. Still, some analysts suggested that the team might leave for newer arenas in Kansas City, Oklahoma City or even Las Vegas. (Ultimately, Oklahoma City got a team, the Oklahoma City Thunder, when the Seattle SuperSonics moved after the 2007-08 season.)
On September 29, 2006, after years of on-and-off negotiations, Orlando Mayor Buddy Dyer, Orange County Mayor Richard Crotty, and the Orlando Magic announced an agreement on a new arena in downtown Orlando, located at the northwest corner of Church Street and Hughey Avenue. The arena itself cost around $380 million, with an additional $100 million for land and infrastructure, for a total cost of $480 million (as of March 8, 2011 the arena was expected to be within $10 million of the estimated cost). It is part of a $1.05-billion plan to redo the Orlando Centroplex with a new arena, a new $375-million performing arts center, and a $175-million expansion of the Citrus Bowl (Later, declining economic conditions led the improvements to the Citrus Bowl to be delayed until at least 2020). When it was announced in the media on September 29, it was referred to as the "Triple Crown for Downtown".
As part of Amway's naming rights to the old Amway Arena, the company received right of first refusal for naming rights to the new venue, and exercised those rights, announcing a 10-year, $40-million naming deal to name the venue the '''Amway Center''' on August 3, 2009.
The details of the agreement were finalized on December 22, 2006. In the agreement, the City of Orlando will take ownership of the new arena, while the Magic will control the planning and construction of the facility so long as contracting procedures are done in the same public manner as governments advertise contracts.  In addition, the City will be paid a part of naming rights and corporate suite sales, a share estimated to be worth $1.75 million the first year of the arena's opening.  The Magic will receive all proceeds from ticket sales for Magic games, while the City will receive all proceeds from ticket sales to all other events. The Orlando Magic will contribute at least $50 million in cash up-front, pick up any cost overruns, and pay rent of $1 million per year for 30 years. The City of Orlando will pay for the land and infrastructure. The remaining money will come from bonds which will be paid off by part of the Orange County, Florida, Tourist Development Tax, collected as a surcharge on hotel stays, which was raised to 6% in 2006. The Magic will guarantee $100 million of these bonds. 
The Orlando City Council approved several operating agreements connected with the arena plans on May 22, 2007. The City Council approved the plan officially, 6-1, on July 23.  The Venue plan received final approval by the Orange County Board of County Commissioners, 5-2, in late evening of July 26 after a long day of public hearings.  Amendments were made by the County Commission which were approved on August 6 by the City Council, 6-1, sealing the deal once and for all. On December 1, 2007, the City and the Magic came to an agreement on nearly $8.5 million in compensation to three owners of the land where the arena is planned to be built.  An eminent domain hearing confirmed the agreement and finalized the sale.
On April 3, 2010 it was reported that Fitch Rating Agency had downgraded the bonds used to finance the new arena to "junk" status and further warned the arena's debt holders that in as soon as 30 months the new Amway Center could be faced with a default unless finances are corrected.  The city and county were quick to assure local media that in no way would Fitch's downgrade delay construction and that all necessary funds were on hand to complete the center.  However because of the Fitch downgrade the interest rate on the debt payments would increase the "payoff" cost of the Amway Center over time and the ''Orlando Sentinel'' pointed out that it would be harder to seek lending for the other phases of the project such as the "$425 million Dr. Phillips Center for the Performing Arts and the $175 million renovation of the Florida Citrus Bowl stadium." 
The downgrade to "junk" of the Amway Center's debt   although reversible   signals that unless local government either expands tax revenue or drastically reduces both Amway Center and non-center expenses, creditors could in just a short few years seek bankruptcy relief in the form of repossession or auctioning off the new center. Such a move would probably not threaten the Magic's status as tenant in the venue.
Populous (formerly HOK Sport) was named the primary contractor on August 3, 2007, with Smith Seckman Reid and Walter P Moore Engineers and Consultants as planning partners.  As part of the contract, Populous agreed to contract at least 18% of the construction work to firms owned by minorities and 6% of the work to firms owned by women. On August 26, 2009, the Magic announced that 35% of the contracts to that point, with 75% of all contracts awarded, have gone to companies owned by minorities or women.
California-based art curator  assembled the Amway Center Art Collection. The collection includes more than 340 works of art, including about 200 museum-quality photographs. 14 of the 21 artists housed in the collection represent Central Florida.
From 2008 to 2010,  based in Venice Beach California designed the following for the Amway Center Arena:   Signage for the building's exterior, interior, wayfinding, concessions, retail, and sponsor zones         Box Office Plaza's    porch    elements including a 50-foot tall rain sculpture, fans and oversized chairs         the ORLANDO sign at the corner of Church and Division Streets         Orlando Magic Team Store sponsored by Adidas         Gentleman Jack Terrace outdoor bar         Nutrilite Magic Fan Experience         Orlando on Demand Info Garden         Airtran Airways Flight Deck sponsor zone         Kia Motors Terrace sponsor deck         Stuff   s Magic Castle kids play area         Magic Stuff kids retail shop         OZONE Bowl Sign and Fan Deck         and the O3 Beverage Bar.
In May, 2010,  was awarded the role of Art Consultant for the curation and installation of artwork, photography and large format graphics. The Amway Center Art Collection includes over 140 pieces of fine art paintings and mixed media originals, over 200 photographs, and graphic wall treatments highlighting both the Orlando Magic and the spirit of Orlando and Central Florida. 
Amway Center is one of the most technologically advanced venues in the world. Inside the building, a unique centerhung installation, manufactured by Daktronics of Brookings, South Dakota, is the tallest in any NBA venue. It maximizes creative programming options by using high resolution, 6mm-pixel technology on each of the 18 displays, including two digital ring displays and four tapered corners. Additional displays include approximately  of digital ribbon boards, the largest of which is a 360-degree,  display surrounding the entire seating bowl. These displays have the ability to display exciting motion graphics and real time content, such as in-game statistics, out-of-town scores, and closed captioning information. Outside the building, a large display utilizes more than 5,000 Daktronics ProPixel   LED sticks, each a meter long, which make up a  by  video display. This display will reach millions of motorists traveling by the Amway Center on Interstate 4.
It was announced in March 2011, five months after the center openned, that a team of firefighters are required to be on hand for all events at Amway Center because of a problem with the fire-safety system responsible for clearing smoke from the venue. City officials were quick to say people who attend events are not in danger and have ensured safety with the attending firefighters.
Amway Center has an assortment of mid-level luxury seats and club seating, located below the upper bowl.  This contrasts Amway Arena's design as it's luxury boxes are above all seats and suspended from the ceiling. The arena's design was unveiled at Amway Arena on December 10, 2007, with an official press release the next day. The floor of Amway Center is designed with arena football in mind, as it features more retractable sections that will permit squared end zone corners, a feature previously not possible for Orlando Predators games.
The official ribbon cutting ceremony and dedication took place on October 1, 2010 at 10:01 AM. The general public was invited to enter the building where Orlando Mayor Buddy Dyer gave his annual State of Downtown address. The first ticketed event was a Vicente Fernandez concert on October 8. The Orlando Magic hosted their first preseason game at Amway Center on October 10 against the New Orleans Hornets when they won by a historic margin of 54 points, while the 2010-11 regular season home opener took place on October 28 against the Washington Wizards.