The '''Palisades Interstate Parkway''' ('''PIP''') is a  long limited-access highway in the U.S. states of New Jersey and New York. The parkway is a major commuter route into New York City from Rockland and Orange counties in New York and Bergen County in New Jersey. The southern terminus of the route is at the George Washington Bridge in Fort Lee, New Jersey, where it connects to Interstate&nbsp;95 (I-95), U.S. Route&nbsp;1   9 (US&nbsp;1   9), US&nbsp;46 and Route&nbsp;4. Its northern terminus is at a traffic circle in Fort Montgomery, New York, where the PIP meets US&nbsp;9W and US&nbsp;202 at the Bear Mountain Bridge. At exit&nbsp;18, the PIP forms a concurrency with US&nbsp;6 for the duration of its run.
The route is named for the New Jersey Palisades, a line of cliffs rising along the western side of the Hudson River. In New Jersey, the parkway is designated, but not signed as, '''Route&nbsp;445'''. A short spur in Fort Lee is designated, but not signed as, '''Route&nbsp;445S'''. In New York, the roadway is designated '''New York State Route&nbsp;987C''' (NY&nbsp;987C), an unsigned reference route. As with most parkways in the New York metropolitan area, commercial traffic is prohibited from using the PIP. The Palisades Interstate Parkway was built from 1947   1958, and fully opened to traffic on August&nbsp;28, 1958.
The Palisades Interstate Parkway begins at the George Washington Bridge in Fort Lee. Passengers from the upper level of the GWB can directly get on the PIP northbound. Passengers from the lower level of the bridge must travel through GWB Plaza on US&nbsp;9W, before getting on the PIP. Passengers riding northbound on the New Jersey Turnpike (I-95) must be in local lanes to directly get on the PIP. It can be a confusing interchange for someone unfamiliar with the arrangement. Construction to fix this problem has been rumored for quite sometime, but nothing has been made official. Once the PIP leaves the GWB, it proceeds north along the New Jersey Palisades, breezing by the Englewood Cliffs Service Area. Unlike service areas further north along the parkway, there are two in Englewood, one for northbound drivers and one for southbound drivers. The others are in the center median shared by drivers going in both directions. There are also three different scenic lookout points over the Palisades about where Manhattan Island begins at the Harlem River. After this, the PIP parallels US&nbsp;9W and the Hudson River for its entire run in New Jersey. In fact, all four exits in New Jersey are either with US&nbsp;9W, or within mere feet of the route. The PIP leaves New Jersey into New York in the borough of Rockleigh.
The entire New Jersey portion of the Palisades Interstate Parkway is within Bergen County. It is designated as a state scenic byway known as the '''Palisades Interstate Parkway Scenic Byway'''.
The Palisades enters Rockland County in the hamlet of Palisades. At about the border the PIP changes direction from due north along the Hudson River to a north-west direction. Shortly after the Kings Ferry Service Area in the center median, the first two exits in New York are key exits for two colleges in Rockland County. Exit&nbsp;5 provides a link to St. Thomas Aquinas College, and exit&nbsp;6 provides a link to Dominican College. In West Nyack, the PIP has a key interchange with the New York State Thruway (I-87, I-287). This intersection is about two miles (3&nbsp;km) west of the Tappan Zee Bridge. After the PIP's interchange with the NY Thruway, the PIP turns slightly north-east and its speed limit increases to . From the GWB to the NY Thruway it is exclusively . At exit&nbsp;13, the PIP intersects US&nbsp;202 as the route crosses south of Harriman State Park in Mount Ivy. This is the first of two meetings between the PIP and US&nbsp;202. At exit&nbsp;15, the PIP has its last busy intersection in Rockland County with County Route&nbsp;106 (former NY&nbsp;210) in Stony Point. From here, the PIP enters Harriman State Park, and at exit&nbsp;16, the PIP intersects Lake Welch Parkway, which is one of several parkways commissioned within the park. 
The Palisades enters Orange County north of Lake Welch Parkway at exit&nbsp;16 and south of the Palisades Interstate Park Commission Visitor Center, which is located in the center median because it was originally a parkway service area. The first interchange in Orange County is exit&nbsp;17 at Anthony Wayne Recreation Area. At exit&nbsp;18, the PIP intersects US&nbsp;6 and Seven Lakes Drive. US&nbsp;6 west heads toward the New York Thruway and NY&nbsp;17 five miles (8&nbsp;km) west in Harriman. US&nbsp;6 east forms a concurrency with the PIP for the last two miles (3&nbsp;km) of the PIP's run. Seven Lakes Drive joins the two routes for one mile (1.6&nbsp;km) before departing at exit&nbsp;19. The two routes then enter Bear Mountain State Park in an eastern direction. Finally, the Palisades Interstate Parkway meets its end at US&nbsp;9W/US&nbsp;202 at a traffic circle inches from the Hudson River and the Bear Mountain Bridge. US&nbsp;6 and 202 head east over the bridge, while US&nbsp;9W heads north toward the United States Military Academy in West Point.
In 1933   34, the first thoughts of a Palisades Interstate Parkway were developed by William A. Welch. The plan was to build a parkway to connect the New Jersey Palisades with the state parks along the Hudson River in Rockland and Orange Counties. Welch would soon garner the support of John D. Rockefeller, who donated  of land along the New Jersey Palisades overlooking the Hudson River. With this favorable momentum for the new route, the proposed route was accepted as a Civil Works Administration project under Franklin D. Roosevelt's New Deal coalition. However, the New Jersey Highway Commission did not support construction, so the idea of a parkway was put on hold.
During the 1940s, Rockefeller renewed the push for a parkway along the New Jersey Palisades, and teamed with ultimate PIP planner, Robert Moses, to establish and design the parkway. The plan originally was to have the PIP stretch from the Garden State Parkway, along the Hudson River, to the George Washington Bridge, and then north along its present-day route ending at the Bear Mountain Bridge. This southern extension was never built, but construction began on the current PIP in New York on April&nbsp;1, 1947. Construction on the New Jersey portion began about one year later.
Construction was delayed twice due to material shortages, but that did not stop the PIP from being opened in stages during the 1940s and 1950s. The route was completed in New Jersey in 1957, and on August&nbsp;28, 1958, the final piece of the PIP was completed between exits&nbsp;5 and&nbsp;9 in southern Rockland County.
Shortly after completion of the PIP, the parkway's interchange with US&nbsp;6 was upgraded to include what is known as Queensboro Circle. Queensburo Circle is located just off of exit&nbsp;18 of the PIP. The exiting driver must proceed to this one of many traffic-circles within Bear Mountain State Park and Harriman State Park before getting off on US&nbsp;6's Long Mountain Spur or Seven Lakes Drive. In the early days of the parkway, the PIP originally had posted speed limits of , but now are posted between  with additional lanes added in higher traveled areas. 
The PIP is a favorite means to access the Catskill Mountains in Sullivan County, New York from New York City.  Travellers take the PIP to the New York State Thruway, then on to Route&nbsp;17 which is exit sixteen of the Thruway.  Due to the huge number of hasidic travellers, particularly in the summer months, the PIP has developed a friendly, multi-cultural tone to it.  Its rest stops offer regular commuter fare side by side with hasidic labelled kosher foods.  Residents of The Bronx and uptown Manhattan also use this route as a means of travelling to Rockland Lake and Harriman State Park on day trips because of their close proximity to the city, especially during the summer.
The PIP is well known for its stone arch overpasses throughout its route and its several scenic overlooks in New Jersey. All sorts of unique trees and flowers, can be seen along the route as well. In 1998, because of all the natural and constructed beauty, the PIP was designated as a national landmark by the National Park Service.
The Palisades Interstate Parkway can be reached from the George Washington Bridge only from the bridge's upper level. Those traveling on the lower level must take the exit for US&nbsp;9W, and travel through northern Fort Lee to reach the PIP. The Port Authority plans to construct ramps to directly connect the lower level to the PIP. Originally, this was to take place anywhere between 2005 and 2009, but has been postponed with no future date scheduled as of now.
Within New Jersey, the New Jersey Turnpike is the only other highway to use sequential exit numbering; all others are based on mileage, except for the Atlantic City-Brigantine Connector in Atlantic City that uses lettered exits (no numerals).