Turgon was born and raised in Leroy, NY, near the suburban Rochester hometown of future band-mate, singer Lou Gramm. A multi-instrumentalist, Turgon started playing in elementary school, and after high school, became a member of Showcase, competing in the same market as the Gramm-fronted band Poor Heart. In late 1971, he joined Black Sheep with Lou, which built a steady regional following over the next two years. In 1974, the Gramm-Turgon written EP ''Stick Around'' was released on Chrysalis, which later led the group to be signed to Capitol. The band released two albums in 1974, and was enroute to major success when an equipment accident in 1975 caused Black Sheep to lose the support act slot for KISS that year. Bruce then left NY state for Los Angeles, eventually writing, recording and touring with bands like Billy Thorpe, Nick Gilder, Prism and Warrior as well as performing around the L.A. area with his own bands. In 1987, Bruce co-wrote the song ''My Way'' along with Paul Stanley and Desmond Child for the platinum Kiss album ''Crazy Nights''.
Eventually, Bruce's long association with his friend Gramm led to the writing and recording of Gramm   s first solo effort ''Ready or Not'', yielding the hit single, "Midnight Blue". The album charted at number 27 in the United States. The single "Midnight Blue" was number one on the Hot Mainstream Rock Tracks. Eventually a second solo effort, ''Long Hard Look'' was released, that included the top ten hit "Just Between You and Me" and "True Blue Love", and reached the Top 40. Also contributed, was a song to the soundtrack for the 1987 film ''The Lost Boys'', titled "Lost in the Shadows". In 2003, Gramm attempted to rejuvenate his solo career with a band that included Turgon on bass, Rocket Richotte on guitar, Kevin Neal on drums, John Purdell on keyboards (who suddenly died very early during the tour), and Gary Corbett on keyboards. Following the death of both Gramm's father and mother, this initial lineup decided it best to take different paths.
In between the recording of Gramm   s second album, ''Long Hard Look'' and its subsequent tour, Bruce also toured with Steve Stevens in support of his 1989 solo album ''Atomic Playboys''. The band featured Steve Stevens on guitar, Perry McCarty on vocals (formerly in Warrior with Bruce), Gregg Gerson on drums, Phil Ashley on keyboards, and Bruce on bass guitar. The album was Steve Stevens first solo recording and featured the video ''Atomic Playboys'' in which Bruce did perform (playing bass).
In 1991, Turgon and Gramm formed the short-lived Shadow King, along with guitarist Vivian Campbell (Dio, Whitesnake, Riverdogs, & Def Leppard) and drummer Kevin Valentine (Godz, The Lou Gramm Band, KISS, & Neverland). They released a self-titled album in 1991 and contributed one song (''One Dream'') to the film ''Highlander II: The Quickening'' (starring Sean Connery & Christopher Lambert). Bruce co-wrote nine of the ten tracks on the debut album, as well as handling multiple instrument, arrangement and programming duties. The impressive video ''I Want You'' did received some play on MTV, and although plans were made for a tour, they performed only once, at the Astoria Theater in London, England, on December 13, 1991. Shortly afterward, Vivian Campbell announced he was leaving Shadow King to join Def Leppard. Although replacements were considered, the band members eventually went their separate ways. Reportedly, Lou Gramm guested with Def Leppard on stage in 1992, shortly after Vivian Campbell joined them.
In 1992, when Gramm rejoined Foreigner, Bruce was hired for the bass position now vacated by the departing Rick Wills. Bringing new energy to the band, three new songs were recorded for the compilation, ''The Very Best of ... and Beyond''. These songs included ''Soul Doctor'', ''Prisoner of Love'', and ''With Heaven On Our Side''. Foreigner then released their eighth studio album, ''Mr. Moonlight'' in 1995, with several songs co-written by Bruce, including the single ''Until The End of Time''. Several tours followed that re-established Foreigner back into the Classic Rock spotlight, and once again proved the band to be a successful touring act.
Over the last 10 years, Bruce has become increasingly involved in TV, movie and documentary soundtrack work, contributing to shows on HBO, Showtime, PBS , and Warren Miller Films. In late 2005, he finally released his first solo album, ''Outside Looking In'' featuring the outstanding tracks ''Living A Lie'', ''Any Other Time'', and the title track ''Outside Looking In'' featuring Ronnie Montrose on lead guitar. Ex-Montrose member Denny Carmassi was the drummer for all tracks. Bruce recently worked on a collaboration album with Redding, CA electronic musician Craig Padilla. The collaboration is titled ''Places of Power'' and the new CD ''Now Is The Hour'' was released on January 23, 2009 on the Blistering Records label.