The Australian state of Victoria is divided into 37 '''counties'''. They are part of the lands administrative divisions of Australia. These counties were gazetted in stages between 1849 and 1871 as Victoria was progressively opened up to European settlement. By 1890 all parish boundaries had been gazetted.  Unlike counties in the United States and the United Kingdom, Victoria's counties have no administrative or political function. They exist purely as cadastral units: used for the purposes of identifying the location of any piece of land. The counties are furthermore divided into 2914 parishes and townships.
The county names have also been traditionally used as names for electoral districts, although these districts seldom have boundaries coinciding exactly with county boundaries. The Victorian Legislative Assembly currently has electoral districts called Benambra, Evelyn, Lowan, Mornington, Polwarth, Ripon and Rodney. The counties are also related to the boundaries for the .
The majority of the counties proclaimed prior to 1871 were named after conservative and titled English politicians. The counties formed from the Gipps Land District, Loddon Land District, Murray Land District and Wimmera Land District proclaimed in 1871 were all given aboriginal names. 
Earlier maps of Gippsland area in the eastern part of the state show unsurveyed counties of Douro (a title of the Duke of Wellington), Bass, Haddington, Bruce, Abinger, Combermere and Howe with approximate boundaries. These counties are shown on several early maps such as  and . They were presumably changed in the mid 1860s, as they appear on maps up until 1864 , but the new counties appear on an . This was during the period of the liberal Government (1863-1868) of Premier James McCulloch.
Victoria was also divided into land districts in the nineteenth century, as shown on a . The land districts were used as the names for parts of the state where no counties had been proclaimed yet. The land districts included: