The '''United States''' competed at the '''1924 Summer Olympics''' in Paris, France.
Ten divers, five men and five women, represented the United States in 1924. It was the nation's fifth appearance in the sport; the United States was the only nation to have appeared at each Olympic diving competition to that point. The Americans were dominant, sweeping the medals in three of the five events and taking the top two places in a fourth. The United States entered three divers in each event for a total of 15 entries; 11 resulted in medals while all 15 advanced to the finals. White was the top individual diver, with gold medals in both of his events. Becker won a gold and a silver. Smith took a gold, while Pinkston took a pair of bronzes. Riggin, Fall, and Desjardins each won a silver, and Fletcher took a bronze. Thrash and Meany were the only two Americans to not win medals.
Ninety-six athletes represented the United States in 1924. It was the nation's seventh appearance in the sport. The United States was one of three nations, along with Great Britain and Greece, to have competed in each edition of the Olympic athletics program to that point. The American team had competitors in each of the 27 events, with the maximum number of entries in all but 3 of them (the United States did not send full teams for the steeplechase, the racewalk, or the triple jump). The United States had finalists in every event except the triple jump. The team swept the medals in two events: the pole vault and the shot put.
The United States won 32 medals overall, almost twice that of the next most successful nation (Finland). The 12 gold medals won by the Americans were two more than Finland won, putting the United States at the top of the leaderboard for the sport. Houser and Osborn were the most successful individuals, with two gold medals apiece. Earl Johnson and Scholz won two medals each. Thirty-three other athletes won medals, bringing the total to 37 of 96 participants taking medals.
Sixteen boxers represented the United States at the 1924 Games; the U.S. was one of four countries (along with France, Great Britain, and Italy) to send two boxers in each weight class. It was the nation's third appearance in the sport. The two gold medals won by Americans matched Britain's pair of golds. The United States team won the most overall medals with six.
In two weight classes, both American boxers won medals. The featherweight final featured two Americans, with Fields coming out on top. LaBarba won the flyweight, with Fee taking the bronze in that weight class. All six medals came in the lightest four weight classes, with Tripoli's silver in the bantamweight and Boylstein's bronze in the lightweight rounding out the total.
Five cyclists represented the United States in 1924. It was the nation's sixth appearance in the sport, matching France for most appearances.
Five equestrians represented the United States in 1924. It was the nation's fourth appearance in the sport; the United States was the only nation to have taken part in each Olympic equestrian competition to date. Doak won the individual eventing bronze, the United States's first medal since 1912 and matching their all-time best result in the sport. Doak and Carr, who finished eighth in the eventing, gave the United States a strong shot at silver in the team competition, but neither Barry nor Padgett finished and so the team did not get a score. Padgett, this time along with Bontecou, again did not finish in the show jumping competition, and the United States did not get a score in that competition either. Barry's 25th place was the best individual result in show jumping.
21 fencers, 19 men and 2 women, represented the United States in 1924. It was the nation's fifth appearance in the sport; the United States was one of nine nations to send women to the first Olympic women's fencing competition.
The United States competed in the Olympic football tournament for the second time in 1924. 
Eight gymnasts represented the United States in 1924. It was the nation's third appearance in the sport. Kriz took the nation's only medal, with the gold in the vault.
Four pentathletes represented the United States in 1924. It was the nation's third appearance in the sport. The United States was one of six nations to have competed in each edition of the Olympic modern pentathlon to that point.
The United States sent a polo team to the Olympics for the third time in 1924. The Americans won their first three games, against the three European sides, and faced Argentina in their final game. Despite having a late lead, the United States was unable to finish off the Argentinians, who came from behind to beat the United States. The United States finished with the silver medal.
20 rowers represented the United States in 1924. It was the nation's fourth appearance in the sport. All five of the American boats won medals: two golds, a silver, and a pair of bronzes.
The United States sent a rugby team to the Olympics for the second time in 1924. The defending champions won their first game against Romania, 37 to 0. As France had already beaten Romania, the three-team round-robin finished with the France-United States match. The Americans won 17 to 3 to become the first team to successfully defend an Olympic rugby championship.