The '''Orange County Library System (OCLS)''' is a public library system located in the Orlando area of Central Florida. OCLS has headquarters in the Orlando Public Library in Downtown Orlando. The System is made up of 15 total locations, one main library (Orlando Public Library) and 14 branch locations. The Orange County Library System is a 501(c)3 organization.
Before the Orlando Public Library came into existence, the Sorosis Club of Orlando maintained a circulating library for its members. This collection was initially on the second floor of the Old Armory Building on Court Street and was subsequently moved to the Knox building at Pine and Court Streets. On May 11, 1920, Orlando citizens showed by a vote of 417 to 19 that they wanted a library and were willing to pay for it.
Captain Charles L. Albertson, a retired Police Inspector of New York City, and a winter resident of Orlando, had for many years been collecting books at his home in Waverly, New York. In November 1920, Captain Albertson offered his collection to the City of Orlando, on the condition that it furnish a suitable building to house it. The contract between the city of Orlando and Captain Albertson provided that Orlando would accept the gift of the Albertson collection and furnish the library building; that the library should be known as the Albertson Public Library; that Captain Albertson should be Advisory Superintendent of the Library throughout his lifetime; and that Orlando should suitably maintain the Library.
Preparation for the 1966 building began in 1962 when construction of a new Main Library was approved by the Orlando voters, and the City acquired additional land adjacent to the original site. In 1964, the library moved to temporary headquarters at 905 North Orange Avenue, the Albertson building was demolished, and construction began. The Orlando Public Library building was dedicated on August 7, 1966. The architect was John M. Johansen of New Canaan, Connecticut. He called his design a "composition in monolithic concrete."
The Library closed its temporary location on July 23 to move into the new building. The Orlando Public Library was dedicated on a rainy Sunday afternoon, August 7, 1966.
As early as 1974 the need to expand the Orlando Public Library was recognized. In 1978, the Library secured from the Orlando City Council a commitment for the whole block to the west of the existing site. In 1980 the voters approved the sale of $22 million in bonds for construction.
In March 1985, the 1966 building was closed. The expansion opened to the public April 8, 1985. Work on renovating the old building began immediately. A Grand Opening Celebration for the expansion and renovation took place April 6, 1986.
The  building fills a whole city block. It was built with 19,000 cubic yards of concrete. A major challenge given to architect Duane Stark and his team was to design an expansion that would blend seamlessly with the original 1966 Johansen design. The measure of Stark's success is quite apparent in the exterior of the building. The color and texture of the new exterior walls were matched to the rough hewn cedar pattern of the original poured-concrete walls.
There are 14 branches located around Orange County and one main location, the Orlando Public Library. Some of the services they offer include gaming, programs, and computer classes taught in the English, Spanish, and Haitian Creole languages.
The Materials Access to Your Library (MAYL) program allows library customers with resident cards to request materials for home delivery free of charge. Most deliveries are made by Priority Express Parcel, a private courier, although some are sent by U.S. Mail. This popular service circulates as much, if not more, material as a branch location and is operated in the basement of the Orlando Public Library.
OCLS operates a virtual branch at  which provides access to the library's easy-search catalog, information on programs and classes, and electronic databases of information. Resident cardholders can request materials for home delivery, renew items, browse content in online databases, take virtual computer classes, learn a language and download audiobooks.
In addition, cardholders can access the library on their smart phone or mobile device via an innovative mobile site at m.ocls.info. Using this user-friendly site, cardholders can access their account, order items delivered to home, check item availability, renew items, find locations and directions, access the library event calendar, sign up for computer classes and much more. In 2010, OCLS unveiled their own mobile app, OCLS Shake It, a helpful tool for making book and movie recommendations. OCLS also maintains a comprehensive web presence on social media sites like , ,  and .
The library system circulates a large print collection of fiction and non-fiction titles. The expansive collection of materials also includes new and classic movies, music and audio books in multiple formats. The New Release DVDs are made available to cardholders on their actual release date. In 2010, OCLS expanded on its existing music CD collection by becoming one of the first U.S. libraries to offer cardholders free mp3 downloads using an innovative new service called . Audio Books are available via download using a service called OverDrive, as well as on CD and on preloaded portable mp3 devices, all available for checkout.
The library system offers a number of convenient services including computer classes, language learning software, live tutoring and practice test help, access to information databases, interactive tutorials, and topical eGuides to name a few. In addition, each location regularly hosts free events for children, teens, adults and family. In order to satisfy the interests of a diverse community, these events range in topic from health screenings to storytimes to cooking classes and even live concerts and stage shows.
The Orange County Library System performs mobile reference, in which staff roam the library buildings to assist customers rather than wait at a desk for people to approach. Each mobile reference staff member wears a Vocera Communications Badge, a wireless device that uses voice recognition software. With a touch of a button, these badges allow staff to communicate with each other throughout the building and place calls outside the library. The Orlando Public Library houses Questline (407.835.7323), the library   s telephone call center. Questline assistants assist customers with account information, material requests, and reference questions. Questline staff also provide digital reference services through email and Orange Chat, an instant messaging program.  Patrons can get assistance via email, live online chat and text as well.
OCLS was the first public library to offer RSS (Really Simple Syndication) feeds. To those who subscribe to the feeds, the library delivers news about library events, new technology, and information for children and teens. OCLS offers podcasts and video podcasts of storytelling and other library events, blogs, and informative virtual galleries on topics that include travel, history, holidays, and more. OCLS cardholders can access a variety of electronic resources, including databases, downloadable audio books, streaming videos, and virtual computer classes.  The library system features free Wi-Fi access in all locations, allowing anyone with a library card and a wireless enabled computer or mobile device to use the Internet. In addition, all locations house public computers with Internet access, though these also require an active library card to use.  Several locations provide self-checkout stations that allow customers to check out materials on their own. The library materials that are housed in self-checkout locations are given Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) tags, which store information about the items and identify material at the point of checkout.
The  is a 501 (c) 3 charitable organization first organized in 1947 as a group of citizens in support of OCLS and the role of public libraries in general.  Over the years, the Friends have worked to raise funds for the Library System and to educate people about the important role libraries play in the community.
The Orange County Library System has been honored with numerous awards and recognitions over the years and are regularly invited to present at major national conferences. A partial listing of recent awards appears below:
The Orange County Board of County Commissioners named OCLS a 2010 Best Partner for its library programming on water conservation and sustainability.
OCLS was bestowed a Golden Brick Award receiving top honors in the Special Event category for the kick-off ceremony for the Citizenship Inspired program. The Annual Golden Brick Awards given by the Downtown Orlando Partnership honor projects that positively affect the Downtown Development District and contribute significantly to its quality of life - making Downtown Orlando a more exciting, interesting and desirable place to live, work and play.
The Orange County Library System was named the 2010 Florida Library of the Year by the Florida Library Association.
The Orange County Library System has been awarded a 2009 Workforce Central Florida Award of Excellence.
OCLS received an Honorable Mention in OverDrive's Outreach Program Contest. OCLS was selected as a winner based on the creativity and effectiveness of a video campaign to reach new patrons.
OCLS was recognized with a 2009 Rethinking Resource Sharing (RRS) Innovation Award for its work on Orlando Memory, a digital archive and social networking community where the users select and contribute content.
OCLS was recognized with a 2008 Workforce Central Florida Award of Excellence for outstanding training provided to employees.
OCLS has been named one of the American Heart Association   s 2008 Fit Friendly Companies. The American Heart Association recognizes workplaces that champion the health of their employees by offering programs and resources to help them live longer, heart-healthier lives.
OCLS is the recipient of a National Leadership Grant from the Institute of Museum and Library Services in the amount of $120,603. Titled Citizenship Inspired, the grant project will focus on service to the pre-naturalized residents of Orange County (numbering over 100,000). Using technology and social networking, and capitalizing on our strong learning platform, OCLS will empower immigrants who have settled in Central Florida to be fully prepared to pass the U.S. Naturalization Test and thereby become full citizens.
Libraries for the Future has chosen the Orange County Library System to participate in Fit for Life, a program of Libraries for the Future, made possible through the generous support of the MetLife Foundation. In this very competitive grant, OCLS was one of 17 library systems nationwide selected to promote lifelong health and wellness through community responsive programs. OCLS was awarded the $20,000 to fulfill the grant proposal.
The Orange County Library System has been awarded a $96,360 grant to promote investor education.The library system is one of 13 nationwide selected for participation in Smart Investing @ Your Library  , a joint grant program sponsored by the American Library Association (ALA) and the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA) Investor Education Foundation.
The Library   s Books & Beyond newsletter won the 2007    Best of Category    award in the four-color newsletter category in the 20th Annual Florida Print Awards.
2007 Best of Show Library Administration and Management Association (LAMA) Winner for Young Adult Reading Club Materials was awarded to the Orange County Library System. More than 420 entries were submitted for this competition from across the U.S. and Canada.
Assistant Director Debbie Moss of the Orange County Library System received a 2007 award from the Urban Libraries Council (ULC) Joey Rodger Fund for Library Leadership.The award provides $5,000 for a senior-level library administrator to participate in a leadership program or professional development opportunity.