 is a passenger rail and bus station located in Fullerton, California, United States. It is served by Amtrak's ''Pacific Surfliner'' and ''Southwest Chief'' trains, and Metrolink's 91 Line and Orange County Line trains. It also serves as a major bus depot for the Orange County Transportation Authority, and is altogether one of the major transportation hubs of Orange County.
The station has two historic depots on site: one built in 1923 by the Union Pacific Railroadhttp://www.fullertonheritage.org/Views_Tours/National_Register/updepot.htm and the other built in 1930 by the Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railway.http://www.fullertonheritage.org/Views_Tours/National_Register/santafe.htm Both depots are on the National Register of Historic Places.
The Santa Fe depot serves as an Amtrak ticket office and passenger waiting area, and also houses a cafe.
The Union Pacific Railroad was the third railway company to lay tracks through Fullerton and to build a depot.  This helped firmly establish Fullerton as the regional rail center for northern Orange County. Fullerton's redevelopment agency moved the Mission Revival-style building next to the Santa Fe depot in 1980 to preserve it, and today it is occupied by an Old Spaghetti Factory restaurant.
In the late 1990s, the Fullerton Railway Plaza Association (FRPA) began fundraising and lobbying efforts for the creation of an interactive railroad attraction or museum at the site, while continuing preservation efforts. Starting in 1999, the Amtrak station and the FRPA were hosts for the annual "Fullerton Railroad Days" event at the Santa Fe depot, an event that attracted between 30,000 to 40,000 participants.  Due to the city not supporting the FRPA museum, Railroad Days was not held in 2009 and FRPA looked elsewhere, choosing to hold its 2010 event in neighboring Brea.  The organization subsequently changed its named to the Southern California Railway Plaza Association (SCRPA).
Numerous trains stop each day at Fullerton, as the station is served by Amtrak's popular ''Pacific Surfliner'' service, as well as two Metrolink commuter lines.  Amtrak's long-distance ''Southwest Chief'' also stops once daily in each direction, but only to discharge westbound or board eastbound passengers.
Of the 73 California stations served by Amtrak, Fullerton was the seventh-busiest in FY2010, boarding or detraining an average of approximately 1150 passengers daily.