The ''Poker After Dark'' format features an "intimate look at one table as it develops over the week." Blinds start at $100/$200 and slowly escalate. Commentator Ali Nejad's commentary is limited, allowing viewers to hear much of the table talk among the players, all of whom are miked. (The table talk occasionally reveals that the "week-long" series is taped in one long session.)
The series was originally structured as a series of week-long No Limit Texas hold 'em mini-tournaments for six top poker professionals. Each week the players vied for a $120,000 winner-takes-all prize pool, with each paying a $20,000 buy-in. By the end of the fifth show, a winner is determined. The sixth show is a "director's cut" that includes excerpts from the action from the previous five days, interspersed with talking heads commentary from the participants. Beginning with Season 4, the producers began to experiment with different formats, including no-limit cash games, and a double-elimination Heads Up battle between the first 4 winners of the National Heads-Up Poker Championship.  Also, Seasons 3, 4 and 5 had a "Dream Table," pitting an amateur against five pros.
Several affiliates, most notably those owned by Post-Newsweek Stations, Barrington Broadcasting, some Raycom Media stations, and the LDS Church-owned KSL-TV in Salt Lake City refuse to air the show due to management or locality objections against programs featuring gambling (the Post-Newsweek stations also refused to carry ''Face the Ace'' in August 2009), while other stations do not carry it due to existing syndication contracts precluding it from airing the series or to retain control of their overnight schedules.
In Canada ''Poker After Dark'' airs afternoons and late nights on Rogers Sportsnet and, since fall 2009 on the French network V. 
In France ''Poker After Dark'' airs at night on RTL9.
In Germany, ''Poker After Dark'' airs on SPORT1. German commentary is provided by Michael Korner. on the DSF website 
In Ireland, ''Poker After Dark'' airs on Setanta Ireland and Setanta Sports 1http://www.setanta.com/ie/TV-Listings/ on most weeknights with little change from the US version. 
In The Netherlands ''Poker After Dark'' airs on Veronica, on weekdays around 2:00am with on Saturday the Director's Cut, also around 2:00am. The episodes contain the original commentary by Ali Nejad and Dutch subtitles are added. 
In Sweden ''Poker After Dark'' airs on afternoons and nights on TV4 Sport. And on TV 10 weekday nights at 01:30
In Denmark ''Poker After Dark'' airs at night on TV3+.
In Italy ''Poker After Dark'' airs at night on POKERItalia24.
In Russia show airs on 7TV at 11:30pm every day till the Febral, now show on REN-tv at 3:00 pm.
In Brazil, ''Poker After Dark'' airs on Discovery Channel (Brazil) on weeknights (Tuesdays - Saturday mornings) at 0400 Sao Paulo/Rio de Janeiro, with the Director's Cut airing on Saturday nights (Sunday mornings) at 0400 Sao Paulo/Rio de Janeiro.  Flop Magazine Editor-in-Chief Juliano Maesano serves as the host and does play-by-play, and Full Tilt Poker Pro Leandro Pimentel provides analysis. 
In Spanish-speaking Latin America, ''Poker After Dark'' airs on Discovery Channel (Latin America) on weeknights (Tuesday - Saturday mornings) at 0400 Buenos Aires/0200 Mexico D.F., with the Director's Cut airing on Saturday nights (Sunday mornings) at 0400 Buenos Aires/0200 Mexico D.F.  Gabriela Hill serves as the host and does play-by-play, and either Argentine poker book author Juan Zubiri or Full Tilt Poker Pro Diego Cordovez provides analysis.   
In the U.S., the show had some early ratings success: during season one's second week, it attracted on average a larger audience among adults 18-34 than ''The Late Late Show'' did the same week, even though the latter is broadcast 90 minutes earlier.
Full Tilt Poker regularly advertises during ''Poker After Dark'' broadcasts and in some countries, Full Tilt Poker is included in the show's title, which for a time prompted players associated with a rival site (Poker Stars) to stop appearing on the show. Full Tilt Poker holds promotional tournaments that offer a seat on the show as the grand prize. The first of these winners, Ken Light, appeared on the first week of Season 3, and was said to have picked his own opponents, though Light later said on the show itself that he was only asked to provide a list of his favorite players and that he did not know that players from the list would join him on the show.
Season 2 was taped in May 2007 at the South Point Casino in Las Vegas. from the NBC Sports website
Season 3 was taped in October 2007 at the South Point Casino in Las Vegas.
Season 4 was taped in April 2008 at the South Point Casino in Las Vegas.  Season 4 episode titles and presumed seating order taken from NBC's Web site.  
Most of Season 5 was taped December 19   21, 2008 at the Golden Nugget Las Vegas. The season's first three weeks include episodes originally announced as Season 4 episodes and were taped at South Point. 
Season 6 was taped in October 2009 at the Golden Nugget Las Vegas and is scheduled to have 13 weeks of episodes. 
Season 7 will take place from the Aria Resort & Casino in Las Vegas, and will feature 13 weeks.
The following tables omit results of unaired episodes, even if such information is available online.
Results from cash game weeks, which ''Poker After Dark'' introduced in Season 4 and continued in Season 5, Season 6, and Season 7, are also omitted.
These statistics are meant to help readers judge the players' relative performances in the main type of event featured on "Poker After Dark": The six-player winner-take-all tournament. So, with the exception of the "Total appearances" column, the statistics omit all "Cash Games" (which do not even have declared winners) and the one "Heads Up" event played so far (Season 4, Week 3, won by Phil Hellmuth). The notations (x2) and (x3) mean the player achieved that placement two or three times, respectively.
The following players have won more than once. (Aired episodes of regular-format tournaments only.)
The following players have appeared more than twice, but have yet to win. (Aired episodes of regular-format tournaments only.)
The following players have been invited to play on ''Poker After Dark'' more than twice. ("Total appearances" column includes all filmed events; "Aired Tournaments" omits non-regular format tournaments as well as yet-to-air episodes.)
In Jam Up Week in Season 3, Eli Elezra rebought for an additional $20,000 resulting in a $140,000 prize. David Williams won this tournament.
Allen Cunningham wins during the Mega Match Week, the buy-ins were $50,000 resulting in a $300,000 prize.
Huck Seed wins during the $100K Freezeout Week, the buy-ins were $100,000 resulting in a $600,000 prize.