The title of ''The Audacity of Hope'' was derived from a sermon delivered by Obama's former pastor, Jeremiah Wright. Wright had attended a lecture by Dr. Frederick G. Sampson in Richmond, Virginia, in the late 1980s, on the GF Watts painting ''Hope'', which inspired him to give a sermon in 1990 based on the subject of the painting - "with her clothes in rags, her body scarred and bruised and bleeding, her harp all but destroyed and with only one string left, she had the audacity to make music and praise God ... To take the one string you have left and to have the audacity to hope ...  that's the real word God will have us hear from this passage and from Watt's painting."  Having attended Wright's sermon, Barack Obama later adapted Wright's phrase "audacity ''to'' hope" to "audacity ''of'' hope" which became the title for his 2004 Democratic National Convention keynote address, and the title of his second book.
While a Senate candidate, Obama delivered the keynote address at the 2004 Democratic Convention, entitled ''The Audacity of Hope'' that propelled him to national prominence. In the less than twenty minutes it took to deliver the speech, Obama was catapulted to sudden fame, with many analysts predicting that he might be well positioned to enter a future presidential race. In 2006, Obama released ''The Audacity of Hope'', a book-length account that expanded upon many of the same themes he originally addressed in the convention speech.
In his speech addressing the Democratic National Convention in 2004, Obama said:
A "political biography that concentrates on the senator's core values," according to the ''Chicago Tribune'', ''The New York Times'' noted that "Mr. Obama   s new book,    The Audacity of Hope    ... is much more of a political document. Portions of the volume read like outtakes from a stump speech, and the bulk of it is devoted to laying out Mr. Obama   s policy positions on a host of issues, from education to health care to the war in Iraq".
The ''Chicago Tribune'' credits the large crowds that gathered at book signings with influencing Obama's decision to run for president. Former presidential candidate Gary Hart describes the book as Obama's "thesis submission" for the U.S. presidency: "It presents a man of relative youth yet maturity, a wise observer of the human condition, a figure who possesses perseverance and writing skills that have flashes of grandeur." Reviewer Michael Tomasky writes that it does not contain "boldly innovative policy prescriptions that will lead the Democrats out of their wilderness," but does show Obama's potential to "construct a new politics that is progressive but grounded in civic traditions that speak to a wider range of Americans."
An Italian edition was published in April 2007 with a preface by Walter Veltroni, former Mayor of Rome, currently leader of Italy's Democratic Party and one of Obama's earliest supporters overseas, who met with Obama in Washington in 2005 and has been referred to as "Obama's European counterpart."
Spanish and German translations were published in June 2007; the French edition, subtitled ''une nouvelle conception de la politique americaine'', was published in October 2007. The Croatian edition was published in October 2008.
The book remained on the ''New York Times'' Best Seller list for the 30 weeks since publication. The audiobook version won the 2008 Grammy Award for Best Spoken Word Album.
A number of blogs and newspapers repeated inaccurate rumors that the book contains the passage, "I will stand with the Muslims should the political winds shift in an ugly direction."  The actual quote does not mention Muslims at all, referring instead to Arab and Pakistani-Americans in the context of immigrant communities generally.