Founded in 1957, Cal State East Bay has a student body of over 13,000.  The university's largest and oldest campus is located in the Hayward Hills, with additional campus-sites in the cities of Oakland and Concord.  Cal State East Bay is one of only a handful of universities in the California State University system to operate on the quarter system.
With multiple campuses across the region, the university adopted a new, broader mission to serve the eastern San Francisco Bay Area in 2005.  To reflect the university's more widespread objective, the school changed its name from California State University, Hayward to California State University, East Bay that same year.
The university was established in 1957 as State College for Alameda County, with its primary mission to serve the higher education needs of Alameda and Contra Costa Counties.  Its construction was part of the California Master Plan for Higher Education as proposed by Clark Kerr and the original site for the school was Pleasanton, California.  The campus was moved to Hayward before plans were finalized due to the efforts of State Assembly member Carlos Bee and other boosters from the Hayward community.  At the time of its opening in 1959, classes were held on the campus of Hayward High School.  With the addition of the school, higher education in the San Francisco Bay Area became more accessible.  To the south was San Jose State College (now San Jose State University) serving the South Bay counties. To the west was San Francisco State College (now San Francisco State University) serving San Francisco and San Mateo Counties. To the north is Sonoma State University, serving Marin and Sonoma counties. Chabot College, a part of the California Community College system, opened nearby in Hayward in 1961.
The university has undergone numerous transitions in its history, making name changes accordingly. In 1961, the school was moved to its present location in the Hayward Hills and renamed Alameda County State College.  In 1963, the name was changed to California State College at Hayward. The school was granted university status in 1972, changing its name to California State University, Hayward. In 2005, the university implemented a new, broader mission to serve the eastern San Francisco Bay Area and adopted the name California State University, East Bay.  The proposal to rename the campus to California State University, East Bay  was approved by the California State University Board of Trustees on January 26, 2005.
California State University, East Bay's main campus is located in Hayward, California.  Warren Hall, its signature building on top of the Hayward hills, overlooks the scenic eastern portion of the San Francisco Bay Area. The building is visible from cities throughout the San Francisco Bay Area, serving as a landmark for Hayward and the surrounding Eastern San Francisco Bay Area. Warren Hall is scheduled for seismic retrofitting, which may go as far as to remove the top seven stories of the 12 story building.California State University, East Bay also has a campus in Concord, California in Contra Costa County, and a professional development center in Oakland.  Continuing education programs are available at all three locations.
California State University, East Bay is also known for its Solar Energy Project.  Solar panels were installed on four campus rooftops and are used to generate supplemental power during peak periods and is one of the largest photovoltaic systems in Northern California.  Since its completion in 2004 the university has received recognition on a regional and national level for the project; those include:
On April 8, 2010, the California Public Utilities Commission approved a fuel cell project of Pacific Gas and Electric Company (PG&E) allowing Cal State East Bay   s Hayward campus to become one of the first college campuses in Northern California to have a fuel cell. Once installed, the waste heat generated by the fuel cell will be converted into hot water to be used in campus buildings. 
Since 2004, the Pioneer Amphitheatre on campus has been home of the KBLX Stone Soul Picnic, a day long festival of R&B, soul and Urban Adult Contemporary music, featured performers have included Ronald Isley, The Whispers, Teena Marie, the late Rick James, and The O'Jays. California State University, East Bay's Associated Student Incorporated also hosts concerts with artists like Lupe Fiasco and Goapele.
In 2005, Cal State East Bay launched an aggressive construction project with the building of three new facilities: the Wayne and Gladys Valley Business and Technology Center (VBT), the Pioneer Heights student housing expansion and the University Union annex. The  VBT center was dedicated on February 28, 2007, making it the first new academic building on the Hayward Campus in more than 30 years. The building offers a state-of-the-art home for programs in business, technology management, engineering, multimedia, science, and online degree programs.   An expansion to Pioneer Heights was dedicated in fall 2008. Student housing was able to accommodate more than 450 new residents and offer a  dining commons. An annex to the existing University  Union opened in January 2007.  
Construction continued with the anticipated dedication of the new Student Services and Administration building in summer 2010 and the Recreation and Wellness Center in Fall 2010.
In 2010, Pioneer Stadium was, briefly, the home to the FC Gold Pride women's professional soccer team, before it folded.
Construction workers removed the stadium   s grass and replaced it with artificial turf, while widening the field to regulation size, said Jim Zavagno, director of planning design and construction for Cal State East Bay.
As part of the facility   s overall renovation, which began in January, the width of the existing running track circling the playing field was narrowed to five lanes to accommodate the larger field.    In addition to the competition areas, improved sidewalks and fencing were added to the facility,    said Zavagno, who reported that the construction costs came in under budget at $1.9 million, about $600,000 less than had originally been projected. "Renovations to Pioneer Stadium included new markings and a recently installed artificial turf field that's been widened to meet professional soccer regulations."
Beginning in September 2010, a parking structure is to be built that will add 1,100 additional parking spaces. The project with a cost of $24.5 million, will be paid by the parking fees. A bridge from the parking structure will allow students and faculty access to the central campus and other buildings such as the Recreation and Wellness center, Warren Hall, and Meiklejohn Hall.
Leroy M. Morishita was named as interim president on April 18, 2011. Morishita's appointment becomes effective July 1, 2011 when current California State University East Bay President Mohammad Qayoumi begins as president of San Jose State University. On May 17, 2006 Mohammad Qayoumi succeeded Norma S. Rees as president of the university. Qayoumi is the first Afghan-American to lead a major American university.
The university is best known for its College of Business and Economics; a strong Education Department, where a large percentage of California teachers receive their certification; and the thriving Music Department where the California State University, East Bay Jazz Ensemble, directed by Dave Eshelman(retired June 2007), holds annual performances in  at Jack London Square in Oakland and frequently tours Europe and parts of South America. The Biotechnology Program developed at California State University, East Bay affords the university a status as the center of research and development in the Life sciences, Bioinformatics and technologies for the Eastern San Francisco Bay Area.
California State University, East Bay also participates in the Internet2 project, a collaboration led by over 200 U.S. universities, private industries, and governments to develop advanced network technologies for research and higher education in the 21st century.
California State University, East Bay offers 52 undergraduate degree programs and 39 Masters degree programs in addition to its teacher education program.  The university also has a doctoral program in Educational Leadership (Ed. D.) held in cooperation with the University of California, Berkeley, San Francisco State University and San Jose State University.  The most popular undergraduate majors are: Business, Psychology, Liberal Studies, Biological Sciences, Pre-Nursing, Human Development, Health Sciences, Criminal Justice, Communication, and Computer Science. 
The academic departments of the University are organized into four colleges:
First year students are put into Freshman Learning Communities which help students to: 
The September 1995 issue of ''SUCCESS'' magazine reported the university as one of the 25 best business schools for entrepreneurs. The ranking was based on four key criteria: qualifications of faculty, entrepreneurship curriculum, academic standards and student scores, and quality and depth of resources. The California State University, East Bay College of Business and Economics is ranked as the up and comers of the 25 schools to watch by Columbia University, Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), and Stanford University. CSUEB has been noted for its fine collection of faculty members.  In 2002, Professor Roger Baldwin received the prestigious Peet award for his superior lectures on American History. 
The university was also ranked 8th among Top Regional Public Schools in the West in U.S. News and World Report's 1999 America's Best Colleges guidebook.  The publication recognized Cal State East Bay again in 2008 as a "top   tier" institution among master's   granting universities in the West. The University   s exceptionally diverse student body was noted in the 2009 guide from U.S. News and World Report who ranked it as the second-most diverse master's-granting university in the Western region. 
In 2003, the College of Business and Economics was ranked by BusinessWeek as one of the Top Business Schools in the West. 
The Princeton Review has selected California State University, East Bay, as a "Best in the West" college every year since 2003; making note of its affordable tuition, small class sizes, diligent, career minded students, multicultural community, and strong business, nursing, and education programs.
The Freshman Learning Communities are seen as a National Model. Students are clustered together in courses with peers who have similar interests and career aspirations. The courses within the cluster have a theme that carries on the entire length of the freshman year. It helps students get through their General Education, while helping them making decisions about their major. In addition, the program has been noted to produce students who earn higher GPA due to the support and close interaction with their peers and professors; development of strong written and oral communication skills and awareness of graduation requirements, are also outcomes that help lead students to graduate on time.
A 2010 report on the California State University system   s statewide economic impact reveals that California State University, East Bay contributes $415 million annually to the regional economy: a return of more than $5 for every state dollar invested. The report,    Working for California: The Impact of the California State University System,    also underscores the long-lasting value of a Cal State East Bay education, concluding that approximately $1.6 billion of earnings by alumni in the East Bay area is directly attributable to their college degrees and creates an additional $2.5 billion of industry activity throughout the state.
The University is an awardee of a 2010 Promise Neighborhoods grant from the United States Department of Education, to aid in improving educational opportunities in Hayward.
The university's Department of Communications publishes a weekly newspaper called ''The Pioneer'', its name referring to the school mascot, Pioneer Pete.  The paper is staffed by faculty and students. East Bay is a diverse state university as indicated by the annual headcount report. 
Associated Students Incorporated (ASI) is a student-run and student-owned organization that represents the student body at California State University, East Bay. Elected by the California State University, East Bay student body, the 15-member ASI Board of Directors is the governing body of Associated Students, Inc. The Board makes policy and oversees the fiscal responsibility of ASI. Additionally, the Board assists the University in planning, implementing, and evaluating campus programs, events, and curriculum. ASI currently has four departments: ASI Presents, ASI Business Office, Student Government, and the Early Childhood Education Center. In 2007 the University administration did not allow ASI to hold a student referendum on increasing student fees to fund a recreation and wellness center. It substituted 'alternative consultation'. In 2008, the administration again did not allow ASI to hold a referendum on increasing student fees to fund athletic scholarship for a move to Division II sports. Again, it substituted 'alternative consultation'.
The mascot of the university is the Pioneer.  At the inception of the athletic program in 1961 the student body chose a spacesuit clad Space Pioneer as the mascot.  In the years since the mascot was shortened to the Pioneers and took a more terrestrial image; first as a frontiersman with a coonskin cap and then as a forty-niner who is reminiscent of Yosemite Sam.  In the 1980s the student body voted to change the mascot to the Vampires, but the decision was overturned by then-president Ellis McCune.
In 2005 there was talk of changing the mascot along with the university's name change.  The original plan was to unveil the new mascot by the end of the 2004-2005 academic year.  However, there was little student support for a mascot change; a majority of the students and faculty were in favor of keeping the Pioneer as the school mascot while supporting a redesign of the Pioneer image.  A final decision on whether or not to keep the Pioneer as the mascot of the university was to be reached before the 2006-2007 academic year but is still an open question in 2010.  A new athletics logo was unveiled on November 20, 2009 at a home opener basketball game.
California State University, East Bay is a member of the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) and began play as a provisional member of the NCAA Division II during the 2009-10 season. The University is currently a "scheduling partner" in the California Collegiate Athletic Association (CCAA), competing against Division II teams across the state. 
The California State University, East Bay Athletics Hall of Fame includes Major League Baseball players, an Olympian, several national record holders, and many All-Americans.
Among the more than 100,000 CSUEB alumni are: 