The '''University of Wisconsin   Milwaukee''' (also known as '''UW   Milwaukee''', '''UWM''' or '''Milwaukee''') is a coed public research university located in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, in the United States. It is the largest university in the Milwaukee metropolitan area and a member of the University of Wisconsin System. It is also one of the two doctoral degree-granting public universities in the state of Wisconsin and the second largest university in the state.
The University of Wisconsin   Milwaukee has a total student enrollment of 30,502 and 1,623 faculty members., University of Wisconsin   Milwaukee. Retrieved on March 2, 2007. It is located in Milwaukee's upper East Side close to Lake Michigan, and is home to the only graduate school of freshwater science in the U.S., the largest School of Architecture, College of Nursing and College of Health Sciences in the State of Wisconsin., University of Wisconsin   Milwaukee The University consists of 14 schools and colleges, and 70 academic centers, institutes and laboratory facilities. It offers a total of 180 degree programs, including 94 bachelor's, 53 master's and 32 doctorate degrees., University of Wisconsin   Milwaukee. Retrieved on October 13, 2009.
The university is categorized as an RU/H Research University (high research activity) in the Carnegie Classification of Institutions of Higher Education. In the year 2010, the university had a total research expenditure of 68 million US Dollars and ranked 189th among US research universities by total research expenditure in 2007., The center for Measuring University Performance
The university's athletic teams are called the Panthers.  A total of 15 Panther athletic teams compete in NCAA Division I. Panthers have won the James J. McCafferty Trophy as the Horizon League's all-sports champions five times since 2000.
In 1885, the Milwaukee State Normal School opened for classes at 18th and Wells in downtown Milwaukee. Over the next 42 years, the Milwaukee State Normal School saw 7 different presidents, the addition of music and liberal arts programs and rapid growth from an initial enrollment of 76. In 1919, the Milwaukee State Normal School moved from downtown to the current location near the lakefront when a new building, now Mitchell Hall, was completed. In 1937, the Milwaukee State Normal School changed its name to the Wisconsin State Teacher   s College in an effort by the State Normal School Regents to refocus on the instruction of teachers. The college became one of the nation's top teacher's training colleges in the 1940s.  In 1953, the Legislature empowered all state colleges to offer liberal arts programs. The Wisconsin State Teacher's College subsequently became Wisconsin State College of Milwaukee (WSCM). In 1956, the Wisconsin State College of Milwaukee and the University of Wisconsin-Extension's Milwaukee division merged to become the University of Wisconsin   Milwaukee.
University of Wisconsin   Milwaukee was founded with the belief that Milwaukee needed a great public university to become a great city. In 1955, the Wisconsin state legislature passed a bill to create a large public university that offered graduate programs in Wisconsin's largest city; the University of Wisconsin   Milwaukee was established in 1956, as a result of the merger of the Wisconsin State College of Milwaukee (WSCM) and University of Wisconsin's Milwaukee extension, a UW branch that had been offering graduate degrees in Milwaukee. The new university consisted of the WSCM campus near the lakefront and the University of Wisconsin extension at downtown Milwaukee. The first commencement of the new University of Wisconsin   Milwaukee was held on June 16, 1957. On June 13, 1958, Socialist mayor Frank P. Zeidler was the first person to receive an honorary doctorate from the university. From 1956-1971, this new school, the University of Wisconsin   Madison and the latter's affiliated 10 freshman-sophomore centers and state-wide extensions (University of Wisconsin   Extension). were part of a merged system under separate governance. In 1971, the state legislature merged this entity with the Wisconsin State Universities to form a united University of Wisconsin System under a single board of regents. In 1988, the UW System designated eight Centers of Excellence at UWM. In 1994, UWM was designated as a Research II University (now a Doctoral/Research University-Extensive) by the Carnegie Foundation.
In the 50 years since adding the Milwaukee campus to the UW System, UWM has expanded to 12 schools and colleges and now offers 84 undergraduate programs and 48 graduate programs, including 22 doctoral degree programs, with a university-wide focus on academic research, teaching and community service. In 2005, UW   Milwaukee surpassed UW   Madison in the number of Wisconsin resident students and became the university with the largest enrollment of Wisconsin residents.
In 2006, UW   Milwaukee was ranked as the ninth best    Saviors of Our Cities    by the New England Board of Higher Education (NEBHE), because of its strong positive contribution of careful strategic planning and thoughtful use of resources that have dramatically strengthened the economy and quality of life of Milwaukee, and was voted by the public as one of the top ten "Gems of Milwaukee" .
In 2008 and 2009, the school saw the establishments of the School of Public Health and the School of Freshwater Sciences. In 2010, UW-Milwaukee purchased its neighboring Columbia St. Mary's Hospital complex. In the early 2011, UW-Milwaukee closed the land purchase for its Innovation Park in Wauwatosa.
University of Wisconsin   Milwaukee is one of the two doctoral granting public research universities in the state of Wisconsin and is categorized as an RU/H Research University (high research activity) in the Carnegie Classification of Institutions of Higher Education. Per ''US News & World Report'' 2011, the University is ranked 171st nationally by America's Best High School guidance counselors as offering the best undergraduate education to their students.
The university consists of 14 colleges and schools, and 70 academic centers, institutes and laboratory facilities. It offers a total of 180 degree programs, including 94 bachelor's, 53 master's and 32 doctorate degrees. The School of Freshwater Sciences is the only graduate school of freshwater science in the U.S. and the third in the world. The School of Architecture and Urban Planning, the College of Nursing and the College of Health Sciences are the largest in Wisconsin.
Based on the statistical analysis by H.J. Newton, Professor of Statistics at Texas A&M University in 1997 on the National Research Council report issued in 1995, the University of Wisconsin   Milwaukee was ranked 72nd among public universities in the U.S. in the NRC Rankings.
The university ranks 98th in the world in the Professional Ranking of World Universities conducted by the Ecole des Mines de Paris in 2011 and one of the top 500 world universities in the Academic Ranking of World Universities compiled by Shanghai Jiao Tong University in 2007. The SCImago Institutions Rankings rated UW-Milwaukee 769th among 2,833 universities and research institutions worldwide in term of research output, international collaboration, normalized impact and publication rate in 2010. The Webometrics Ranking of World Universities ranked UW-Milwaukee 200th world wide and 96th in North American. 
The School of Information Studies ranks 16th nationally in the ''US News & World Report'' ranking, with its Archives and Preservation program  ranks the 9th. The ''U.S. News & World Report'' also ranks the Helen Bader School of Social Welfare 42nd nationally and consistently ranks the College of Nursing in the top 10%. The School of Education and the Peck School of the Arts rank 86th and 93rd nationally in ''U.S. News & World Report'' ranking.
The College of Engineering and Applied Science ranks 129th nationally by ''U.S. News & World Report'', with its computer science program ranked 110th in 2011. The National Research Council (NRC) ranked the school 73rd nationally, with the Industrial Engineering 34th, Materials science 60th, Civil Engineering 69th, Mechanical Engineering 87th, and Electronic Engineering 96th. 
The Management Information Systems (MIS) program of Sheldon B. Lubar School of Business is ranked 19th in the U.S. and 24th in the world by a study published in Communications for the Association for Information Systems. Also, the Organizations and Strategic Management program is ranked 32nd worldwide by a joint study conducted by Texas A&M University and the University of Florida. In 2006 and 2008, the School was ranked among the top 100 business schools around the world in terms of research productivity.
Golda Meir Library is the university's main library. The Library has more than 5.2 million catalogued items, many of which are available electronically through electronic reserve, web-based online catalog, searchable databases and indexes. The building was first constructed in 1947 and then expanded with the addition of the East Wing in 1974 and conference center in 1982. It was named for Golda Meir, the fourth Prime Minister of Israel, who graduated in 1927 from the Milwaukee State Normal School, a predecessor of University of Wisconsin   Milwaukee. The Golda Meir Library is also home to the American Geographical Society Library (AGSL), which "consists of well over one million items, and includes maps, atlases, books, journals, pamphlets, photographs, slides, Landsat images, and digital spatial data.", according to the UWM Libraries website http://www4.uwm.edu/libraries/about/collections.cfm .
The Honors College is an academic division that emphasizes personalized education to a selected group of students. It is open to students in all majors and disciplines who meet and maintain the Honors College admission requirements. Students in the Honors College have a designated writing tutor, special advisors, private study space in the library and opportunities to engage in undergraduate research.
There are about 500 students enrolled in the Honors College and about 60 students graduate with the Honors degree each year.
The university is categorized as an RU/H Research University (high research activity) in the Carnegie Classification of Institutions of Higher Education. In the year 2010, the university had a total research expenditure of 68 million US Dollars and ranked 189th among US research universities by total research expenditure in 2007.
The UWM Research Foundation supports and commercializes the university's research and innovations. It provides intellectual property management, technology transfer, corporate sponsored research and strategic corporate partnership services to UWM researchers and industry corporations
Research Growth Initiative (RGI) is a research administration of the university. It is designed to expand UWM   s research enterprise through investment in project proposals with anticipated return on investment through extramural funding. Proposals are evaluated by external reviewers with national reputations and ranked according to their quality, rewards and risk. Projects are awarded each year in March and are intended to commence on or after July 1.
The  UWM campus is located in a residential area on Milwaukee   s upper East Side. The campus is five blocks from the shoreline of Lake Michigan, and is less than a ten-minute drive from downtown Milwaukee. The Milwaukee County Transit System provides the campus with access to public bus transportation in Milwaukee.  The campus is shaped like an "L," and is divided into central, west and north quads.  In addition to the campus proper, UWM incorporates a large number of other sites throughout the Milwaukee metropolitan area.
The central north of the Central Quad is the UWM Golda Meir Library, a major library of the country.  The library consists of three parts: the West Wing, East Wing and the conference center on the top.  The West Wing and the East Wing were completed in 1967 and 1974 separately.  The two structures are joined by passageways in the basement and on the second and third floors.  The northern extensions of the East and West Wings and a fourth floor conference center facility were completed in 1987. In 1979, the Library was named for Golda Meir, the fourth Prime Minister of Israel, who attended Milwaukee State Normal School, a UWM predecessor institution.
The central south of the Central Quad is the UWM Union, a center for student activities. In the Summer of 2008 the union provided some changes for students. The computer lounge added 50 computers, new furniture, flooring, and is now open whenever the union is.  Golda Meir Library on the north and the UWM Union on the south are connected by the Ernest Spaights Plaza.  Overtowering the Ernest Spaights Plaza on the west side is Bolton Hall which houses the Departments of Sociology, Anthropology, Political Science, Economics, Urban Studies, and Geography.
West of Bolton Hall is Lubar Hall, home of Sheldon B. Lubar School of Business.  This four-story facility consists of  of classroom, computer labs and office space and can accommodate 2,000 students in its instructional facilities at one time.  Originally constructed in 1995 as the Business Administration Building, it was renamed in 2006, Lubar Hall in honor of Sheldon B. Lubar, a prominent Milwaukee businessman, civic leader and philanthropist. Lubar is founder and chairman of Lubar & Company, Inc., a private investment firm. His commitment to UWM and higher education spans more than three decades including service as a past president of the University of Wisconsin System Board of Regents. Lubar's distinguished career of public service also includes his work as Assistant Secretary of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development and Commissioner of the Federal Housing Administration.  The building's original automated light and temperature controls featured a system called The Lighting Showcase by the Wisconsin Electric Power Company. It was designed to provide maximum energy efficiency for the most highly utilized academic building on the UWM campus. In addition to providing nearly 200 offices, there are three lecture halls, with a total of 785 seats;  seven arc-shaped classrooms; 10 U-shaped classrooms; an Executive MBA classroom; three computer labs; and two levels of underground parking.
On the east side of the Ernest Spaights Plaza are the Art building, Music building, and the Theatre building which are all indirectly connected through a series of basement hallways, and on the second floor.   These buildings make up what is part of the Peck School of the Arts. Main buildings on the east side of the central quad include Mitchell Hall, sometimes known as "Old Main," which was the home of the original Milwaukee State Teachers College; Garland and Pearse Halls (which formerly housed Milwaukee-Downer Seminary); Curtin Hall; etc.
The north side of the North Quad contains the Downer Woods, a wooded area and conservation center.  On the west side of North Quad are the Sandburg Residence Halls, a complex comprising four high-rise dormitories.  Sandburg Residence Hall houses about 2,700 students.
In the central part of North Quad, there are the school's indoor sports facilities the Klotsche Center and its new addition the Pavilion. Next to the indoor sports facilities is Chapman Hall and the 11-story Enderis Hall, which houses the College of Health Science, School of Education, School of Information Studies, and the Helen Bader School of Social Welfare.
The east side of the North Quad is a group of old red buildings, including Holton Hall, Merrill Hall, Johnston Hall, Sabin Hall, etc. These old buildings were acquired by the University in the Milwaukee-Downer College campus purchase.
The West Quad is the location for the College of Engineering and Applied Science, the College of Nursing, the School of Architecture and Urban Planning, and the natural science departments.  The College of Engineering and Applied Science is housed in the EMS building.  The Physics Building is to the south, and the Chemistry Building and Lapham Hall (housing the Biology and Geosciences Departments) are to the east. Cunningham Hall on the northwest side houses the College of Nursing.
The award winning Architecture and Urban Planning Building on the east side of the West Quad was completed in 1993. With more than , it is one of the largest school of architecture buildings built in the U.S. in the last 40 years. The exterior of the L-shaped building has brick walls accented by metal panels and large windows. Full glass walls facing onto the central courtyard afford a view of that area from almost every room in the building. Inside, the air ducts, light fixtures and structural system have been left exposed, providing a unique architectural teaching environment. The building includes student design studios, classrooms, a lecture hall, exhibition areas, computer labs, offices, a media and photography center, and research centers.
Surrounded by the buildings in the West Quad is Engelmann Field, home to the Milwaukee Panthers men's and women's soccer teams. Built in 1973, the 2,000-capacity stadium is tucked between buildings in the middle of the West Quad, making it a unique stadium among American sports venues. Engelmann Field is home to the longest-running in-season tournament in NCAA Division I men's soccer, the Panther Invitational. The tournament entered its 34th year in 2007.
The former Columbia St-Mary's hospital was recently acquired in 2010.  It contains a 7 building complex, with over .  As of Fall 2011, students with a current ID will be able to park in the existing parking structure free of charge. The uses of the reminaing complex are yet to be determined.  This long over due expansion will expand the campus by 20 percent.
UWM has had two mascots and nicknames: Cardinals (1956   1964) and Panthers (1964   present).
The Panthers currently rank 182nd out of all 336 NCAA Division I schools in this years NACDA Director's Cup standings administered by National Association of Collegiate Directors of Athletics., Horizon League website, Retrieved on August 29, 2007. The Panthers also have won the McCafferty Trophy as the Horizon League's all-sports champion for three straight and four of the last six years.
Milwaukee competes in the ten-member Horizon League, of which they became a member in 1994. Since moving up to the Division I level for all NCAA sports in the 1990-91 season, the Milwaukee Panthers have quickly become prominent on the national landscape, particularly in men's and women's basketball as well as men's and women's soccer (the men's soccer program has competed at the Division I level since its inception in 1973). A total of 15 Panthers athletic teams compete at the NCAA level for Milwaukee.
With an appearance in the Sweet Sixteen of the 2005 Men's Basketball NCAA Tournament, the university received much attention from the national media. Other sports in which Milwaukee competes include baseball, women's volleyball, men's and women's cross country, men's and women's indoor and outdoor track and field, men's and women's swimming and diving, and women's tennis.
The men's baseball and women's volleyball teams have also enjoyed national success in recent years, with the baseball team posting six 30-win seasons in the last nine years and advancing to three NCAA Tournaments since 1999 including a win over # 1 ranked Rice in the first round of the 1999 NCAA Tournament.  The volleyball team has qualified for six of the last nine NCAA Tournaments and has compiled an all-time record of 867-477-7 through the end of the 2006 season.
At the club level, Milwaukee's men's and women's teams are some of the most successful in the country. The football team, known as Milwaukee Panther Football, has been very successful in its first few years of creation, going 4-0 in its first year, 2003.
There are five university-managed student housing facilities: Cambridge Commons, Kenilworth Square Apartments, Purin Hall, RiverView Residence Hall, and Sandburg Halls. 
Sandburg Halls is the largest student residence hall on campus. It is a four-tower complex with a capacity of 2,700-students, arranged in three- and four-room suites. The North, South, and West towers were built in 1970, with the East tower opening in 2000. All East tower suites have full-size kitchens and a dining area. Sandburg Hall went through a renovation in the summer of 2008 with the installation of an environmentally friendly roof. Following a design by associate professor Jim Walsey, this change was intended to prevent overflows and backups into neighboring homes. Facilities inside the building include a cafeteria, fitness center, convenience store, coffee shop, computer lab and a second-run movie theater for residents. Sandburg Halls also has space for recreational activities, including grass space, a patio, tennis courts, basketball courts, and sand volleyball.
Purin Hall is on the corner of Downer and Kenwood. It is a small building housing approximately 50 students in apartment-style suites.
Kenilworth Square is slightly south of the main campus and has a capacity of about 330 upper-class, graduate, and older students in one-, two-, and three-bedroom apartments in a converted Ford factory that also houses part of the Peck School of the Arts.
RiverView Residence Hall, opened to first year students in 2008, is located several blocks west of Kenilworth Square and has a capacity of 470 students.  There are a 24-hour University Housing shuttle, MCTS, and BOSS (Be On the Safe Side, the university shuttle service) running between the residence hall and the main campus. First year students can also attend some classes within the residence hall.
Cambridge Commons is the newest residence hall project, which opened in 2010 and houses 700 residents.  Approximately 140 spaces are available for returning residents in apartment-style suites to include living rooms and kitchens.  The remaining spaces are two-room suites with a shared bathroom and refrigerator. The lobby features a fireplace lounge, music practice rooms equipped with recording technology, and a computer lab.  Cambridge is expected to be a LEED Gold certified building, with two green roofs, solar panels, and a green courtyard that reduces rain runoff using a 20,000 gallon holding tank.
In addition to these university-managed residence halls, students also occupy apartments and rental houses in the surrounding neighborhood.  The Neighborhood Housing Office is available to help students seeking off-campus housing.
Campus newspapers include the ''UWM Post'' and the ''Leader'', with the ''Post'' being the older of the two. The ''Post'' is a weekly newspaper independently run by the students. The ''Leader'' is an art and entertainment newspaper published every other Wednesday. Journalism students also run ''Frontpage Milwaukee'', an online newspaper.
Journalism & Mass Communication students run PantherVision, a weekly, award-winning news program distributed via the Higher Education Cable Consortium to approximately 300,000 households in southeastern Wisconsin.
The College of Letters and Science runs WUWM, a Milwaukee public radio station serving southeastern Wisconsin with news, public affairs and entertainment programming.
UWM also is home to the award winning Broadcast-Club, a club that gives students insight to the broadcast field.
PantherU.com is a sports news media website that covers Milwaukee Panthers athletics in specific.
There are about 300 student organizations on campus. The governing body is the Student Association of UWM, which under Wisconsin's "shared governance" system (statute 36.09(5)) interacts with the University administration and the student body to insure students rights and interests. Other student organizations in the university vary greatly in nature, ranging from political (College Democrats, College Republicans), academic, cultural, to sports clubs. UWM is home to a number of Greek organizations, including; Gamma Phi Beta, Kappa Tau, Phi Sigma Sigma Rho, Tau Kappa Epsilon, Sigma Chi Rho, Phi Sigma Kappa, Triangle, Omega Delta Phi, and Iota Phi Theta.
At the beginning of each academic year, the university stages a "Pantherfest" at the Marcus Amphitheater area on the south end of Milwaukee   s lakefront Summerfest Grounds. It is the largest event of the university's two-week Campus KickOff programming, which celebrates the beginning of an academic year with featured music, fun activities, fireworks and getting together. Started in 2008, the event is the brainchild of former UWM Student Union Director Scott Gore, who retired in June 2011. The event is free to UWM Students, alumni, faculty, staff and their families. Past performers have included Lupe Fiasco, Dashboard Confessional, Kid Cudi, O.A.R., and Common.
The Panther Prowl is an annual running race sponsored by the UWM Alumni Association. Participants stride across the UWM campus and Upper Lake Park to raise funds for students scholarship and support alumni programming.
Four venues provide performance space for UWM's Peck School of the Arts including music, dance, theater and film.  Musical performances are held in the '''Bader Concert Hall''' located in the Helene Zelazo Center for the Performing Arts or the '''Recital Hall''' adjacent to the Arts Center courtyard.  Theatrical performances are held in the '''Mainstage Theater''' or '''Studio Theater''' located in the '''Theater Building''' next to Spaight Plaza.  Dance performances are held in '''Mitchell Hall Dance Studio''' located on the second floor.  The department of film recently opened a new venue to showcase new student films in Kenilworth Square.
Several main characters in the television show ''Happy Days'' (set in Milwaukee) were students at this university in later seasons of the show. UWM banners also hung inside the characters' regular hang-out, "Arnold's Drive-In." To match the time period of the show, ''Happy Days'' used the red-and-white colors and the Cardinals mascot, which was in use by UWM during this period.
Early in the fifth season of the FOX television series ''House, MD'', a framed UWM credential is visible on the office wall of ''Dr. Lisa Cuddy''.  It is not apparent what degree or honor this document is intended to represent.
In  , the twenty-fourth season of MTV's reality television series ''The Real World'', Ryan Knight pursues a degree in marketing at University of Wisconsin   Milwaukee.
In addition to an on-campus University Police Department staffed 24 hours a day, 365 days a year, with an authorized strength of 33 full-time sworn police officers, UWM provides a safety escort service called SAFE (Safety Awareness For Everyone), a shuttle van service called BOSS (Be On the Safe Side), and an emergency alert notification system.
BOSS operates from 6 pm to until 2am Sunday thru Thursday and until 4am on the weekends during the spring and fall semesters. Summer hours are 7pm-12am, 7 days a week. Their van service will even drop people off right at their front door if they live in their area of service.  This service is funded through students segregated fees.
Image:Golda Meir2.jpg|Golda Meir, the fourth Prime Minister of Israel 
Image:Vanderhoef.jpg|Larry N. Vanderhoef, chancellor of University of California, Davis
Image:FujimoriUSIP.jpg|Alberto Fujimori, the 90th President of Peru
Image:AlanKulwickiSearsPoint1991.jpg|Alan Kulwicki, NASCAR's 50 Greatest Drivers inducted into the International Motorsports Hall of Fame