Malkin was born on October 20, 1970 in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. She is the daughter of Philippine citizens Rafaela (nee Perez; born 1945)     a homemaker and teacher     and Apolo DeCastro Maglalang (born 1942), then a physician in training. Several months prior, her parents had immigrated to the United States on an employer-sponsored visa.Lamb, Brian. , Booknotes, December 8, 2002. (archived from  on 2007-10-13) After her father finished his medical training, the family moved to the small South Jersey''In Depth'', Book TV, Jan 3, 2011, http://www.booktv.org/Watch/11186/In+Depth+Michelle+Malkin.aspx town of Absecon. Malkin has a younger brother. She has described her parents as Reagan Republicans who were "not incredibly politically active".Nahm, H Y. , "Goldsea Asian American". Retrieved July 16, 2009.
Malkin, baptized a Roman Catholic,  attended Holy Spirit Roman Catholic High School, where she edited the school newspaper and planned to become a concert pianist. Following her graduation in 1988, Malkin originally planned to pursue a bachelor's degree in music at Oberlin College, but changed her major to English. Malkin was employed as a press inserter, tax preparation aide, and network news librarian before graduating from college.
 Malkin's first article for the paper heavily criticized Oberlin's affirmative action program, which received a "hugely negative response" from other students on campus. In 1992, Malkin graduated from Oberlin College. She later described her ''alma mater'' as a "radically left-wing, liberal arts college".Article preview. , ''The American Enterprise'', September 1, 2005. Retrieved on 2007-10-25.
Malkin began her journalism career at the ''Los Angeles Daily News'', working as a columnist from 1992 to 1994. In 1995, she worked in Washington, D.C., as a journalism fellow at the Competitive Enterprise Institute, a libertarian think tank dedicated to the promotion of free enterprise without government regulation. In 1996, she moved to Seattle, Washington, where she wrote columns for ''The Seattle Times''. Malkin became a nationally-syndicated columnist with Creators Syndicate in 1999.
For many years, Malkin was a frequent commentator for Fox News Channel and a regular guest host of ''The O'Reilly Factor''. In 2007, she announced that she would not return to The ''O'Reilly Factor'', claiming that Fox News had mishandled a dispute over derogatory statements made about her by Geraldo Rivera in a ''Boston Globe'' interview. Since 2007, she has concentrated on her writing, blogging and public speaking, although she still appears on television occasionally, especially with Sean Hannity on Fox News and Fox & Friends once a week. In December 2009, Malkin began writing for the ''St. Louis Globe-Democrat''.
 Matthews said "No irresponsible comments are going to be made on this show"; Malkin criticized Matthews and the MSNBC staff in her blog the following day. Georgia Senator Zell Miller accused Matthews of "browbeating" Malkin.
Her first book, '' '', was published in 2002 and was a ''New York Times'' bestseller.
 The "Historians' Committee for Fairness", a group of professors, condemned the book for not having undergone peer review and argued that its central thesis is false. It was announced in August 2004 that the Hawaii-based newspaper ''MidWeek'' dropped her column as a result of the controversy.
Beginning in November 2004, this move was followed by ''The Virginian-Pilot'', with criticism that she was "an Asian Ann Coulter". Malkin responded, "I'm not Asian, I'm American, for goodness' sake. I would take the comparison to Ann Coulter as somewhat of a compliment. I have a lot of respect for Ann Coulter."
Malkin's opponents attempted to get the Manzanar National Historic Site (a former relocation and internment camp) to ban her book from their store, but failed.
Malkin's third book, '' '', was released in October 2005.
Malkin described an objective of the book in a July 27, 2009, interview with Sean Hannity, saying "What I have done is to help shatter completely the myths of hope and change in the new politics in Washington by scouring every nook and cranny, every inch of this administration, and showing how in a very short span of six months they have betrayed every principle and every promise that they have made by installing these influence peddlers, power brokers and very wealthy people." Discussing her theme of corruption Malkin said: "You have to judge them by their rhetoric, and if you look at the gap between the rhetoric and the reality, this has to be one of the most corrupt administrations in recent memory."Malkin, Michelle.,"Fox News Channel", FoxNews.com, July 27, 2009. Retrieved July 29, 2009.
Malkin appeared on NBC's ''Today'' show on July 29, 2009, where she explained the title for chapter 2 of her book, "Bitter Half: First Crony Michelle Obama" as deriving from her view that Michelle Obama "was steeped in the politics of the Daley machine" and that she "is beholden to the type of hardball politics that Barack Obama says he is against". Stating that Michelle Obama's "entire professional career was based on nepotism", Malkin went on to say that "despite Michelle Obama's Princeton thesis where she whined and moaned about the old boy network and how she couldn't get ahead because of her skin color, in fact it was a farce because it was one of those old white boys who put her in that position in the first place."
In June 2004 she launched a political blog, MichelleMalkin.com. A 2007 memo from the National Republican Senatorial Committee described Malkin as one of the five "best-read national conservative bloggers", and Technorati ranks MichelleMalkin.com consistently in its "Top 100 blogs of all types".
After Malkin criticized hip hop artist Akon for "degrading women" in a ''Vent'' episode, Akon's record label, Universal Music Group, forced YouTube to remove the video by issuing a DMCA takedown notice,
In an interview with ''BusinessWeek'' magazine in July 2007, Malkin said, "We   re doing what few other blogs can do. We serve up terabytes of bandwidth... I'm shelling out for gold-plated servers. That's expensive, and we want to be able to withstand huge traffic surges."
She continued to contribute frequently to MichelleMalkin.com, and in June 2007, she revamped it, moving it to a larger server on WordPress. With the new redesign, she re-enabled comments on her blog, which she said she had disallowed after February 2005 due to a high level of obscene and racist comments. Subscribed readers could once again post comments, although registration for the comments is rarely open. Malkin states her policy thus: "I may allow as much or as little opportunity for registration as I choose, in my absolute discretion, and I may close particular comment threads."
Malkin was one of several bloggers who questioned the credibility and even the existence of Iraqi police Captain "Jamil Hussein" who had been used as a source by the Associated Press in over 60 stories about the Iraq war. The controversy started in November 2006 when the AP reported that six Iraqis had been burned alive as they left a mosque and that four mosques had been destroyed, citing Hussein as one of its sources. In January 2007, Malkin visited Baghdad, and stated, "the Iraqi Ministry of Interior says disputed Associated Press source Jamil Hussein does exist. At least one story he told the AP just doesn   t check out: The Sunni mosques that as Hussein claimed and AP reported as 'destroyed,' 'torched' and 'burned and blown up' are all still standing. So the credibility of every AP story relying on Jamil Hussein remains dubious." Malkin has issued a correction for her denial of Capt. Hussein's existenceMalkin, Michelle., MichelleMalkin.com, January 6, 2007. but still contests AP claims of destroyed mosques and civilians burned alive.
In April 2006, Students Against War (SAW), a campus group at University of California, Santa Cruz, staged a protest against the presence of military recruiters on campus, and sent out a press release containing contact details (names, phone numbers and e-mail addresses) of three student leaders for use by reporters. Malkin included these contact details in a blog column entitled "Seditious Santa Cruz vs. America".Malkin, Michelle.
SAW remarked: "Due to the continued irresponsible actions of some bloggers, members of the group have received numerous death threats and anti-Semitic comments through phone calls and emails."
 A blog war ensued. Malkin claimed that she received hostile e-mails then her private home address, phone number, photos of her neighborhood and maps to her house were published on several websites. The ''Santa Cruz Sentinel'' reported receiving an email from Malkin saying that this forced her to remove one of her children from school and move her family.
Another controversy involving private addresses began on July 1, 2006, when Malkin and other bloggers commented on a ''New York Times'' Travel section article that had featured the town where Vice President Dick Cheney and Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld owned summer homes. The article included a picture of Rumsfeld's long tree-lined driveway that showed a birdhouse and small portion of the housefront. Malkin declared that this story was part of "a concerted, organized effort to dig up and publicize the private home information of prominent conservatives in the media and blogosphere to intimidate them".
On April 24, 2006, ''Hot Air'', a "conservative Internet broadcast network" went into operation, with Malkin as founder/CEO. She intended the blog to provide "content and analysis you can't get anywhere else on a daily basis   both on the blog and in our original video features". Her staffers included 'Allahpundit' and Bryan Preston, though the latter was replaced by Ed Morrissey on February 25, 2008. In February 2010, Hotair.com was bought by Salem Communications and is no longer administered by Malkin.
 delivered by illegal aliens on American soil, undermines the integrity of citizenship. She argues that the custom of blanket birthright citizenship is supported neither by the Fourteenth Amendment nor by legal precedent.
Malkin also opposes sanctuary cities, in which local authorities do not enforce all national immigration laws or coordinate with agencies such as Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE). Following the August 2007 execution-style murder of three college students in Newark, New Jersey, she repeated her criticisms of politicians' posture towards sanctuary cities. In particular, she criticized former New York City Mayor Rudy Giuliani's proposal for a tamper-proof identification card with this comment:
She supports coordination with federal authorities through the use of Section 287(g) of the IIRIRA to investigate, detain, and arrest aliens on civil and criminal grounds. Malkin supports the detention and deportation of some immigrants, regardless of legal status, on national security grounds.
During an appearance as a news analyst on the roundtable segment of ABC's ''This Week with George Stephanopoulos'' on August 2, 2009, Malkin suggested that extending unemployment benefits was a cause of the high unemployment rates of 2009. She explained why she opposed another 13-week extension of unemployment benefits: "if you put enough government cheese in front of people they are going to just keep eating it and kicking the can down the road... people will just delay getting a job until the three weeks before the benefits run out."
She married Jesse Dylan Malkin on July 23, 1993. Eventually, he worked as an associate policy analyst and economist focusing on healthcare issues for the RAND Corporation. The Malkins have two children: daughter Veronica Mae (born 1999) and son Julian Daniel (born 2003). In 2004, Malkin reported on her website that her husband had left his "lucrative health-care consulting job" to be a stay-at-home dad.
The family initially lived in North Bethesda, Maryland, but relocated to Colorado Springs, Colorado, in November 2008.
On February 16, 2006, Malkin returned to Oberlin College to give a lecture. Responding to controversy about racism, Malkin was quoted in ''The Oberlin Review'' article as saying: "Once, in kindergarten, I came home crying because I was called a racist name. My mom wiped my tears and told me everyone has prejudice. I am eternally grateful for this ."Beckhardt, Jon. , The Oberlin Review, February 17, 2006 
On March 7, 2011, it was announced that Malkin's cousin Marizela Perez, a student at the University of Washington, had disappeared since March 5.