Between 2009 and 2010, he worked for the US Federal Trade Commission as the first ever in-house technical advisor to the Division of Privacy and Identity Protection. 
Soghoian received a B.S. from James Madison University (Computer Science) and a Masters from the Information Security Institute of Johns Hopkins University (Security Informatics; May 2005).
On October 26, 2006, Soghoian created a website that allowed the user to generate fake boarding passes for Northwest Airlines. While the website visitor could change the boarding document to have any name, flight number or city that they wished, the generator defaulted to creating a document for Osama Bin Laden.
Soghoian claimed that his motivation for the website was to focus national attention on the ease with which a passenger could evade the no-fly lists. Information describing the security vulnerabilities associated with boarding pass modification had been widely publicized by others before, including Senator Charles Schumer (D-NY)
At 2 AM on October 28, 2006 his home was raided by agents of the FBI to seize computers and other materials.  Soghoian's Internet Service Provider voluntarily shut down the website, after it received a letter from the FBI claiming that the site posed a national security threat. The FBI closed the criminal investigation in November 2006 without filing any charges.  The TSA also initiated a civil investigation in December 2006,  which was closed without any charges being filed in June 2007. 
In June 2009, Soghoian published an open letter
One month after Google started to encrypt Gmail traffic, the Iranian government blocked all domestic access to the service, an action motivated by the fact the government can no longer monitor Gmail communications.
In December 2009, Soghoian released an audio recording he made at a closed-door surveillance industry conference. In the recording, an executive from Sprint Nextel revealed that the company had received 8 million requests from law enforcement for customer GPS information in the previous year. A Sprint spokesperson later clarified that the number reflected the number of individual "pings" for location, not unique individuals under surveillance.
In December 2009, Soghoian also released a letter from Yahoo's legal team, objecting to the release of documents detailing how much the company charges for government requested surveillance activities. In the letter, Yahoo's attorneys argued that: "he  information, if disclosed, would be used to 'shame' Yahoo! and other companies     and to 'shock' their customers. Therefore, release of Yahoo!'s information is reasonably likely to lead to impairment of its reputation for protection of user privacy and security, which is a competitive disadvantage for technology companies."  When a copy of the price list subsequently appeared on Cryptome, Yahoo! sent a DMCA takedown request to the website in an attempt to force the removal of the information.
In February 2007, Soghoian announced that a TSA website was collecting private passenger information in a highly insecure manner. The website was intended to provide a way for passengers to file disputes in the event that they were incorrectly included on the No fly list. Passengers who submitted their information through the website were at risk of identity theft. TSA shut down, fixed and then relaunched the website within days, after the press was tipped to the story by Soghoian. 
In January 2008, The House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform issued a report on the incident, the result of investigation.
The report stated that the flawed website had operated insecurely for over four months during which over 247 people had submitted personal information using the insecure web-forms.
Soghoian co-authored an update to Indiana's data breach legislation.