A '''hearing aid''' is an electroacoustic device which typically fits in or behind the wearer's ear, and is designed to amplify and modulate sound for the wearer. Earlier devices, known as an "ear trumpet" or "ear horn",
 were passive funnel-like amplification cones designed to gather sound energy and direct it into the ear canal. Similar devices include the bone anchored hearing aid, and cochlear implant.
There are many types of hearing aids (also known as hearing instruments), which vary in size, power and circuitry.
Among the different sizes and models are:
This was the first type of hearing aid invented by Harvey Fletcher while working at Bell Laboratories. Thanks to developments in technology they are now rarely used.  These aids consist of a case, an earmold, and a cord. The case contains the amplifier components. The case is about the size of a pack of playing cards and is worn in the pocket or on a belt. The ear mold is connected to the case via a cord. Because of use of vacuum tubes, body worn aids can provide loud amplification. This made them the first appropriate hearing aid for profound hearing losses.  Today, body aids have largely been replaced by '''B'''ehind-'''T'''he-'''E'''ar (BTE) instruments.
BTE aids consist of a case, a tube and an earmold. The case is small and made of plastic. Generally, the case sits behind the pinna (ear)
BTEs can be used for mild to profound hearing loss. Due to the electrical components being located outside the ear, the chance of moisture and earwax damaging the components is reduced. This increases the durability of a BTE aid and with proper care it can last for a number of years. BTEs can be connected to assistive listening devices, such as FM systems, and FM systems can also be an integrated (yet separable) part of the design. An important aspect of the BTE aid is that the case and earmold are separate which makes it easier to replace the earmold. BTE aids are commonly worn by children who need a durable type of hearing aid. As children get older, they will require new earmolds on a regular basis; for example, babies may need earmolds replacing as often as every two weeks.
Recent innovations in BTEs include miniature BTEs with thin hair-like sound tubes (see open-fit devices below). These are often less visible than '''I'''n-'''T'''he-'''E'''ar aids (ITEs). They use a larger vent than other hearing aid types.  This keeps the ear canal more open, which allows sound to enter the ear without being amplified. This is helpful for listeners with normal hearing in the lower frequencies. Miniature BTEs are generally used for mild to moderate high frequency losses.
These devices fit in the outer ear bowl (called the concha); they are sometimes visible when standing face to face with someone. ITE hearing aids are custom made to fit each individual's ear. They can be used in mild to some severe hearing losses. Feedback, a squealing/whistling caused by sound (particularly high frequency sound) leaking and being amplified again, may be a problem for severe hearing losses. Some modern circuits are able to provide feedback regulation or cancellation to assist with this.
Another way to deal with feedback is venting. The vent is a tube primarily placed to offer pressure equalization. However, different vent styles and sizes can be used to influence and prevent feedback.
Traditionally, ITEs have not been recommended for young children because their fit could not be as easily modified as the earmold for a BTE, and thus the aid had to be replaced frequently as the child grew. However, there are new ITEs made from a silicone type material that mitigates the need for costly replacements.
ITE hearing aids can be connected wirelessly to FM systems, for instance with a body-worn FM receiver with induction neck-loop which transmits the audio signal from the FM transmitter inductively to the telecoil inside the hearing instrument.
At a first glance, these devices are similar to the BTE aid. There is however one crucial difference: The speaker ('receiver') of the hearing aid is placed inside the ear canal of the user and thin electrical wires replace the acoustic tube of the BTE aid. There are some advantages with this approach: Firstly, the sound of the hearing aid is arguably smoother than that of a traditional BTE hearing aid.  With a traditional BTE hearing aid, the amplified signal is emitted by the speaker (receiver) which is located within the body of the hearing aid (behind the ear).  The amplified signal is then directed to the ear canal through an acoustic tube, which creates a peaky frequency response.  With a RITE hearing aid, the speaker (receiver) is right in the ear canal and the amplified output of the hearing aid does not need to be pushed through an acoustic tube to get there, and is therefore free of this distortion.  Secondly, RITE hearing aids can typically be made with a very small part behind-the-ear and the wire connecting the hearing aid and the speaker (receiver) is extremely inconspicuous.  For the majority of people this is one of the most cosmetically acceptable hearing device types.  Thirdly, RITE devices are suited to "open fit" technology (see below) so they can be fitted without plugging up the ear, offering relief from occlusion.
ITC aids are smaller, filling only the bottom half of the external ear. The aid cannot be seen when face to face with the wearer. MIC and CIC aids are generally not visible unless the viewer looks directly into the wearer's ear. These aids are intended for mild to moderately-severe losses. CICs are usually not recommended for people with good low frequency hearing, as the occlusion effect is much more noticible.
In-the-ear hearing aids are typically more expensive than behind-the-ear counterparts of equal functionality, because they are custom fitted to the patient's ear.
In fitting, an audiologist takes a physical impression (mold) of the ear.
The mold is scanned by a specialized CAD system, resulting in a 3D model of the outer ear.
During modeling, the venting tube is inserted.
The digitally modeled ''shell'' is printed using a rapid prototyping technique such as stereolithography.
Finally, the aid is assembled and shipped to the audiologist after a quality check.
This type of hearing aid fitting is not visible when worn. This is because it fits deeper in the canal than other types, so that it is out of view even when looking directly in to the ear bowl (concha). A comfortable fit is achieved because the shell of the aid is custom-made to an individual ear canal after taking a mould of the patient   s ear.
Invisible hearing aid types use venting and their deep placement in the ear canal to give a more natural experience of hearing. Unlike other hearing aid types, with the IIC aid the majority of the ear is not blocked (occluded) by a large plastic shell. This means that sound can be collected more naturally by the shape of the ear, and can travel down in to the ear canal as it would with unassisted hearing. Instead of taking out the IIC to change memory or volume settings, some allow the wearer to use their mobile phone as a remote control to alter settings. IIC types are most suitable for users up to middle age, but are not suitable for more elderly people.
Extended wear hearing aids are hearing devices that are non-surgically placed in the ear canal by a hearing professional.  The extended wear hearing aid represents the first "invisible" hearing device. These devices are worn for 1   3 months at a time without removal.  They are made of soft material designed to contour to each user and can be used by people with mild to moderately severe hearing loss. Their close proximity to the ear drum results in improved sound directionality and localization, reduced feedback, and improved high frequency gain. While traditional BTE or ITC hearing aids require daily insertion and removal, extended wear hearing aids are worn continuously and then replaced with a new device.  Users can change volume and settings without the aid of a hearing professional. The devices are very useful for active individuals because their design protects against moisture and earwax and can be worn while exercising, showering, etc.  Because the device   s placement within the ear canal makes them invisible to observers, extended wear hearing aids are popular with those who are self-conscious about the aesthetics of BTE or ITC hearing aid models. As with other hearing devices, compatibility is based on an individual   s hearing loss, ear size and shape, medical conditions, and lifestyle.  The disadvantages include regular removal and reinsertion of the device when the battery dies, inability to go underwater, earplugs when showering, and for some discomfort with the fit since it is inserted deeply in the ear canal in the only part of the body where skin rests directly on top of bone.
This design is intended to reduce the occlusion effect. Conversely, because of the increased possibility of feedback, and because an open fit allows low frequency sounds to leak out of the ear canal, they are limited to moderately severe high frequency losses.
While the design approach is attractive to a general hearing aid user where they fall into the category to be considered fitted with one of these types of hearing instruments it has to be taken into account that open-fit devices can by their design have problems when connected to Assistive Listening Devices (ALD's). This problem has been addressed by manufacturers, who provide assistive listening devices that can be paired with the specific device worn.
The personal programmable, consumer programmable, consumer adjustable, or self programmable hearing aid allows the consumer to adjust their own hearing aid settings to their own preference using their own PC.  Personal programmable hearing aid manufacturers or dealers can also remotely adjust these types of hearing aids for the customer.  Available in all hearing aid styles, these hearing aids differ from traditional hearing aids only in that they are adjustable by the consumer.
Disposable hearing aids are hearing aids that have a non-replaceable battery. These aids are designed to use power sparingly, so that the battery lasts longer than batteries used in traditional hearing aids. Disposable hearing aids are meant to remove the task of battery replacement and other maintenance chores (adjustment or cleanings).  To date, two companies have brought disposable hearing aids to market: Songbird Hearing and Lyric.  Songbird is a BTE hearing aid that is bought online and worn like any other BTE device.  When it runs out, the user replaces it with a new one.  Lyric is implanted deep in the ear canal by a professional.  When it runs out, it must be removed and replaced with a new one by a professional.
The BAHA is an auditory prosthetic which can be surgically implanted.  The BAHA uses the skull as a pathway for sound to travel to the inner ear.  For people with conductive hearing loss, the BAHA bypasses the external auditory canal and middle ear, stimulating the functioning cochlea.  For people with unilateral hearing loss, the BAHA uses the skull to conduct the sound from the deaf side to the side with the functioning cochlea.
Individuals under the age of 5 typically wear the BAHA device on a headband.  Over age 5, a titanium "post" can be surgically embedded into the skull with a small abutment exposed outside the skin. The BAHA sound processor sits on this abutment and transmits sound vibrations to the external abutment of the titanium implant.  The implant vibrates the skull and inner ear, which stimulate the nerve fibers of the inner ear, allowing hearing.
BAHA's can be connected to an FM system by attaching a miniaturized FM receiver to it.
During the late 1950s through 1970s, before in-the-ear aids became common (and in an era when thick-rimmed eyeglasses were popular), people who wore both glasses and hearing aids frequently chose a type of hearing aid that was built into the
temple pieces of the spectacles.  However, the combination of glasses and hearing aids was inflexible: the range of frame styles was limited, and the user had to wear both hearing aids and glasses at once or wear neither.  Today, people who use both glasses and hearing aids can use in-the-ear types, or rest a BTE neatly alongside the arm of the glasses. There still are some specialized situations where hearing aids built into the frame of eyeglasses can be useful, such as when a person has hearing loss mainly in one ear: sound from a microphone on the "bad" side can be sent through the frame to the side with better hearing.
This can also be achieved by using CROS or bi-CROS style hearing aids, which are now wireless in sending sound to the better side.
Feb 2008. This improves the Signal-to-noise ratio by allowing for amplification of the sound coming from the front, the direction in which the user is looking, and active noise control for sounds coming from the sides or back.
Only very recently has the technology required become small enough, in size, to be put in the frame of the glasses. As a recent addition to the market, this new hearing aid is currently available only in the Netherlands and Belgium.
A hearing aid and a telephone are "compatible" when they can connect to each other in a way that produces clear, easily-understood sound. The term "compatibility" is applied to all three types of telephones (wired, cordless, and mobile). There are two ways telephones and hearing aids can connect with each other:
Note that telecoil coupling has nothing to do with the radio signal in a cellular or cordless phone: the audio signal picked up by the telecoil is the weak electromagnetic field that is generated by the voice coil in the phone's speaker as it pushes the speaker cone back and forth. 
The electromagnetic (telecoil) mode is usually more effective than the acoustic method. This is mainly because the microphone is automatically switched off when the hearing aid is operating in telecoil mode, so background noise is not amplified. Since there is an electronic connection to the phone, the sound is clearer and distortion is less likely. But in order for this to work the phone has to be hearing-aid compatible. More technically, the phone's speaker has to have a voice coil that generates a relatively strong electromagnetic field. Speakers with strong voice coils are more expensive and require more energy than the tiny ones used in many modern telephones; phones with the small low-power speakers cannot couple electromagnetically with the telecoil in the hearing aid, so the hearing aid must then switch to acoustic mode.
The American National Standards Institute (ANSI) has a ratings scale for compatibility between hearing aids and phones:
The best possible rating is M4/T4 meaning that the phone works well in both modes. Devices rated below M3 are unsatisfactory for people with hearing aids.
Various US mobile phone providers have special pages on their websites where they list hearing-aid compatible models:
Recent hearing aids include wireless hearing aids. One hearing aid can transmit to the other side so that pressing one aid's program button simultaneously changes the other aid and both aids change background settings simultaneously. FM listening systems are now emerging with wireless receivers integrated with the use of hearing aids. A separate wireless microphone can be given to a partner to wear in a restaurant, in the car, during leisure time, in the shopping mall, at lectures, or during religious services. The voice is transmitted wirelessly to the hearing aids eliminating the effects of distance and background noise. FM systems have shown to give the best speech understanding in noise of all available technologies.
FM systems can also be hooked up to a TV or a stereo.
2.4 gigahertz Bluetooth connectivity is the most recent innovation in wireless interfacing for hearing instruments to audio sources such as TV streamers or Bluetooth enabled mobile phones. Current hearing aids generally do not stream directly via Bluetooth but rather do so through a secondary streaming device (usually worn around the neck or in a pocket), this bluetooth enabled secondary device then streams wirelessly to the hearing aid but can only do so over a short distance. This technology can be applied to ready to wear devices (BTE, Mini BTE, RIE, etc) or custom made devices to fit directly into the ear.
Image: PhonakCampusS.jpg |Phonak wireless FM system
Image: Resound-alera-small-wireless-digital-hearing-aid.jpg|ReSound Alera Hearing Aid
Image: Resound-unite-wireless-accessories.jpg|ReSound Alera Unite Wireless Accessories
In developed countries FM systems are considered a cornerstone in the treatment of hearing loss in children. More and more adults discover the benefits of wireless FM systems as well, especially since transmitters with different microphone settings and Bluetooth for wireless cell phone communication have become available.
Many theatres and lecture halls are now equipped with assistive listening systems that transmit the sound directly from the stage; audience members can borrow suitable receivers and hear the program without background noise. In some theatres and churches FM transmitters are available that work with the personal FM receivers of hearing instruments.
Many hearing aids now have both an omnidirectional and a directional microphone. This is because speech often comes from directions other than in front of the listener. Usually, the omnidirectional microphone mode is used in quiet listening situations (e.g. living room) whereas the directional microphone is used in noisy listening situations (e.g. restaurant). The microphone mode is typically selected by using a switch. Some hearing aids automatically switch the microphone mode.
Directional microphones only provide benefit when the distance to the talker is small. In contrast, an FM system continues to provide a better signal to noise ratio even at larger speaker to talker distances.
Telecoils (T-coils), sometimes referred to as "Telephone Coils", allow audio sources to be directly connected to a hearing aid, which is intended to help the wearer filter out background noise. They can be used with telephones, FM systems (with neck loops), and induction loop systems (also called "hearing loops") that transmit sound to hearing aids from public address systems and TVs. In the UK and the Nordic countries, hearing loops are widely used in churches, shops, railway stations, and other public places. In the U.S.A., telecoils and hearing loops are gradually becoming more common.
A T-coil consists of a metal core (or rod) around which ultra-fine wire is coiled. T-coils are also called induction coils because when the coil is placed in a magnetic field, an alternating electrical current is induced in the wire (Ross, 2002b; Ross, 2004). The T-coil detects magnetic energy and transduces (converts) it to electrical energy.
Although T-coils are effectively a wide-band receiver, interference is unusual in most hearing loop situations. Interference can manifest as a buzzing sound, which varies in volume depending on the distance the wearer is from the source. Sources are electromagnetic fields, such as CRT computer monitors, older fluorescent lighting, some dimmer switches, many household electrical appliances and airplanes.
The states of Florida and Arizona have passed legislation that requires hearing professionals to inform patients about the usefulness of telecoils.
In the United States, the  (HAC Act) requires that the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) ensure that all telephones manufactured or imported for use in the United States after August 1989, and all    essential    telephones, are hearing aid-compatible (through the use of a telecoil).
In 2003, the FCC adopted rules to make digital wireless telephones compatible with hearing aids and cochlear implants. Although analog wireless phones do not usually cause interference with hearing aids or cochlear implants, digital wireless phones often do because of electromagnetic energy emitted by the phone's antenna, backlight, or other components. The FCC has set a timetable for the development and sale of digital wireless telephones that are compatible with hearing aids. This effort promises to increase the number of digital wireless telephones that are hearing aid-compatible.
Direct Audio Input (DAI) allows the hearing aid to be directly connected to an external audio source like a CD player or an assistive listening device (ALD). By its very nature, DAI is susceptible to far less electromagnetic interference, and yields a better quality audio signal as opposed to using a T-coil with standard headphones.
Every electronic hearing aid has at minimum a microphone, a loudspeaker (commonly called a receiver), a battery, and electronic circuitry.  The electronic circuitry varies among devices, even if they are the same style. The circuitry falls into three categories based on the type of audio processing (Analog or Digital) and the type of control circuitry (Adjustable or Programmable).
Hearing aids are incapable of truly correcting a hearing loss; they are an ''aid'' to make sounds more accessible. Two primary issues minimize the effectiveness of hearing aids:
Like much of the Irish health care system, hearing aid provision is a hodge-podge of public and private.
Hearing aids are provided by the State to children, OAPs and to people whose income is at or below that of the State Pension. The Irish State hearing aid provision is extremely poor; people often have to wait for two years for an appointment.
It is estimated, that the total cost to the State, of supplying one hearing aid, exceeds    2,000.
Hearing aids are also available privately, and there is grant assistance available for insured workers.
Irish taxpayers can also claim tax relief, at the standard rate, as hearing aids are recognised as a medical device.
Hearing aids in the Republic of Ireland are exempt from VAT.
Hearing aid providers in Ireland, mostly belong to the Irish Society of Hearing Aid Audiologists.
Ordinary hearing aids are Class I regulated medical devices under Federal Food and Drug Administration (FDA) rules.  A 1976 statute explicitly prohibits any state requirement that is "different from, or in addition to, any requirement applicable" to regulated medical devices (which includes hearing aids) which relates "to the safety and effectiveness of the device."  Inconsistent state regulation is preempted under the federal law.  In the late 1970s, the FDA established federal rules governing hearing aid sales, and addressed various requests by state authorities for exemptions from federal preemption, granting some and denying others.
Exemption from Preemption of State and Local Hearing Aid Requirements; Applications for Exemption, Docket No. 77N-0333, 45 Fed. Reg. 67326; Medical Devices:  Applications for Exemption from Federal Preemption of State and Local hearing Aid Requirements, Docket No. 78P-0222, 45 Fed. 67325 (Oct. 10, 1980).
Several industrialized countries supply free or heavily-discounted hearing aids through their publicly funded health care system.
The Australian Department of Health and Ageing provides eligible Australian citizens and residents with a basic hearing aid free-of-charge, though recipients can pay a "top up" charge if they wish to upgrade to a hearing aid with more or better features.  Maintenance of these hearing aids and a regular supply of batteries is also provided, on payment of a small annual maintenance fee.
In Canada, health care is a responsibility of the provinces.  In the province of Ontario, the price of hearing aids is partially reimbursed through the Assistive Devices Program of the Ministry of Health and Long-Term Care, up to $500 for each hearing aid, every three years. Like eye appointments, audiological appointments are no longer covered through the provincial public health plan. Audiometric testing can still easily be obtained, often free of charge, in private sector hearing aid clinics and some ear, nose and throat doctors offices. Hearing aids may be covered to some extent by private insurance or in some cases through government programs such as Department of Veteran Affairs or Workplace Safety & Insurance Board.
Social Insurance pays a one time fee of ISK 30,000 for any kind of hearing aid. However, the rules are complicated and require that both ears have a significant hearing loss in order to qualify for reimbursement.  BTE hearing aids range from ISK 60,000 ISK to 300,000 ISK.
Within the UK, the NHS provides BTE hearing aids to NHS patients, on long-term loan, free of charge.  BTEs are often the only style available, and private purchases may be necessary if a user desires a different style. Batteries are free. Private purchases can cost between   600 to   3,500.
Most private US health care providers do not provide coverage for hearing aids, so all costs are usually borne by the recipient. The cost for a single hearing aid can vary between $500 to $6,000 or more, depending on the level of technology and whether the clinician bundles fitting fees into the cost of the hearing aid. Though if an adult has a hearing loss which substantially limits major life activities, some state-run vocational rehabilitation programs can provide upwards of full financial assistance. Severe and profound hearing loss often falls within the "substantially limiting" category. Less expensive hearing aids can be found on the internet or mail order catalogs, but some in the $200 range tend to amplify the low frequencies of background noise, making it harder to hear the human voice.
The cost of hearing aids is a tax-deductible medical expense for those who itemize medical deductions.
While there are some rare instances that a hearing aid uses a rechargeable battery or a long-life disposable battery, the majority of modern hearing aids use one of five standard Button Cell Zinc-air batteries. (Older hearing aids often used mercury battery cells, but these cells have become banned in most countries today.)  Modern hearing aid button cell types are typically referred to by their common number name or the color of their packaging.
They are typically loaded into the hearing aid via a rotating battery door, with the flat side (case) as the positive terminal (cathode) and the rounded side as the negative terminal (anode).
These batteries all operate at 1.35 up to 1.45Volts.
The type of battery a specific hearing aid utilizes depends on the physical size allowable and the desired lifetime of the battery, which is in turn determined by the power draw of the hearing aid device. Typical battery lifetimes run between 1 and 14 days (assuming 16 hour days).