The name Bluestar was originally the brand for the premier Solent Blue Line services, but with the withdrawal of the Red Rocket services on 25 February 2008, all services now operate under the name. Some local routes run under the Baby Bluestar name. The New Forest Tour runs under its own sub-brand.
Bluestar services run under a number of sub-brands. To complete the change of all Solent Blue Line routes running under the Bluestar name, a number of brands were discontinued. These can be seen on the Solent Blue Line page.
Bluestar was originally the brand for Solent Blue Line's premier services. With the rebranding, it was extended to most of the main services.
All of the routes serve Southampton City Centre, with only the 18 running through it; all other services terminate there. Current routes are services:
Baby Bluestar is the name given to the more local routes run, and those that weren't withdrawn after the demise of Red Rocket.
Bluestar began operation of the free City-link service in Southampton from 28 September 2008. It runs between Southampton Central Station, WestQuay and Town Quay for Red Funnel ferries to the Isle of Wight.
The two buses used on the service were inherited from the previous operator, Enterprise, and have been repainted in a new two-tone blue livery, with the interiors also rebranded.
In early 2008, it was announced that Bluestar had won the 10-year contract to provide the uni-link service on behalf of the University of Southampton. Bluestar operations started on 28 September 2008. A fleet of 18 new buses were ordered, of which the first, 9 double-deck dual-door Scania OmniCitys arrived in time for the start. 9 single-deck OmniCitys also arrived in early 2009. 
To cover the start of operations, the existing vehicles of previous operator Enterprise were hired, of which numbers are gradually declining. Additionally, a tri-axle, single deck 13.7m Scania OmniLink single-deck bus is being trialled on the network.
The New Forest Tour is a circular open-top bus service running around the New Forest, between Lyndhurst, Brockenhurst, Lymington, Beaulieu and Exbury.
It was started in 2004, using distinctively branded yellow and orange Bristol VRs (in the same livery as the old Southern Vectis open-top services.) The service was reversed in 2005, to run in the opposite direction. For the 2006 season, two low-floor Volvo B7TL/East Lancs Myllenniums from Wilts & Dorset were used, retaining the Wilts & Dorset livery but with "New Forest Tour" vinyls added. In 2007 the buses passed to Solent Blue Line and were repainted in a new green and orange livery, with ponies on the side. Again, this is similar to the Southern Vectis livery which that company uses on their open-top buses.
These are late night services running on Friday and Saturday nights aimed at people who have a night out in Southampton. All services begin at Leisure World and additionally call in the area of number of city centre bars and clubs. Nightstar services operate outbound from Southampton only and charge a flat fare of   2 on routes N6, N12, N18, N19 and   3 on N1, N2, N9 and N16.
Services start at Leisure World before serving the city centre:
This was an express bus link between Portsmouth and Southampton.  This service was originally run by Southampton City Bus and later First Hampshire & Dorset as services 727 and 747. It has had a number of other operators since, prior to the Solent Blue Line attempt it was branded as the Solent Clipper and run by Tellings-Golden Miller, they retained part of the original Southampton City Bus route numbers with the services becoming X27 and X47. The Bluestar service was due to terminate on 2 June 2007 due to financial funding from the local councils being taken away, but it was then continued due to popular demand, with a revised timetable from 2 July 2007. In February 2009, Bluestar announced that the Solent Shuttle would end. The Solent Shuttle stopped running on the 21 February 2009.
Beep! Bus was a brand name for the ex-Bluestar service B between Eastleigh and Southampton via Boyatt Wood and Velmore which began on 8 September 2008. The service operates in direct competition with Velvet B, with Beep! Bus journeys timed to operate 3 minutes ahead of all Velvet B services.
Initially the service was registered with VOSA as a Wilts & Dorset route to begin on 15 September 2008 but this was later cancelled and replaced with an identical Bluestar registration.
Because the service was not officially scheduled to begin until 15 September (a week after Velvet started operating), Bluestar initially was unable to take fares for the service, therefore it operated as a free service until its registered start date a week later. Normal fares were slightly lower than Velvet's, on some journeys but local journeys were more expensive.
Bluestar operations director Andrew Wickham said that the decision was "a business decision pure and simple", adding that they "are not scared of competition" but Velvet were "deliberately creaming off" some of their passengers.
The rival Velvet service ended on 10 January 2009 because of low passenger numbers. Soon after, Bluestar announced their intention to withdraw Beep! Bus from February 2009, ironically one year after they withdrew the Red Rocket B service.
This service was withdrawn after a withdrawal of council funding on 6 February 2010.
This service was withdrawn by Bluestar on 21 February 2009, but was continued by Velvet.
This service was withdrawn on 10 April 2011 due to withdrawal of council funding.
Bluestar also infrequently offer a Do the Docks Tour, which is an open-top double decker that runs a circular route around Southampton Docks. The tour is scheduled to ran on November 11; the date of the last scheduled passenger journey departure of the QE2.
Bluestar utilise a mix of single and double deck buses.
The double deck fleet is made up of seven East Lancs Lolyne bodied Dennis Tridents built in 1998, seven East Lancs Myllennium Vyking bodied Volvo B7TLs built in 2001 and an Enviro400-bodied Volvo B7TL which joined the fleet in October 2006 and entered service in November of that year. This vehicle, given the fleet number 758, was originally intended for Wilts & Dorset and is fitted out with their interior design. 758 is the only Enviro400-bodied Volvo B7TL as the B7TL has been replaced with the Volvo B9TL. The company also has a number of Leyland Olympians and Volvo Olympians with East Lancs or Northern Counties Palatine 1 bodywork. The New Forest Tour utilises two East Lancs Myllennium Vykings transferred from Wilts & Dorset.
Single deck buses include DAF SB120/Wright Cadets which are primarily used on Bluestar route 18, Dennis Dart/Plaxton Pointer MPDs for use on Bluestar. Also a small number of Optare Solos transferred from Wilts & Dorset and ten new Mercedes-Benz Citaros arrived in 2006.
In early 2009 seven brand new Scania OmniCity double deckers enter service with the company. They are primarily used on the Bluestar 1 route. The first, 1125, arrived in November 2008.
Seven ex-Southern Vectis 2007 built Mercedes-Benz Citaros are due to replace older vehicles on routes to Romsey via North Baddesley and routes to Calmore, meaning low floor vehicles will always be used on main routes. The buses have arrived in Southampton and have been branded for Route 9 in Southampton, they retain the Southern Vectis interior.
In March 2007 whilst being used as a rail-replacement bus a double-decker member of the Red Rocket fleet drove under a low bridge at Barnham causing the top to be ripped off, in addition to minor damage to the bridge. It is now with Southern Vectis as an open-topper.
In the early hours of Tuesday 22 March 2011, there was an incident between a car and a Bluestar bus on route 2 between Southampton, Eastleigh and Fair Oak, resulting in a single fatality of the car driver, and the passenger last known to be in a critical condition. Only one passenger of the 10 on-board were treated for minor injuries. 
In July 2009, the MP for Eastleigh Chris Huhne ordered an investigation into allegations of anti-competitive behaviour of Bluestar against Velvet's over their implementation and subsequent removal of extra services, which operated between Eastleigh and Fair Oak, to rival Velvet's service, the Fair Oak Flyer. 