Teper's community organizing began at age nine - helping on mailings and selling buttons for the SF chapter of National Organization for Women. Teper was ten when her mother came out as a lesbian and twelve when her best friend and many other friends abandoned and harassed her after finding out about her mom. It wasn't until Teper was 24 that she found a community of other young people with families like hers.
A San Francisco native and Oakland resident, Teper attended public schools in San Francisco and graduated from Brandeis University with a B.A. in Sociology, Latin American Studies and Women's Studies. Before joining COLAGE she was a leader of outdoor adventures and activism: leading wilderness expeditions, teaching environmental ethics, and sharing the pleasure of food and nature with urban youth and families. As part of this work she climbed Mt. Whitney and rafted the Colorado river in the Grand Canyon. Teper has worked for women's health and reproductive rights, an end to US military action and occupation, LGBT liberation and environmental sustainability. She has a background in popular education, social, economic and environmental justice, and youth empowerment which she brought to her work with COLAGE.
She joined COLAGE in October 1993 and has been an active participant and leader in the LGBT family movement ever since. Prior to being COLAGE's Executive Director, she served on the COLAGE Steering Committee and as chair of the COLAGE Board of Directors for almost seven years. In 1994 she marched and spoke at the rally in New York City for the 25th Anniversary of the Stonewall Riots. In 2003 she became COLAGE's third executive director. In 2005 she led COLAGE's Hurricane Katrina relief efforts to support LGBT families and groups. In 2006 she presented and co-sponsored several workshops and caucuses focused on LGBT families at the  . In 2008 she coordinated the national group's participation in American Family Outing (AFO), an outreach effort to communities of faith sponsored by Soulforce, in collaboration with the National Black Justice Coalition, the Universal Fellowship of Metropolitan Community Churches and COLAGE.Will Billings, ''Kids    cartoon character becomes member of gay rights group: Title animated character in 'Buddy G, My Two Moms and Me' has become a member of COLAGE'', QNotes,May 3, 2008. The AFO is a "family-to-family visits with the parishioners and leaders of six of America   s most influential megachurches, including Joel Osteen, T.D. Jakes, and Rick Warren." As of 2008 Teper overseas the administration of 65 chapters in 32 states and affiliates in Canada, Sweden, and England.National Black Justice Coalition. In 2010 Teper and COLAGE along with The Progressive Project filed amicus curiae brief in support of the plaintiffs in Perry v. Schwarzenegger (Proposition 8).TPP and COLAGE Amicus Brief for Perry v Schwarzenegger, Case3:09-cv-02292-VRW Document548 Filed February 03 2010, 32 pages, The Progressive Project. The brief focuses on "the harm that occurs to children of same-sex couples when marriage equality is banned".
Currently she meets other children with gay parents, lectures on gay family rights and works to protect the rights of Queerspawn, a term identifying children of LGBTIQ parents. She leads COLAGE workshops each summer during Family Week in Provincetown on Cape Cod.