Kennedy was born in Washington, D.C. six months after her father was assassinated. She graduated from Brown University in Providence, Rhode Island.
In the 1990s, Kennedy and fellow Brown classmate Vanessa Vadim (daughter of Roger Vadim and Jane Fonda) formed May Day Media, a non-profit organization that specializes in the production and distribution of films with a social conscience,  based in Washington, D.C.
In 1998 Kennedy and fellow Brown graduate Liz Garbus founded Moxie Firecracker Films which specializes in documentaries that highlight pressing social issues. The television networks that have shown its films include:
She directed and co-produced ''American Hollow'' (1999) about a struggling Appalachian family which received critical acclaim and many awards. HBO broadcast the film and publisher Little, Brown and Company released Kennedy's companion book simultaneously.
Kennedy directed and co-produced the Emmy Award-nominated series '' '' (2003), which premiered at the International AIDS Conference in Barcelona, Spain, on July 8, 2002; it was later broadcast as a five-part series on HBO in June 2003.
Kennedy directed and co-produced ''A Boy   s Life'' (2004), the story of a young boy and his family in rural Mississippi. It premiered to rave reviews at the 2003 Tribeca Film Festival and was awarded the Best Documentary prize at the Woodstock Film Festival; it was later broadcast on HBO.
When asked in a March 24, 2004, interview with ''Salon.com''  about her interest in the American South, Kennedy cited her father's experiences in the region as an inspiration and starting point. In the same article, she goes on to mention that showing class differences in American culture also motivates her.
For HBO she directed and co-produced '' '' (2004), which was broadcast on September 9, 2004. The film takes a "what if" look at the catastrophic consequences of a radioactive release at the Indian Point Energy Center, a three-unit nuclear-power plant station, located  north of midtown Manhattan, New York City, New York.
Kennedy directed and co-produced ''Homestead Strike'' (2006) as part of The History Channel   s  series, ''10 Days that Unexpectedly Changed America'' (April 2006).
Kennedy directed and co-produced  ''Ghosts of Abu Ghraib'' (2007) which premiered at the Sundance Film Festival and won the 2007 Primetime Emmy Award for Best Documentary.
She directed '' '' (2008) for HBO Documentary Films, which premiered on HBO on August 18, 2008.
Kennedy most recently directed "The Fence (La Barda)" which premiered at the opening night of The Sundance Film Festival 2010. The film made its debut on HBO on September 16, 2010.
Kennedy advocates for several social activism organizations and sits on the board of numerous non-profit organizations.
Kennedy announced her support of Barack Obama being the Democratic Party's nominee in the 2008 U.S. presidential election in an op-ed essay, ''Two fine choices, one clear decision - Obama'', in the ''San Francisco Chronicle'' stating:
On August 2, 1999, Kennedy married Mark Bailey in Greece at the home of shipowner Vardis Vardinoyiannis. The wedding was originally scheduled for July 17 in Hyannis Port, Massachusetts, but was postponed after the plane carrying her cousin, John, Jr., crashed ''en route'' to the event. Kennedy and Bailey have three children: Georgia Elizabeth Kennedy-Bailey (born 2002); Bridget Katherine Kennedy-Bailey (born 2004); and Zachary Corkland Kennedy-Bailey (born 2007)Beggy, Carol and Mark Shanahan, Mark (July 17, 2009). .  ''The Boston Globe''.  Accessed August 25, 2009. The family resides in Brooklyn, New York.
In addition to her father's assassination six months before her birth and the plane crash that postponed her wedding, Kennedy has experienced other family tragedies throughout her life. Her older brother, David, died of a drug overdose at a Palm Beach, Florida hotel room on April 25, 1984, after a long-publicized battle with drug addiction. A second brother, Robert, Jr., as well as other members of the Kennedy family, has experienced public battles with substance abuse. A third brother, Michael, died in an Aspen, Colorado skiing accident on December 31, 1997 that occurred while she was present.