The first hour focuses on the original ''Star Trek'' series, and the ideas that Gene Roddenberry had about the future of space travel.
It begins with the life of Dr. Marc D. Rayman, the chief propulsion engineer at NASA   s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, and shows how Dr. Rayman became interested in propulsion through ''Star Trek''. It also discusses how NASA's newest deep space probe's ion propulsion was inspired by the ''Star Trek'' episode ''Spock's Brain''. Shatner also states that "those pesky trekkies are everywhere in the space program," hence the name for the first  .
The show then examines the life of Martin Cooper, the chief engineer at Motorola, who invented the cell phone. Cooper states that ''Star Trek'' was his inspiration for the cell phone, and discusses the similarities between the modern day cell phone and a Star Trek communicator. He also discusses how ''Star Trek'' introduced the concept of computer voice recognition dialing. 
Next, Mae C. Jemison describes how ''Star Trek'' inspired her to become the first African-American in space, and  Seth Shostak, of SETI (Search for Extra Terrestrial Intelligence), tells how it led him to astronomy.
The show investigates the research work of Kevin Warwick at the University of Reading and considers its links with the Borg. Warwick's Cyborg implants, linking his own nervous system into the internet, are featured.
Next, medical technologies are discussed, in particular the inspiration for non-invasive Star-Trek-style imaging technology.
The second hour focuses on further programs in ''Star Trek'' franchise -- '' '', '' '', '' '' and '' '' -- and their impact and how they differed from the original series.
Next up is Steve Perlman, at the time principal scientist at Apple Computer, who was inspired to invent the QuickTime media player by watching an episode of ''Star Trek: The Next Generation''.
Filmed mostly in Vancouver, the special featured some scenes that took place in locations shown in ''Star Trek'' TV series.
The special was nominated for two Emmy Awards in 2006 - Outstanding Nonfiction Special, and Outstanding Writing For Nonfiction Programming.