1080p HD (June 2010 - present)
At some point during the blending process, a subtitle appears stating whether or not the particular items are safe to blend at home. Golf balls, marbles, cell phones and cubic zirconia, for example, are not safe. These show the subtitle "Don't try this at home". On the other hand, credit cards, ice, and a McDonald's Extra Value Meal are safe to blend. These show the subtitle "Please try this at home." While the item is being blended Dickson is smiling and waiting for the process to end. When it does, Dickson frequently warns viewers not to breathe the smoke or dust that results when blending unsafe items by saying "Don't breathe this!"  At the end of each video, the contents are emptied out onto a work top, at which point the subtitle "Yes, it blends!" appears.
One of the most famous ''Will it Blend?'' creations is the "cochicken", which is half of a chicken (cooked, usually rotisserie) blended with 12 fluid ounces of Coca-Cola (without the can). Although the show's example was blended with the bones (and thus was disclaimed as safe to eat), a boneless version was made on NBC's ''Today'' and served to Meredith Vieira.
Popular fan requests for the show include blending either another blender or a crowbar. It is highly unlikely that either would blend, and this probably means that neither would even be attempted, because of the nature and purpose of the show   marketing Blendtec products. A demonstration video featuring the anticipated crowbar was interrupted by a cell phone, to which Dickson responds by stuffing the entire crew's cell phones into the blender and blending them instead. The show has attempted to blend increasingly unlikely items, such as a six foot garden rake and a sealed can of soda.
Between January 24th to January 30th of 2007, Dicksons studio were ''Will it Blend'' was shot changes to a different location.
On the April 3, 2007 episode, Dickson placed a camcorder in the blender, giving viewers a first-person look inside the container while being blended. Shortly afterwards, the production team, Kels Goodman and Ray Hansen, attempted to return what was left of the camcorder to Best Buy, with no success.
On the July 10, 2007, episode, an iPhone played the video intro before being blended. The resulting remains of the iPhone (which consist of powder and a mangled metal frame), along with a brand new Blendtec blender and a DVD compilation of the commercials, were put up for auction on eBay and sold at US$901 (which was given to charity). Dickson has done the same thing with an iPhone 3G on the July 11, 2008, episode, setting up a charitable auction on eBay again, along with a "Will It Blend" t-shirt, an autographed jar (holding the blended remains of the phone), the box the iPhone came in (including the earphones), and a brand new Blendtec Total Blender. On the April 5, 2010, episode, an iPad was blended, after being smashed to fit into the blender. After Dickson saw how many views this video received, he set up a contest on blendtec.com to give away either the shredded or the boxed iPad. Each comes with a free Blendtec blender. On the June 25, 2010, episode, an iPhone 4 was blended. After Dickson blended a new iPhone 4 everyone can join at the "Blend my Phone Contest" when you go to Blendtec's website and you can win a new iPhone 4 with a 2 year contract paid by Dickson and your old Mobile phone blended. The winner was Ashley S. from Portland, Oregon and was announced on July 12, 2010.
One of the most extreme episodes featured Dickson placing six Bic lighters in the blender. In a matter of seconds, the mixture of butane, metal and plastic ignited into a ball of fire inside the container. The scene was exaggerated by the addition of nuclear explosion film footage before one of the production crew sprayed a fire extinguisher on the still-operating blender.
Some episodes are produced to coincide with certain events. For example, three episodes aired during the weekend of  Super Bowl XLI. Because of trademark restrictions, the words "Super Bowl" were substituted with other words such as "Super Sunday," "The Big Game" or "That Last Football Game." The first episode had Dickson blend a smoothie out of salsa, tortilla chips, Buffalo wings and some Budweiser. The second and third episodes used two blenders to predict the outcome of the Super Bowl by blending miniature helmets (AFC vs. NFC) and foam footballs (Indianapolis Colts vs. Chicago Bears). To coincide with the release of the film ''Transformers'', Dickson blended the ''Transformers'' toys Bumblebee and Swindle before challenging two of his grandchildren to transform the remains. When Dickson learned that The Beach Boys did not win ''Esquire Magazine'''s 2007 Esky Award, he blended the trophy. He also blended the music/rhythm video game '' '' after finding no Beach Boys in it, and the first-person shooter ''Halo 3'' after two of his grandchildren beat him in a multiplayer game. To celebrate the release of Weezer's 2008 album, Dickson blended a copy of the CD with a can of pork and beans (a reference to the album's first single, as ''Will It Blend?'' is among the internet memes referenced in the song's video). Dickson also blended the Wii Wheel after breaking it during a game of Mario Kart Wii, and a Grand Theft Auto IV disc because the 1968 Mustang GT 390 (like in Bullitt) was not included in the game.
Dickson has revealed that the campaign has been a great success for Blendtec:
Blendtec now sells ''Will It Blend?'' merchandise, including a spoof shirt with the slogan "Tom Dickson is my Homeboy".
Dickson has made many national television appearances, including NBC's ''The Tonight Show'' with Jay Leno on March 30, 2007, on which he blended a rake handle in mere seconds. Dickson also made his appearance in the History Channel series ''Modern Marvels''. In the episode ''World's Strongest III'' aired March 6, 2008 the show ends with a special Will it Blend to prove if he can blend the channel's longest running series (in the form of a portable MP3 player).
In April 2007, radio station KDRF (eD-FM) in Albuquerque, New Mexico enlisted Tom Dickson to do a ''Will It Blend?'' version to promote the radio station. The three 30-second commercials show different styles of music CDs being blended, showcasing the station's variety format.
In September 2007, the videos earned the second highest annual payout of about US$15000 from the video hosting service Revver.
In 2008, ''Will It Blend?'' was featured on a Dreyer's Dibs commercial. In the commercial, a girl holding a large lollipop tries some Dibs and wonders what will happen to lollipops when kids stop buying them in favor of the bite-sized ice cream treats. The next scene shows giant lollipops being used as an alternative to waxing a man's hairy back before Dickson blends them. A second version of the commercial has Dickson himself being waxed.
As far as awards, ''Will it Blend?'' has been nominated for the 2007 YouTube award for Best Series, winner of .Net Magazine's 2007 Viral Video campaign of the year and winner of the Bronze level Clio Award for Viral Video in 2008.
The iPhone episode of Will It Blend? won Ad of the Week in episode 8 of the Australian show The Gruen Transfer.
As of May 27, 2011, the Blendtec series of videos had collected a total of 161,404,538 views on YouTube.
Dickson often gives a reason for his destruction of products, such as cellular phones interrupting his show, a poor golf game, needing to update his iPod, and his grandchildren leaving their toys out (hurting his feet).