KUGN is the flagship radio station of the Oregon Sports Network, and broadcasts University of Oregon football and basketball games. KUGN also broadcasts local high school football and basketball games. On weekdays, KUGN airs four-and-a-half hours of local news and talk programming, local and national news twice per hour, and nationally syndicated talk shows.
Talk programming includes: 
KUGN first took the air on July 4, 1946 as the second radio station in Eugene, after KORE. KUGN was originally affiliated with the ABC radio network, but switched to NBC in December 1952. The station dropped the longtime NBC affiliation for CBS in December 1977.  In 1953, KUGN raised its power to 5,000-watts, to become the most powerful radio station in Oregon, outside of the Portland-metro area.  In 1979, KUGN began airing some Mutual Broadcasting System programming, including Monday Night Football and Larry King's popular evening talk show.  
During its first four decades, KUGN was best known for its eclectic, personable announcers. The careers of such veterans as Duke Young, Dick Cross, Dave Miller, Russ Doran, Skip Hathaway, Webb Russell, Wendy Ray and Dale "Uncle Fuzzy" Reed spanned the period from the late 1950s to the early 1970s.  
The "old" KUGN, which Ray unabashedly called "the best radio station in the world," is best remembered for its popular "Morning Show." Reed, KUGN's resident Renaissance Man, teamed with Ray and news director Fred Webb for a much beloved program that was a "must hear" in the Eugene area throughout the 1970s, 1980s, and early 1990s.  "The Morning Show" entertained "The Listener" with such lighthearted semi-regular features such as Ray's "Ball Score Boogie," the "Poet's Nook" starring Webb as the high-buttoned poetry devotee "Charles," and "Gridpute," a tongue-in-cheek Friday morning football preview featuring Ray and a clanking, cantankerous "computer."  Ray and Webb also teamed up on Eugene's top-rated morning newscasts, twice hourly between 5:30 and 10 a.m. D.J.-anchor "Uncle Fuzzy" knit it all together with his wry commentary and savvy music choices (adult contemporary with a fair amount of jazz), delivered in a voice that was airwave-polished, yet that of Everyman.
Ray retired from radio in March 1992.  Reed and Webb continued until that November, but management chose not to renew their contracts.  The station experimented with a few replacements, before settling on a morning news team of Ralph Steadman and Rick Little.  Steadman exited in 1995 to make way for University of Oregon sportscaster Jerry Allen.
KUGN-AM was founded in 1946 by C.H. Fisher of Portland.  After some years, his children - Carl Fisher, Jane Whitbread, and Nancy Harrison - assumed daily operations of the station.  In 1972 Obie Advertising bought KUGN from the Fishers.  Obie was headed by Brian Obie, a future mayor of Eugene.  Obie Advertising sold KUGN to Dallas-based Media Corp. of America in 1987.  Then in mid-1989, long-time employees Jim Torrey (also a future mayor of Eugene) and Chuck Chackel purchased KUGN for $4.2 million and formed Combined Communications.  Torrey sold his interest in the company in 1991.
In 1996, the Federal Communications Commission changed radio station ownership rules to allow companies to own up to six stations in a market (see Telecommunications Act of 1996).  Prior to 1996, companies could only own two FM and two AM stations per market.  Combined Communications took advantage of the new ownership rules and sold the station in 1996 to Deschutes Broadcasting for $7 million.  Over the next three years, the station passed hands from Deschutes to Citadel Broadcasting to Marathon Media, and finally, to Cumulus Broadcasting.  Cumulus also purchased five other stations in the Eugene area.
In 1957, KUGN became the first flagship station of the University of Oregon sports radio network, with play-by-play announcer John Tasnady serving five seasons as the football "Voice of the Ducks." KUGN morning host Wendy Ray, already a veteran sportscaster, took the microphone in 1960 as the Ducks' basketball announcer, when KUGN got the broadcast rights to that sport from local rival KASH.  When Tasnady retired from broadcasting prior to the 1962 football season, Ray stepped in as football announcer, and called both sports up through the 1969 Oregon-Oregon State "Civil War" football game. Color commentator Mike Guldager stepped in as play-by-play announcer for the season finale at Hawaii, and then announced Ducks basketball and football until 1973.
Ray returned to Oregon Ducks play-by-play for one season (1974   75) as football and basketball announcer. He also served as color commentator for new play-by-play announcer Warren Swain in the 1980 football season. Outside of radio, Ray was the longtime public address announcer for Oregon track and field meets at Hayward Field.  Other KUGN "voices" of University of Oregon sports were Bud Sobel (1973   74), Ralph Petti (football, 1975), Mike Stone (1975   80), Swain (1980   82), Portland sportscaster Bill Johnson (1982   84) and Hal Ramey (1984   87).
KUGN lost the broadcast rights to Duck sports in 1987, when the University of Oregon athletic department set up its own in-house radio network. The university put the network's flagship status up for bidding, and local rival KPNW won out over KUGN.  During that time, KUGN became the flagship station for the Oregon State Beavers radio network, outbidding Portland station KEX-AM.  Eight years later, KUGN regained the broadcast rights to Duck sports. Play-by-play announcer Jerry Allen moved from KPNW to KUGN at that time.  
Allen, a native Oregonian and veteran sportscaster, will begin his 25th season as "Voice of the Ducks" in the fall of 2011.
Bob Valdez