Aerosmith, just like any other band, have tracks left from their recording sessions, often referred to as outtakes. Little was known about them until the 1990s as lyrics, information and songs started leaking on to the internet.  Additionally, some outtakes were released as B-sides on singles, as bonus tracks on international pressings of albums, as well as on compilations, live albums and box sets that the band has released throughout their career.
Only few bootlegs exist with complete demos or sessions. From 1982, there is a bootleg called "Pure Gold .999" with some "Rock In A Hard Place" demos. Three other bootlegs exist with demos and outtakes from the 1987 ''Permanent Vacation'' album: "Permanent Outtakes" (28 tracks), "Love Me Like a BirdDog" (with some Rick Rubin demos) and the "March 1, 1987 session" where the tape recorded 58 minutes of the band rehearsing a few songs. ''Pump'' does not have a full bootleg of outtakes; about 5 songs (mostly instrumentals) escaped in mid-1990s and have been included on several rare songs bootleg compilations.
Rumors of three fake bootlegs with the tracks left from ''Pump'', ''Get a Grip'', and ''Nine Lives'' sessions started in the year 2000 in internet chats and forums. Those bootlegs were later proved to be fakes, yet the song titles were real.
Nothing full has escaped so far from ''Get a Grip'', ''Nine Lives'', ''Just Push Play'' or ''Honkin' on Bobo''. However, two tracks from the 2000s leaked: "Painted on My Heart" written by Diane Warren and recorded for the ''Gone in 60 Seconds'' movie soundtrack and "Oxygen" from the 2002 Maui sessions.
Sources of additional tracks' info, lyrics and sound bits have escaped from official websites, press, band members, close friends, private collectors, etc.
The following is a list of all possible outtakes known so far, mostly take from Gonzaloc's site.  Please keep in mind that some are confirmed, as they have been subsequently released on other albums or mentioned as existing by the band, while some are not. For extended info on each song, full lyrics and few outtakes clips and covers, go to '''Gonzaloc's Aerosmith Outtakes''' site at: http://sites.google.com/site/aerosmithouttakes/