When the series begins, Jan Levenson-Gould is Michael Scott's superior at the New York City corporate headquarters of fictitious paper distributor Dunder-Mifflin. Jan's no-nonsense style is at odds with Michael's much more casual approach. Since her office is in New York, Jan's contact with the Scranton branch is largely by telephone, although she will make the two-and-a-half-hour drive to Scranton if necessary. She usually asks if she's on camera when talking to Michael on the speaker phone, and Michael often lies and tells her she is not, before admitting that they are   at which point she hangs up on him. 
While initially based on Jennifer Taylor-Clarke from the UK version, her character develops in a wildly different direction.
Eventually, she has a long-term but troubled romantic relationship with Michael, which escalates after Dunder Mifflin fires her for increasingly erratic behavior. Her relationship with Michael only worsens when she moves into his condo and takes over, redecorating the condo and damaging his finances by running him into debt.
Introduced as a very driven, successful woman, Jan has a managerial style that clashes with Michael's laid-back business style. Jan is usually reprimanding Michael for some combination of failing to fulfill his work duties, violating company policy, or trying to flirt with her. Jan generally gets more respect from the office than Michael does. Her marriage ended in divorce due partially to Jan's desire for children, a dream not shared by her ex-husband ("The Client"). Prior to that, she went by the name Jan Levenson-Gould, but dropped "Gould" following the divorce. In her personal life, Jan faced a rough year not only with her divorce but as a victim of identity theft. She is also seeing a psychiatrist. In a deleted scene from "Dinner Party," it is implied that Jan grew up in West Virginia. The "Serenity by Jan" website indicates that she had an unhappy childhood and ran away from home.
Although not a regular smoker, Jan tends to light up when put in stressful situations  ("Performance Review", "Casino Night", "Cocktails"), and exhibits poor judgment due to what her psychiatrist deems "self-destructive tendencies".
Jan has a strong sexuality, revealed by Michael explaining that she made him dress up as a school girl during a role-playing session, and when she did not abide by their "safety word," which is revealed to be "foliage" in "Women's Appreciation." Other fetishes of hers include leather, licking coffee off her lover, Cuban musicians, and frat boys.
Jan initially drives a Volvo S80 and a Volvo S60.  At the beginning of season four both her Volvo and Michael's Chrysler Sebring are traded in for a Porsche Boxster that they share, unsuccessfully.  Jan seemed to have appropriated the Porsche, as Michael drove a PT Cruiser Convertible after their break-up.  Jan, as a mother, now drives a Toyota Highlander.  The Highlander is uniquely bare-boned, contrasting Jan's Rolls-Royce-esque stroller and her image.
Jan's surname is almost universely spelled "Levinson", NBC confirms the spelling "Levenson." Though contradicting the usage is the Season 4 DVD interior casing showing Dwight's "Power flow chart" where her name is, once again, spelled with an 'i'.