Former on-air personalities include Kris Moore, Justin Tate, Dina Fuentes, Ron Jeffries, Karen Carter, Lance Braden, Jim Brewer, Mark Bairrington, Keri Teegarden, Rodney Scott, Larry Williams (1980-1981 Highest 12 week ratings sweep), J. Michael Scott,(KUFO founding program director),
KODM (97.9 FM, "Lite Rock 98") is a radio station that serves the Midland   Odessa metropolitan area with Soft rock music. The station is under ownership of Cumulus Media.
Current on-air personalities include Spencer Bennett (Workday Wakeup Show, and program director 1993 to present), Rick Dees (March 2011), John Moesch (Afternoon Drive; Operations Manager; joined 2009).
Before it became KODM, the Odessa, Texas station was known as KOYL-FM then later, KUFO-FM at a frequency of 97.9.  The FM was an off shoot of 1310 AM KOYL. It was called KOYL-FM, and first went on the air April 1, 1966. Power was 34,000 watts horizontal polarization at 100 feet above average terrain. KOYL-AM was a daytimer founded in 1957 by Edward Roskelley and his brother. This station was used to extend the day format into the night hours. In 1979 the station was sold by the Roskelleys (Mid Cities Broadcasting) to Stream Broadcasting (Harold H. "Spook" Stream III who was married at the time to Lynn Anderson.) Stream also owned an FM station in Lake Charles, Louisiana.
While KOYL AM/FM had its studios, AM & FM transmitters at one site in north west Odessa, Stream leased space in a newly constructed bank building in Odessa and built new studios and production spaces, and built a new FM transmitter site (used to this day by KODM) that boasted better coverage (100,000 watts horizontal and vertical, 360 feet above average terrain, and more centrally located between Odessa and Midland. The new KUFO-FM became a popular album-oriented rock station. The manager and chief architect was Frank Hall. The Program Director was J. Michael Scott.
In the fall of 1985, KUFO FM was sold by Stream to East/West Broadcasting (Partners Steve Horowitz, Bill Gruber, Dick Warren). The new team changed the call letters to KODM (for Odessa / Midland), and gave it the nickname, "FM98".  The audience that KUFO had built over the years was very loyal to AOR music and much pressure was put on the new owndership of KODM to somehow save the format.  So, to take pressure off of the new KODM, the owners decided to donate all of the AOR albums in their library to KBAT which was struggling with their ratings at the time.
Within a few months, KODM was moved from the leased space in a bank building to new facilities in a strip mall called Market Place, located at University and Parkway in Odessa.  Progrm consultant Lee Randall was brought in to re-shape the programming and to position it for a broader audience.  One of the more positive changes made was the teaming of Dave Perkins and Kathy Redwine to host the morning show. Rodney Scott, an overnight DJ who stayed on from KUFO, made several "after work" morning show appearances. His contribution became so popular that he relinquished his overnight duties and became a permanent member of the morning team.  Keri Teegarden also stayed on from KUFO for the midday shift on FM 98.  Brad Holcomb served as Program Director and afternoon voice.  
During its four year run as an East/West Broadcasting property, "FM98" was usually on top of the Arbitron ratings and enjoyed massive popularity among adults, particularly women.  At a Business Appreciation luncheon held in May, 1987, the Odessa Chamber of Commerce honored KODM with the Business Excellence Award for 1986 citing KODM's "...firm belief in Odessa and the area's economic future." The award was presented to station partner, Bill Gruber by Bill Griffin, then President of the Odessa Chamber.  "FM98" was sold again in May of 1989, to DNF Broadcasting based in New York.  At that time, many of its staffers went their own way also.  Dave Perkins went on to host a top five morning show in Cleveland, Ohio, at WGAR FM.
The station features syndicated programs: The Billy Bush Show weeknights 6-10PM, Casey Kasem's American Top 40 the 80's, Absolutely 80's with Nina Blackwood and Backtrax with Kidd Kelly.  The station still calls itself Lite Rock 98.