In 1944 Criswell was called to replace George W. Truett as pastor of the First Baptist Church in Dallas.  He would spend the remainder of his life at First Baptist, preaching more than four thousand sermons from its pulpit. During his tenure membership grew from 7,800 to 26,000, with weekly Sunday School attendance in excess of 5,000. The church expanded to multiple buildings covering five blocks in downtown Dallas, eventually becoming the largest Southern Baptist church in the world. The popular evangelist Billy Graham joined the church in 1953, became a close friend of the Criswell family, and remained a member of the Dallas congregation for 55 years.  
Criswell was an early pioneer of the modern megachurch 
Criswell's accomplishments include helping to engineer the rightward shift of the Southern Baptist convention which began in the late 1970s. He was awarded eight honorary doctorates in addition to his earned postgraduate degree.  He published fifty-four books, including an annotated ''Criswell Study Bible'' (in later editions the ''Believers Study Bible'' and ''Holy Bible, Baptist Study Edition'', Thomas Nelson Publishers), and founded both the Criswell College with its radio station KCBI and First Baptist Academy. 
In 1995 First Baptist called Dr. O. S. Hawkins as pastor and Criswell entered semi-retirement as pastor emeritus. He continued to preach at conferences, First Baptist's annual 
Well-known pastor and author Rick Warren recounts his call to full-time ministry as a 19-year-old student at California Baptist College, when in November 1973 he and a friend skipped classes and drove 350 miles to hear 
Criswell preach at the Jack Tar Hotel in San Francisco.
Warren went on to found the Saddleback Church in California, one of the most recognized and influential churches in the country, with weekly attendance in excess of 20,000. In his book, ''The Purpose Driven Church'', Warren referred to Criswell as the "greatest American pastor of the twentieth century."
Audio recordings of Criswell's preaching were made beginning in December 1953, and over 3,300 of his expository sermons are 
W. A. Criswell Foundation which also supports the Criswell College.
Criswell's theology is best described as conservative and evangelical. He 
First Baptist Church of Dallas, Criswell preached dispensational premillennialism from the pulpit.
Criswell's preaching also reflected his culture as societal attitudes evolved on the issue of racial integration. While he 
Baptist Convention and the SBC's endorsement of racial equality and desegregation, Criswell announced to the press, "Every 
Southern Baptist in the land should support the spirit of that statement. We Southern Baptists have definitely turned away 
Criswell's first sermon after his election as SBC president in 1968 was titled "The Church of the Open Door," emphasizing that his 
In the 1980s, he continued to support Republican presidential nominees Ronald W. Reagan and George H. W. Bush.