BL (formerly British Leyland Limited) was renamed to Rover Group.
The Rover Group's Leyland Trucks division (which included its Freight Rover van business) was merged with the Dutch DAF Trucks company to form the new commercial vehicle company DAF NV. The new company's trucks (built in Leyland, UK and Eindhoven, Netherlands) and its vans built in Birmingham, UK, were branded as Leyland DAF for the UK market and as ''DAF'' for other European and worldwide markets.
The Rover SD1 ceased production after 10 years and was replaced with the Rover 800, which is the third product of the venture with Honda. The Japanese version of this Rover model was the Honda Legend.
Ford gave the Escort a mild facelift in March, with a new softer look. A similar makeover was given to the Orion saloon range, which expanded to include lower specification "L" and "LX" models, having originally been sold in upmarket "GL" and "Ghia" trim only.
Vauxhall replaced the Carlton with an all-new model after eight years, but with a familiar rear-wheel drive chassis providing the underpinnings for a four-door saloon and five-door estate aimed directly at the Ford Granada. Engines ranged from a relatively slow 1.8 to an ultra-refined 3.0 V6 which produced almost 200&nbsp;bhp. It was European Car of the Year for the 1987 model year.
BMW launched an entirely new 7 Series to replace the nine-year-old original version. It heralds a new era for luxury cars, setting the standards for others to match in terms of technical innovation, equipment, safety, security, quality and design flair. Even the basic 728i version offers high levels of refinement, quality, driver appeal, luxury and style. The 750iL (long-wheelbase) version doubles the cost with some of the highest standards of specification ever seen on a production car.
The 1986 model year saw Renault introduce two important new cars. The most significant of these was the Espace - the first "proper" people carrier made by a European firm. Powered by a 2.0 petrol engine, the Espace was available in several trim levels, all of which gave a good level of specification. Its interior was unique in terms of versatility, practicality and clever touches, providing room for seven people. All of these innovation came at just a slightly higher cost than a Ford Sierra or Vauxhall Cavalier - neither of which (even in estate form) was anywhere near as practical. Renault's other major car launch of the year was the R21 range, a four-door family saloon aimed directly at the Sierra, Cavalier, Austin Montego and Citroen BX. There is also an American-built version called the '''Eagle Medallion'''. Power comes from 1.7 and 2.0 petrol engines as well as a frugal 2.0 diesel. The R21 isn't a particularly stylish car, but its unremarkable styling hides a chassis with gives excellent ride and handling. The 2.0 petrol unit gives particularly impressive performance. For buyers who can't afford an Espace, there is also a seven-seat estate version of the R21 - badged '''Savanna''' in the UK and '''Nevada''' in France - which is only marginally more expensive than the saloon.
The Renault group suffered a tragedy in November when president Georges Besse was shot dead outside his mansion in Paris. Right-wing extremists are believed to have been responsible for his murder.
Peugeot has decided to phase out the Talbot marque on passenger cars, though it will be retained for PSA's light commercial vehicle - the Talbot Express. The phasing-out of Talbot began in January when the Horizon ceased production to be replaced by the Peugeot 309 - which became the first "French" car to be built in Britain, at the Ryton plant near Coventry. The new model fits between Peugeot's popular 205 and 505 ranges, and is a direct competitor for the Ford Escort. Most of its power units, and its chassis, are derived from the Horizon. The next phase of Talbot's demise came later in the year, when the '''Minx''' and '''Rapier''' ranges (previously Alpine and Solara) and the Samba were all withdrawn from production. This ended Talbot production in the UK, and by the end of 1986 only the Horizon assembly lines in Finland and Spain were still keeping the marque alive on passenger cars. They too will be terminated next year. The Ryton plant is set to host production of a new Peugeot-badged Sierra rival, which is due to be ready for the 1988 model year.
The Citroen GSA has finally ceased production after 16 years, having been effectively replaced by the larger BX four years ago. The modernisation of Citroen will continue into 1987 with the launch of a new mini-car based around the running gear of the Peugeot 205. A CX replacement is already in the pipeline, and should be on sale before the end of the decade.
The "Type Four" platform has spawned its third car in the shape of the Fiat Croma, which went into production early this year. It is a large five-door hatchback similar in size to the Ford Granada, and its underpinnings have been around for the year beneath the Saab 9000 and Lancia Thema. The final car on this platform - an Alfa Romeo model - is due on sale next year.
To celebrate its 75th anniversary, Alfa Romeo has launched a 75 range to compete with the likes of the BMW 3 Series.
A year after the launch of the Ibiza hatchback, the saloon version of the car has gone on sale. Badged the Malaga, it is similar in size to the Ford Orion and Volkswagen Jetta. It is also much cheaper, and that is explained by relative shortcomings in terms of refinement, quality and style.
Volvo has expanded its range with its first proper coupe in more than a decade - the 480. It is a three-door coupe with a 2+2 seating arrangement, and was designed with American buyers in mind. Mysteriously, this distinctive looking car has not been imported to the States, but it has been imported to Britain. It is Volvo's first front-wheel drive car. Power comes from a 1.7 petrol engine which is also used by Renault and Peugeot. An integral computer is built into the car to control its advanced electrical system, an innovation which is rare in any car.
Nissan has launched an all-new version of its Sunny family car. The new model is available as a hatchback, estate, saloon or coupe. It is competitively priced, cheap to run, well built and reliable, but falls behind the best of its competitors in terms of interior space, ride and handling. Its styling is also lacking in flair. It has already been on sale for a year in its homeland, and will go on sale in Mainland Europe next year as the Pulsar.