The official report into the disaster found that the crash was due to a loss of control resulting from multiple human failures. An alternative theory has been developed that suggests the crash may instead have been the result of mobile phone use interfering with the aircraft. The theory resulted in multiple countries banning mobile phone usage on aircraft.
  The plane was scheduled to depart from Zurich Airport (Switzerland) on Monday, 10 January 2000, at around 6:00 p.m. and arrive in Dresden Airport (Germany) a few hours later.Abegg, Ernst E.  (Jan. 10, 2000).  Associated Press.  ''Crossair plane crashes near Zurich.''  (17 January 2000).  ''First Crossair Fatal Crash Comes Amid Labor, Management Turmoil.''  Volume 70; Issue 3; Pg. 27.CBC News.  (11 November 2000).  ''''  The cold, drizzly weather was normal for the area,Birmingham Post.  (11 January 2000).  ''Ten killed in plane fireball.'' there were no indications that anything was wrong with the aircraft, and, although this particular aircraft had 24,000 flying hours since its November 1990 delivery, this type of airplane had a very good safety record.  The pilot had 8,100 hours of flying time, with 1,900 in the Saab 340 type and the co-pilot had about 1,800 total hours and 1,100 hours in the Saab 340 type.  The plane was carrying no unusual payload such as freight or mail and the plane was not due for its next regular maintenance check for another 21&nbsp;days, on 31 January 2000.
After the seven passengers and three crewmembers boarded, the plane was cleared for takeoff on time at 5.55 p.m. (1755 GMT).  The aircraft departed Runway 28 heading west.  From takeoff, the plane climbed normally. But after 7.2 kilometers (4.5 miles) the plane suddenly started to lose altitude and turn to the right instead of following the approved flight path to the left. When air traffic controllers asked the pilot if he meant to turn right, they were answered with "Stand by," followed by a loss of radio contact.
At 6.05 p.m. (1705 GMT), one minute 56 seconds into the flight, the plane disappeared from radar screens. Officials later determined that the plane went into a diving right turn before vanishing from radar screens.  Burning wreckage was scattered for 200   300 meters close to houses at Niederhasli, some  northwest of the runway at Zurich's Kloten airport.  The flight data and cockpit voice recorders were recovered from the accident scene, both heavily damaged.
Four of the passengers were Germans     Steffen Braun, 36; Klaus Friedrich, 48; Matthias Morche, 22; and Peter Schmidt, 31.  The others were a Frenchman, Pascal Rol, 43, a Swiss, Heinz Hoefler, 61, and a Spaniard who traveled to Zurich on a Swissair flight from Madrid, and of which no details are available.  The three person crew included Moldovan pilot Pavel Gruzin, Slovakian copilot Rastislav Kolesar and a French flight attendant, Severine Jabrin. There were no survivors.
At that time, Crossair was a majority owned subsidiary of SAirGroup.Aviation Daily.  (11 January 2000).  ''Crossair Has First Crash, A Saab 340 Near Zurich.''  Volume 339; Issue 7; Pg. 1.  The crash of Crossair Flight LX498 was the first time in Crossair's 25-year history that the regional airline had lost an aircraft, and was the deadliest accident to hit the SAirGroup since the crash of Swissair Flight 111, a MD11 flying from New York to Geneva crashed into the Atlantic Ocean off Nova Scotia, Canada in September 1998, killing all 229 aboard.
At the time, Crossair operated 17 Saab-340 type planes, but eventually phased them out with Embraer ERJ-145 regional jets.  The crash came about in the midst of a bitter labor-management dispute between Crossair and its pilots over a possible pay raise and work rules changes. The pilots' union had just canceled pay agreements with Crossair in December, 1999, with a termination effective in summer 2000.  In addition, and prior to the accident, two Crossair pilots told Swiss media that some foreign pilots employed by Crossair pose a safety risk because of an insufficient knowledge of English. These two pilots were fired by Crossair, but were then elected to head the pilots' union, "Crossair Cockpit Personnel (CCP)".  Flight LX498's crew consisted of a captain from Moldova and a copilot from Slovakia. An investigation of the accident later revealed that Pilot Gruzin and copilot Kolesar were only able to communicate with each other in English, but Gruzin's ability to speak English was too limited to hold more than a basic conversation.Abegg, Ernst E.  (Aug. 23, 2002).  Associated Press.  ''Investigators: Pilot in fatal Swiss crash was taking tranquilizers.''
After the crash, both Crossair and CCP, including the pilots who had previously spoken to the media and been fired, publicly stated that the coincidence between the accident and the dispute was very unfortunate and that reports about pilot error being involved in the crash were speculation, although this conclusion was later established to be the probable cause of the accident.
The Saab 340 is widely used in the United States, Australia and elsewhere as a commuter plane.  Prior to the hull loss of Crossair Flight LX498, there had been only four crashes worldwide of the 400 Saab-340 plane types since 1984 and only two of those were hull losses.  The two hull losses were a 1994 KLM Cityhopper crash that killed three in the Netherlands and a 1998 Formosa Airlines crash that killed 13 in Taiwan.
An examination of pilot Pavel Gruzin's body revealed traces of the tranquilizer Phenazepam in his muscle tissue.  Examiners also found an open packet of the Russian-made drug in baggage belonging to Gruzin.
According to the Investigation Report of the Aircraft Accident Investigation Bureau, the accident was attributable to the flight crew losing control of the aircraft for the following reasons:  Pg. 108.
According to this same Investigation Report, the following factors may have contributed to the accident:
The government crash report does not mention cell phone activity as a primary cause of the crash, and instead attributes it to pilot error. However, a separate investigation into the cause of the crash showed that the autopilot system malfunctioned at the same time that a passenger's cell phone on board the plane received an SMS message and another received a call. After this information was made public, a number of countries that had previously been reluctant to do so outlawed cell phones on flights (including Switzerland).