Kajeet was founded by three dads figuring out how cell phones, kids, and parents could work best together. The company name, "kajeet," was derived as an anagram from the names of the founders' children.  Two of the original founders still guide the company today: Ben Weintraub, COO, and Daniel Neal, CEO.  Kajeet's service was designed around providing safety-conscious families affordable cell phones and prepaid plans for their teens, tweens, and young children.
Kajeet was mentioned in a ''Time Magazine'' online article and in the print edition. In both, the author Wendy Cole recounted her daughter's experience during kajeet beta testing.
Kajeet's service considers the safety of its users in many facets.  Mobile downloadable content, such as wallpapers, ring tones, and games are screened to ensure that they are child appropriate.  The free parental controls are accessible by parents logging in to their accounts.  They are organized into five different managers.
The '''Feature Manager''' allows parents to determine whether their child's phone can use certain features.  Parents can disable the use of picture messaging, to prevent problematic issues such as sexting.  Downloadable content can be turned off, to prevent users from purchasing ring tones and games without permission.  Mobile web access can be granted or denied, as well as specific sites, such as those that are not free to access, or social media websites.  Feature manager can also allow child access to the GPS location services, in the event that they should lose their phone.
The '''Time Manager''' allows account holders to control when a kajeet phone can and cannot be used; for example, the phone can be scheduled to not make or receive calls during school hours.  These restrictions can be set up in minimum 30 min blocks, any times and days of the week.
The '''Contact Manager''' provides the ability to create black and white lists for numbers that parents do and do not want coming in or going out on their child's phone.  This contact manager also allows the phone to reach certain numbers at all times, even during scheduled "off" times, for cases of emergency.  Kajeet phones are also allowed to call 911 and kajeet customer care at any time, free of charge.  In addition, all 1-900 numbers are always blocked.
The '''Wallet Manager''' gives parents the opportunity to add dollars to their child's account, whether it is incorporated as a reward system for good behavior, allowing the child to purchase games and ring tones, or as a tool to teach responsibility.  This feature allows parents to add money to their child's account on either a recurring or single time basis.
The '''GPS Phone Locator''' makes use of kajeet's location-based service, which can be activated at any time by the parent, at a low monthly cost.  The GPS locator is one of the more alluring parental feature, as it has proven useful to many families in the cases of children skipping school, losing their phones, having their purses stolen, or even going somewhere forbidden.
Kajeet has won several parenting awards for its unique cell phone service.  This list of awards includes:
Parent Tested, Parent Approved Media Inc., Seal of Approval - 2008
National Parenting Publication Awards, Honors Award Winner - 2009
Mom's Choice Awards, Gold in Gear and Accessories - 2010