Riverwind casino houses 2,295 slot machines and over 50 blackjack and poker tables.. ''Oklahoma Casino Guru''. It also has an off-track betting area. The casino also hosts numerous poker tournaments throughout the year, and "Players Club" members can earn multiple rewards such as entries and invites to members-only events and free play offers.
Riverwind features musical and entertainment acts on many occasions during the year. In addition to the 1500-seat ShowPlace Theatre, the smaller 77-seat River Lounge,located near the northeast entrance, also features regular live musical performances as well as a full service bar. Recent well-known performers at the ShowPlace Theatre include Styx, Kool & the Gang, Bad Company, Rick Springfield, Kenny Rogers, Gladys Knight, Foreigner, The Beach Boys, Hootie and the Blowfish and more.
Along with several full service bars and a food court that features Panda Express, Burger King, Taco Bueno, and Rick's Cafe, Riverwind Casino has two restaurants. Willows Buffet(Oklahoma's largest buffet)  is open for lunch and dinner during the week, and breakfast buffets are available on the weekend.  Additionally. Autographs is endorsed by the three living Oklahoma Heisman Trophy winners   Billy Sims, Steve Owens, and Jason White. Autographs has a personal TV at each booth in the restaurant.
Riverwind Casino hosts unique community events regularly throughout the year such as benefits for The Toby Keith Foundation, Susan G. Komen for the Cure, as well as casting calls for popular TV shows such as Minute to Win It.
Opened in February of 2009, the 100-room Riverwind Hotel is adjoined to the casino by a skybridge. Guest rooms have a contemporary design and include free wireless internet service and large flat screen TVs. In addition, full service in-room dining is available, and the hotel offers four meeting rooms available for rent which can be used for banquets, meetings, or parties.
The property employs 1,300 full and part-time staff members.
Riverwind Casino was designed by The Hnedak Bobo Group of Las Vegas and Memphis. The Chickasaw Nation Division of Commerce has also developed non-gaming projects that have had a significant impact. Chickasaw Nation Division of Commerce built a $1.7 million sewage treatment plant for Goldsby and a $2.1 million water tower for Newcastle. 
On December 1, 2006, the casino hosted Mel Gibson for a prescreening of his movie ''Apocalypto''.