Milad Tower is part of ''The Tehran International Trade and Convention Center''. The project includes the Milad telecommunication tower offering restaurants at the top with panoramic views of Tehran, a five-star hotel, a convention center, a world trade center, and an IT park. The complex seeks to respond to the needs of business in the globalized world of the 21st century by offering facilities combining trade, information, communication, convention and accommodation all in one place.
Furthermore, the complex features a parking area of 27,000 square meters, a large computer and telecommunications unit, a cultural and scientific unit, a commercial transaction center, a temporary showroom for exhibiting products, a specialized library, an exhibition hall, and an administrative unit. Milad Tower has an octagonal base, symbolizing traditional Persian architecture.
Milad Tower, with its height of 435 meters, is the fourth tallest telecommunication tower in the world. Milad Tower consists of five main parts: foundation, transition (lobby) structure, shaft, head structure and antenna mast. The lobby structure consists of six floors. The first three floors consist of 63 trade units, 11 food courts, a cafeteria and a commercial products exhibition, which is supposed to be 260 square meters. 
The first and second floors underground consist of official and installing sections and data center. The ground floor is devoted to the entrance and visitors reception. The shaft is a concrete structure which is 315 meters high from ground floor. In three different sides of it 6 elevators are designed to transfer the visitors to the head of the tower at the speed of 7 meters per second and an emergency staircase exists at the fourth side.
The head of the tower is a steel structure weighing about 25,000 tons and consisting of 12 floors. This structure is the biggest and the tallest multi-story structure among all the telecommunication towers in the world. In the top floors of the tower, there are the fire-immune area as a refuge zone, closed observation deck, cafeteria, public art gallery, open observation deck, a revolving restaurant, telecommunication floors, a VIP restaurant, Mechanical floors, and a sky dome.
The 4-stage antenna mast is 120 meters high. The lower floor of the mast is for the adjustment of public users' telecommunication antennas and the three upper floors are devoted to the antenna of radio and television organization of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
The Client was Yadman Sazeh Co. a representative of Tehran Municipality. The tower has been designed by Dr.M.R.Hafezi, Built By Boland Payeh co.,
The center's main parts are 7 conference salons and an exhibition space with an area of 700 square meters, and its other features are a lobby, a training room, two powder rooms, a radio and television studio, and reception services.
A five-star hotel with  area has been established in order to provide local and global tourists and the guests attending the conventions with accommodation and reception services.
This center with  area has been established with different sections for national and global commercial business transactions, exhibitions for products and services, technical and scientific conventions.