Minami is a 27-year-old female office worker in an advertisement agency. Though she has a boyfriend, she spends the majority of her time working and appears to feel ambivalent about the relationship at best. When the boyfriend finally breaks up with her, it's the push she needs to start a social life with her co-workers. In-office romances soon follow. Much of the story is told through Minami's thoughts, which are full of self-doubt.
The TV series started with Minami falling asleep in a train ride on the way to work, interrupted by the ringing of an unattended cell phone in the empty seat next to her. She reluctantly answers. The young man on the other end claims to be the owner and asks her to return the phone to the next station. They bargain and argue because the man is in a hurry for a part-time job interview, and Minami is on the way to meeting with clients. Minami finally obliges and leaves the phone at the lost and found department. On the way from the station, Minami spots an old TV commercial of a puppy in the rain among the walking legs of people. She takes a picture, but captures a young man in her frame.
Meanwhile, Ishida Yuya calls Imaoka Kyootaro, one of the executives at the advertising agency, to say that he's late and ask for advice. Kyootaro tells him to apologize to his interviewers and smile. At the office, freelance copywriter Watanabe Yuri gives him an orientation. Later, he takes up the duties of the office boy and delivers Minami mail. Fifteen seconds later (this also happens to be the length of a TV commercial), his cell phone rings and he answers it. That's when Minami realized, that it was Yuya's cell phone that Minami had been returning this morning, he was the young man captured while photographing the puppy TV commercial, and that he's the new part-timer at the office. 
Throughout the series, Minami is shown to be an excellent creative director with very methodical approaches to her work. She is increasingly gaining the trust of her boss, Kyootaro, to design strategies and pitch campaigns to clients. This has led to her working many late nights and having barely any social life. Her relationship with other females in the office tends to be tense, as they are often in some kind of rivalry either in terms of career or socially, rather than building genuine friendships based on trust.
Ogiwara Satoshi has strong feelings for Minami and seems to be the perfect candidate for her lover. He is also a hard worker, good looking, well respected, and of similar age and career level as Minami. While Minami is somewhat open to the possibility, she puts up her walls quite high and resists his advances, especially because Satoshi is known for having an affair with the older, married executive Tanaka Mizuho with whom Minami has tense relations to start with. Similarly, at the lower rung of the company's hierarchy, Yuri is growing unrequited feelings for Yuya.
Not being able to afford a place of his own, Yuya lives in with Kyootaro and his 10-year-old daughter Natsuki. Natsuki looks up to Yuya as an older brother, but often shows more maturity than him and asks him questions that make him think. Having divorced parents and a mother assigned in Hungary, Natsuki has had to grow up fast. Meanwhile, Yuya indulges his new living arrangement at the Imaoka residence by inviting his coworkers for a party while Kyootaro and Natsuki are out for the evening. In the kitchen, Yuya shows off his curry cooking skills and laughs at Minami, who seemed to be a perfect woman before, but turned out to be clueless in the kitchen. The Imaokas return sooner than expected, catch Yuya laughing at Kyootaro's silly photo album, and tell everybody to go home. Fortunately, since Kyootaro and Yuya's late father were good friends, Kyootaro looks at Yuya almost like his own son and forgives him for the incident.
Realizing Yuya's creative potential, Kyootaro assigns Minami to mentor him in the advertising profession. Yuya hasn't been the easiest person to work with because he dropped out of college, gets bored and distracted easily, and wants to have fun all the time. However, he also turns out to be capable of bringing fresh ideas to the table and quite reliable in working them out. The experience of having his superiors trust him to do something that only he can do has helped boosted his confidence, self esteem, and self worth. Yuya calls Minami Nee-san, or "older sister", implying trust and some level of dependence. Secretly, though, Yuya and Minami are falling for each other. They both try to hide their feelings, knowing that people will perceive them as an odd couple and talk; Yuya being much younger than Minami and lagging in education and finances.
Soon, however, Yuya begins to realize that he is not the only one pursuing Minami, and that he must do something before he misses out and regrets. This spurs awkwardness in his relationship with Satoshi, whom he respects and looks up to professionally. Finally, while visiting a client up on the mountains, Yuya and Satoshi have a man to man talk while bathing in the springs. Yuya asks Satoshi if he and Minami are in a relationship; otherwise Yuya intends to pursue her seriously. Satoshi agrees but quietly does not take Yuya's statement seriously, believing that someone at Minami's level had no chance of falling for a 20-year-old wannabe who's constantly underdressed and has no concept of professionalism and future plans.
With a new goal in mind, Yuya gets another part time job taking care of grapevines at a winery that the agency is campaigning for. On site, Minami falls asleep on the table while working on a load of paperwork for the campaign. In the morning, she wakes up to find Yuya already dirtied up, working in the garden. She confronts him and he confesses his love for her. They kiss.
Back in Tokyo, an elated Yuya returns to work with enthusiasm. An opening to hire new employees is being scheduled, so Kyootaro encourages Yuya to apply and Minami happily helps him prepare for the tests. As a token of appreciation, Yuya prepares a lunch bento for Minami, as well as for Kyootaro and Natsuki. At the office, he sneaks up to Minami while she is alone and flirts with her, though she is resistant. He presents her the bento, but upon opening it they find that the bento says, "Enjoy!" which is Kyootaro's catch phrase. Meanwhile at his meeting, Kyootaro finds his bento with pink hearts that says "Love" and instantly closes the lunch box with embarrassment.
Realizing that Yuya has stepped up his game, Satoshi and Yuri conspire to lure Minami and Yuya away from each other. Satoshi applies for a managerial position in a prestigious advertising agency in Beijing, one that Minami has long been interested in working for, and intends to take Minami with her. Yuri resolves to sit in for the recruitment test which Yuya is planning to take, and attempts to lure him away.
Knowing that they have to figure things out, Yuya proposes to visit Minami at her place and talk about where the relationship is heading. However, on Minami's way home, she is stopped by Yuri, who insists that they urgently need to talk. Yuri tells her that Minami already has every good thing in life a girl could possibly wish for, and in tears Yuri asks Minami if she could give her just one thing: Yuya. In the meantime, a rain drenched Yuya is waiting at Minami's doorstep. Minami returns his call later, telling him that she has an urgent meeting at work, but in fact sitting at a coffee shop to be alone and contemplate.
In the Imaoka residence, Yuya finds that Natsuki has received a letter from her mother saying that her assignment in Hungary will be extended. Natsuki decides to go to Hungary to be with her mother. To make sure that her father won't be lonely when she leaves, Natsuki encourages freelance copywriter Yugi Yoko (whom she has confided in as an adult friend) and Kyootaro to get with each other. Natsuki tells her father that she will be playing at a piano recital on the 18th and wants him to come with Yoko.
Yuya passes his recruitment test, while Yuri fails. Yuya and Minami excitedly celebrate his victory while Yuri wallows alone in sadness, knowing that her chances of being with Yuya is diminishing. Meanwhile, a nerdy colleague at the office comes to cheer up Yuri by giving her a flowerpot that says, "Ganbare, Watanabe Yuri!"
However, a second phase of the recruitment will follow soon, which is an interview with the board of directors. Since Yuya will be needing a suit in order to attend the interview, he asks Satoshi to help him shop for one, and Minami tags along. While Yuya is trying on suits, Satoshi hollers that he is going to Beijing and intending to take Minami with her, and asks to be excused while he discusses matters privately with Minami. Satoshi and Minami leave the shop, and Yuya catches them red handed at the corner of the street while Satoshi proclaims his love to Minami repeatedly. To make things worse, Yuya catches Minami browsing the website of the Beijing agency. Realizing that Yuya is upset, Minami apologizes for Satoshi's awkward proposal, teases Yuya for being jealous, and presents him a silk tie to go with the suit he will wear to the interview.
Yuya spends the evening preparing for the interview with Kyootaro, rehearsing questions and making the impression. As his last question for the evening, Yuya asks Kyootaro why he's letting his daughter go. Kyootaro says that it cannot be helped, so he might as well "send her off with a smile".
At the interview, Yuya initially did well with presenting campaign storyboards and the creative ideas behind them, but lost his grip when the board of directors ask him analytical questions about the advertising agency. The board of directors tell Yuya that he needs more time, and he ultimately fails the interview. 
Meanwhile, Minami also fails her pitch for a watch advertising campaign, although her client agrees to give her time to redesign the campaign and "represen" it. The represen will coincide with Natsuki's recital, and Kyootaro lets his daughter down by telling her that he won't be able to come. To cheer up Natsuki, Kyootaro draws a cartoon of himself smiling with a thumb-up, and the words "Enjoy!" underneath it.
While evaluating Minami's failure, Kyootaro tells her that her logical and methodical approach has made her works too complacent and mechanical, and that she needs to start listening to the product, designing campaigns with more heart. To lift her spirits, Satoshi comes to her and shows her an impressive portfolio of hers that he has compiled. Satoshi tells her that she has so much potential, and that her capabilities would be valuable in Beijing. Minami considers and tells Kyootaro that at this age, this will probably be her last chance of gaining experience abroad. Minami calls Yuya but he diverts the call to his voicemail, where Minami leaves a message suggesting they meet tomorrow over some home cooked curry lunch. She also tells him that he needs more time to mature, which Yuya listened to in tears. 
Yuya calls Satoshi to meet up and admits his defeat. He asks Satoshi to take good care of Minami, bows, and leaves. 
The next morning, the entire office gathered around a handwritten resignation note from Yuya. Kyootaro says that Yuya has cancelled his mobile phone subscription and is returning home to Fukuoka, but his mother is yet to see him come home. On his former desk is the silk tie from Minami.  Minami runs out the office and attempts to find him, but misses and returns to the office in tears. A friend picks up Yuya in the park, apparently Yuya is staying at his place. The friend tells Yuya that he can't wait to visit Yuya in Fukuoka and ride the waves there. Realizing that Yuya had forgotten his surfboard, he sneaks back into the Imaoka residence while Natsuki is watching TV. Natsuki catches him red handed and confronts him about his disappearance, and if this has to do with his failure to win Minami's heart. Yuya tells her that even to loving someone requires qualifications, and since he doesn't meet them for Minami, he might as well "send her off with a smile". Yuya promises Natsuki that he will call Kyootaro once he finds a job back home. 
On the way out, Yuya catches Minami leaving the office, but his attempt to greet her was cut by the millisecond as Satoshi calls her name and asks her to dinner. Over dinner, Satoshi tells Minami that Yuya is running away from her, from the job, and from life, so there's no use waiting for him.
In the office, meetings were being held to redesign the watch campaign. Inspired by the sight of couples telling the time on their watches while returning from chasing Yuya, Minami tells Kyootaro that the English word for "watch" (clock worn on a wrist) happens to also mean "to watch", and that when one watches their watch, their watch watches back at them. Kyotaro approves. Minami goes to her quiet spot in an empty meeting room, and Yuri sees her to congratulate her. Yuri says, "I've been watching Ishida Yuya, but every time I watch him, I catch him watching you, and you watching back at him." Minami ponders over Yuri's words as she leaves, then storms into her team's meeting, telling them that she must make one final change.
On the 18th, Kyootaro attends the "represen" though his colleagues encourage him to leave. When he opens his notes, however, he sees an "Enjoy!" cartoon similar to the one he drew on Natsuki's sheet music, asks to be excused, and requests Minami to take over. Minami began by sharing a story of a special young man who has taught her to be in the moment and made her time warm. She pitches a campaign with pictures of couples enjoying the time together, such as lying down on the grass on a sunny day, or telling the time together, and then pasting over them a transparent clock where the couples become the hands of time. The colleagues and clients were initially uncomfortable with such a personal story, but as they grasped it as a marketing concept from the heart, both sides applauded. 
After the meeting, Minami's colleagues congratulate her. Satoshi privately speaks to Minami, correcting what he told her over dinner, saying that the one running away from love is actually Minami, not Yuya. He reveals that Yuya had met him earlier, asking Satoshi to take good care of Minami. Satoshi points out that out of many beautiful words from the heart Minami is capable of expressing, even ones that make killer advertising campaigns, the most difficult to say is "I love you"; and that she should not leave before at least saying it to Yuya. After Minami leaves, Mizuho confronts Satoshi and tells him that he should have not told Minami about his last meeting with Yuya. Satoshi replies that he only wanted Minami to be happy.
In the meantime, Kyootaro makes it to the recital just in time for Natsuki's turn to perform. He and Yoko stay way past the recital to listen to Natsuki play other songs and cherish the moment before she leaves.
In Fukuoka, Yuya finds a job at a rudimentary advertising workshop run by a humble rural couple who does supermarket posters and billboards. Yuya calls Kyootaro as promised, and Kyootaro tells Yuya that it is time to grow up. Though Yuya's current job is far less prestigious than his job in Tokyo, Yuya works it with a passion, riding a bike to visit prospective clients and offer services, well dressed in a suit, and answering phone calls like a professional businessman. Minami finds him in Fukuoka, just after finished erecting a billboard. She tells him that she loves him. He replies that he is working hard to earn respect and get to a level where he can provide the life that Minami deserves, then he will return for her. They embrace and finally share the long awaited kiss. In the background is a billboard from Minami's watch campaign, with a matching picture of a kissing couple as the hands of the clock.
Back in Tokyo, the agency throws a goodbye party for Satoshi and sends him off as he jumps into a taxi, heading to the airport. A photograph of a smiling Natsuki is on Kyootaro's desk, showing that she has safely arrived in Hungary and is happy to be there. Kyootaro is now in a relationship with Yoko, and Yuri with the nerdy colleague who gave her the flower pot. Yuya shows up downtown sharply dressed in a suit to pick up Minami after work, and they leave walking hand in hand.