The world '''Novaria''' is part of is a parallel world to Earth, a plane of existence related to ours in that ours constitutes its afterlife. This unique conceit makes it a sort of reverse-Bangsian fantasy, or rather makes our world ''its'' Bangsian fantasy. Mankind shares this world with other intelligent beings, like the '''serpent people''' of Beraoti, the '''beast-men''' of Komilakh, and the '''silvans''' of the mountain forests. The fauna is largely that of Earth's Ice Age, while the vegetation is similar to that of present-day Earth. 
In Novaria's world, the supernatural element is dominant. Magic works, though in a strictly logical fashion that often leaves its practitioners dissatisfied. '''Gods''' are real and strongly influence mortal affairs, communicating with their worshipers through dreams. '''Demons''' can, and often are, summoned from other planes of existence, which Novarians number in relation to their own (which to them is the '''Prime Plane''').
The two western continents where most of the series' events take place span the world's climatic zones from the arctic to the tropics. They are bounded by the '''Western Ocean''' to the west and the '''Eastern Ocean''' to the east.
The northernmost of these continents is largely desolate, consisting primarily of the steppe country of '''Shven''', inhabited by nomads patterned after the Mongols, with the pirate isles of '''Algarth''' off its western coast and the land of '''Hroth''' to the north. It is joined to the southern continent at the southwest end by the broad isthmus of '''Novaria''', but otherwise separated from it by the Mediterranean-like inland seas known as the '''Inner Sea''' and the '''Sea of Sikhon'''.
The more civilized southern continent contains, from west to east, the empire of '''Penembei''', the desert of '''Fedirun''', home to Beduin-like nomads, the tropical realm of '''Mulvan''', and the jungles of '''Komilakh''', inhabited by beast men; other lands, notably '''Beraoti''', lie further south of these. The principal powers are Penembei and Mulvan. Penembei is modeled on Sumerian Mesopotamia, Ptolemaic Egypt, and the Byzantine Empire; authority there is shared between a King and a High Priestess, with considerable influence also exercised by two mutually-antagonistic sporting-political factions in the capital of '''Iraz''', similar to those that tore Byzantium apart in the Nika riots. '''Mulvan''' is a caste-bound empire combining features of India, China and Persia. In Novaria there are small bands of wandering Mulvanians, who act as entertainers and fortune-tellers and who are plainly modeled on Gypsies.
East of the western continents across the Eastern Ocean are the archipelagos known as the '''Peppercorns''', '''Salimor''', and '''Gwoling'''. The Salimor islands comprise a monarchy mingling elements of Japan and the Philippines. Beyond the islands is an eastern continent that contains the great empire of '''Kuromon''', based on China and Japan, and another nomad-inhabited steppe belt. West of the western continents across the Western Ocean is the country of the cannibal '''Paaluan''' sea raiders; as these are also stated (in ''The Honorable Barbarian'') to be a threat in the Eastern Ocean, there is evidently a navigable sea passage around either the main Novarian continent or the eastern continent, or both.
Novaria itself, as noted above, is a broad isthmus joining the two continental masses to the north and the south. (De Camp oddly yet consistently refers to it as a peninsula, though it is plainly an isthmus in both his maps and descriptions.) Novaria is separated from the northern continent by the high '''Ellorna Mountains''' and from the southern by the great '''Logram Mountains'''. On its other sides it drains into the Western Ocean and the Inner Sea, which communicates with the Eastern Ocean via the smaller Sea of Sikhon. 
Culturally Novaria bears resemblances to the eras of both Classical Greece and late Medieval Europe (Italy in particular), especially in conveying the vivid life of a cluster of city states sharing a common language and culture, though widely different in political regime and often at war with each other.
The twelve city-states Novaria is split into are ruled under a wide variety of competing governmental systems, some of them unique. Several of these are visited and their contemporary situations shown during the progress of the stories; the general history of the region is recounted from a Kortolian perspective by Jorian, the series's main protagonist, in a number of folktales he relates in the course of his adventures. The Twelve Cities and their governments (as far as these were revealed) are as follows:
The series incidentally explores various pros and cons of different modes of governance as the action moves through Novaria and various other countries. Most of the stories have satirical themes     e.g., of academic conferences (the magicians' conclave, which ends ''The Goblin Tower''); of Monotheistic religion (the toad-god Grogolor, a minor deity in other places but the supreme god of the universe in theocratic Tarxia); of modern poetry (Jorian's tale of a king in his native Kortoli refusing to grant an award to a poem composed of randomly chosen words).
Two other tales are set earlier in Novaria's history; "The Emperor's Fan," which illustrates the perils of a magical artifact, and ''The Fallible Fiend'', a satire told the point of view of the demon '''Zdim''', who is condemned to service in the perplexing world of humans. A final story, ''The Honorable Barbarian'', is a sequel to the Jorian sequence, relating the adventures of his younger brother '''Kerin''' in the far east. 
According to de Camp's friend and fellow writer Darrell Schweitzer, De Camp wrote one additional Novarian novel, which has "a quasi-Polynesian setting."Darrell Schweitzer, message on Yahoo Discussion Group d_for_de_Camp, April 28, 2007.  http://groups.yahoo.com/group/d_for_de_Camp/message/43  Accessed 6/22/07. It was reportedly de Camp's last novel, represented a noticeable falling-off in quality from his better work, and was considered unpublishable. Its working title was ''The Sedulous Sprite''.Darrell Schweitzer, message on Yahoo Discussion Group d_for_de_Camp, June 18, 2007.  http://groups.yahoo.com/group/d_for_de_Camp/message/231  Accessed 6/22/07. It could well be a satirical tale with a non-human protagonist like ''The Fallible Fiend'', as its title suggests it might focus on '''Belinka''', a duty-obsessed fairy and major supporting character from ''The Honorable Barbarian''.