The stadium was to have been be part of a retail park complex which has been planned by Tesco and Knowsley Council. The stadium would have cost Everton Football Club   78million to build, and supermarket giants Tesco's involvement would have provided   52million of 'value'. The overall stadium value was reported as a minimum of   130million up to   150million. It was not been revealed how Tesco's involvement would have benefited Everton FC because of "confidentiality issues" and no details on costing was given at the Public Inquiry which was called to see whether the project could go ahead.
Tesco purchased the existing town centre stores from Development Securities for   65m following DevSec's decision to withdraw their planning application for the site. Tesco also purchased an adjoining piece of land south of Cherryfield Drive for   12million from Knowsley Council. Tesco intend to reroute the River Alt, relocate the wildlife living there and remove the woodland from the site to make it viable for the stadium.
The   52million cross-subsidy was sarcastically described as a "miracle of modern economics" by Liverpool City Council's barrister Stephen Sauvain. He told planning inspector Wendy Burden: "Tesco   s expert doesn   t think the money is coming from Tesco and Ms Ramsey doesn   t think it   s coming from Knowsley, so it   s a miracle of modern economics, because nobody is prepared to tell you what the situation really is."
Everton director Robert Earl had previously described Tesco's contribution as "manna from heaven" and a "non reimbursable cheque" in the Liverpool Echo.
Other stadiums which have been built with retail enablers include Parc y Scarlets (Llanelli), McDiarmid Park (Perth), St. Mirren Park (Paisley), Stadium MK (Milton Keynes), Liberty Stadium (Swansea), Ricoh Arena (Coventry) and Halliwell Jones Stadium (Warrington).
In December 2004, Everton again began looking at the possibility of leaving Goodison Park for a new stadium. In 2006, two possibilities of a location for the ground being in Liverpool and another possible location in Kirkby (in the neighbouring borough of Knowsley) were put forward. Everton said at their AGM they have signed an exclusive deal to look at the Kirkby proposal but will not move out of the city without the fans backing. On the February 7, 2007 Everton submitted their initial proposals to Knowsley Council, with a preferred location being next to Knowsley Community College, off Cherryfield Drive in Kirkby.
The Kirkby option included a stadium designed loosely on that of FC Koln's stadium in Germany selected for the World Cup in 2006.  It was part of a development known as 'Destination Kirkby' which was backed by Terry Leahy the CEO of the supermarket chain Tesco and would include a Tesco supermarket, a hotel and a retail park with car parking.
In 1996, Everton FC under Peter Johnson released plans to relocate Everton to a new stadium on the site of Kirkby Golf Course.
A fan-funded organisation was set up by supporters called 'Goodison For Everton' who later commissioned the Architects behind Twickenham's redevelopment for a feasibility report which supports the view that Goodison Park can be redeveloped.
In 2000, Everton released plans for a proposed new 50,000 seat stadium that would form part of the King's Dock development in Liverpool on the Mersey waterfront.
A ballot of supporters at this time found that, of those questioned, 85% would prefer to leave Goodison Park for a new stadium. As part of the proposal, Everton would be granted "preferred bidder" status and would contribute   30m towards the project. However, the club failed to raise the money necessary and were forced to pull out of the project in 2003.
There were rumours that Everton's preference for a new stadium site was Stanley Park, before planning approval was granted to Liverpool F.C.
In 2005, with the announcement that Liverpool were planning a new stadium to replace Anfield, Everton met with the then Sports Minister Richard Caborn, the city council and representatives of Liverpool to discuss the possibility of a ground-share. This proposal was however not greeted with significant enthusiasm by either club, and so Liverpool have continued the project alone.
The ground share idea was reintroduced in 2008 when Liverpool City Council leader Warren Bradley told the local press that he had been working on it behind the scenes. Former CEOs at both clubs (Liverpool's Rick Parry and Everton's Keith Wyness) dismissed the idea as a non-starter.
However, following the rejection of the club's plans by the government and the finaicial problems at both Everton and Liverpool FC, the idea of a groundshare has been raised again.
On 20 July 2007 the proposed stadium plans were produced for the Kirkby option. However prior to this Everton conducted a ballot to decide if it was the best option would be held with eligible voters being current season ticket holders, individuals who have had a season ticket in the last three years, adult Evertonia members and shareholders. Complimentary season ticket holders were not eligible to vote.
On Goodison Park's 115th anniversary, August 24, 2007 the result was announced.
As a result Everton will continue to negotiate plans with Tesco and Knowsley Borough Council. An application was submitted to Knowsley Council by the club and Tesco on January 2, 2008.
On the 9th June 2008, Knowsley Council approved of the plans with 20 councillors voting in favour and 1 against. Keith Wyness, the club's CEO said:
On the 6th August 2008, the project was called in by the Government. In a statement by the club, Everton were said to be "disappointed by the decision."''.
The outcome of the Public Inquiry will announced some time before November 27, 2009.
These are approximate for Planning Statement purposes and include general spectators, hospitality, directors, disabled, press and media but exclude players.
Everton's financial advisors (Deloitte) have revealed that "the annual potential financial benefit to the club of the new stadium is of the order of   6m" Deloitte also suggested that Everton's ability to raise over   80m for the stadium was "questionable".
The stadium could be ready for the beginning of the 2012/13 football season if planning permission is granted; originally it was expected to be ready for 2010/11.
Everton are relying on selling Bellefield, Goodison Park and stadium naming rights to fund the stadium build. The sale of Bellefield was delayed when the UK Government upheld Liverpool City Council's decision to reject a planning application to build 70+ houses on the land.
There is a chance that the stadium would be used for the England's bid for the 2018 World Cup. FIFA rules dictate that only one city can have two host stadia, and no other city can have more than one. The proposed stadium is part of Liverpool's bid. It is not known whether the plans meet FIFA's recommendations.
The rival for the Liverpool host stadium is Liverpool's Stanley Park Stadium. It is thought that should Stanley Park Stadium be built, it would be chosen ahead of the Kirkby Project should Liverpool's host city bid accepted. At Liverpool's host city bid launch in the Liverpool Echo Arena, Knowsley Council representatives and Everton's managerial and playing staff failed to attend the event. Chris Bascombe of the News of the World suggested that this was because Everton felt let down by the decision to reject planning application for Bellefield.
The site for proposed stadium is 4 miles from Goodison Park in the suburb of Kirkby, population 42,000. Fans are divided on whether Everton should relocate. The most common reason given by those who do not wish for the club to relocate is that Kirkby is outside of Liverpool and in the neighbouring borough of Knowsley. Alternatively, it is perceived by some that Liverpool's city boundaries are outdated and that the next boundary revision should see South Sefton and Knowsley incorporated into Liverpool.
The stadium was praised as being the "best served transportation wise of any stadium in the north west if not the UK" by Keith Wyness. Steer Davies Gleave, the company responsible for the transport arrangements at major stadiums in the country (notably Wembley Stadium and Emirates Stadium), later suggested the phrasing by Wyness used was inaccurate and "comprehensive" would be a more fitting description.
The site is located adjacent to the M57 and A580 East Lancashire Road with the M58 close by. These major roads link to the main north west motorways of the M6 and the M62. However there are concerns amongst some fans, Merseytravel, and Network Rail that the existing bus network and local railway station will not be able to cope with the demand for a 50,401-capacity stadium.
Whilst the railway station is a short distance away from the stadium and has a direct access to Liverpool, Wigan and Manchester city centres, it only has one platform and there are no current plans to add another. The costs of adding a second platform and a second rail track over the nearby motorway are prohibitively expensive. Three trains currently leave the station per hour in all directions; however Merseytravel have agreed that extra Liverpool services will be implemented on a match day, meaning up to five six-carriage trains will be used.
The club are also paying for an additional 170 or more bus services to take fans to and from the stadium before and after each game. Tesco have pledged to build a 30-bay bus station on the site of nearby Kirkby athletic stadium should planning permission be granted. The bus station will be one of the largest and busiest in Merseyside. It is expected to process upwards of 16,000 fans on a match day.
Opinion is divided between both Everton supporters and Kirkby residents on the project. Some believe that the associated traffic problems may bring the town centre to a stand-still, whilst many others believe the stadium will be a catalyst for Kirkby's regeneration.
At an open meeting for Evertonians on the 10th March, 2007 a movement named '''Keep Everton In Our City''' (KEIOC) was inaugurated, with the stated aim of preventing Everton Football Club moving to a site that they did not feel was adequate for a Premier league football club for varying reasons.
Liverpool Council Leader, Liberal Democrat Warren Bradley, was in attendance and stated that the City Council have a strong desire to keep Everton Football Club within the city. He and Joe Anderson, leader of the opposition Labour group, later accused the previous council of 'shame' in not doing enough to keep Everton within the city boundaries.
Former Everton players have backed the KEIOC movement including ex-Everton fans favourite Duncan Ferguson and  Tony Kay.Everton manager David Moyes was photographed with fan campaign group Keep Everton In Our City during a pre-season tour in the United States. A club official said '"He was not aware of the wording on the banner when the photograph was taken.'".
Keep Everton In Our City went on to voice their concerns over the stadium proposal at the Public Inquiry.
Everton chairman Bill Kenwright has announced that Everton FC are looking to sell naming rights for the proposed new stadium.
The Club's press officer Ian Ross said that the club could obtain up to   6million per annum for the naming rights.
He said: ''"We are currently in the throes of finding the best naming rights deal. That has involved meeting some of the biggest companies in the world."''
Earlier Robert Elstone, the club's then deputy Chief Executive Officer had said the figure would be closer to   4.5million per annum.
Elstone also said: 'We are known as the people's club and so we are trying to live up to that. We're looking for a brand that fits with the consumers, who are typically 18-35 year old males.' Elstone said the club is looking to secure a 15-year deal and that the brand could be the same company that sponsors the club's shirt as is the case with Bolton and Reebok, and Arsenal and Emirates.
The club appointed Anschutz Entertainment Group (AEG) to find a company willing to purchase the stadium naming rights. Two Liverpool based companies Ampersand Communications and Mocha were commissioned to create a DVD and interactive pop-up book. Everton gave 500 DVDs and DVD players to prospective partners.
Robert Elstone revealed he had been in talks with Japanese company.
In March 2008, a government body, the Commission for Architecture and the Built Environment issued a report that stated:
It was also described as "at best, a lost opportunity".
A number of local authorities objected to the scheme including Liverpool City Council, Sefton Council, West Lancashire Council and St Helens Council as they felt that the accompanying retail park would have a detrimental effect to towns in their area. The Liverpool City Council leader Warren Bradley referred to the Everton's proposed stadium in Kirkby as "a cow shed in a small town".
Joe Anderson responded angrily to the suggestion that he was putting football before his civic duty and responded  ''"Let me be clear to both EFC and Knowsley Council, you will not silence me on speaking out and representing what I believe to be in the best interests of the people of Liverpool, that is what I am elected to do."'' 
The Duke of Westminster's company Grosvenor and developers St. Modwen Properties lodged an objection. Grosvenor argued that the development may have an adverse affect on Liverpool city centre (but not their own Liverpool One project) and St. Modwen stated that nearby Skelmersdale would suffer if the development went ahead.
Liverpool City Council representatives Cushman and Wakefield suggested that Everton are attempting to receive state aid as they will not fund their share of the stadium from retail enabling as Everton originally stated.
They suggested that it would be funded from land value increases as a result of planning permission being given for a retail park being given on what is currently public land:
Knowsley Council announced that they are looking to brand itself as the 'home' of Everton FC, to help boost the national profile of Knowsley.
The council currently does this on the M57 motorway with hoardings advertising the borough as home of QVC. They also intend to move Everton's charity 'Everton in the community' and BBL Basketball Team Everton Tigers to Knowsley.
Former Everton Chief Executive, Keith Wyness met with Liverpool City Council to discuss an alternative site within the city in the Everton district adjacent to Scotland Road on land known as the 'loop' next to the Wallasey Tunnel. However he dismissed it as he did not believe it would have the potential for a 75,000 capacity stadium.
Everton fans voted to move to Kirkby in a ballot and Scotland Road site plans were put on hiatus.
Knowsley Council will be the stadium operators and they will directly negotiate the sub-lease terms with Everton. Keith Wyness, the club's CEO has stated Everton will pay a "peppercorn rent" but has not given an exact sum. Tesco will sign a 999 year lease for the land from Knowsley Council and Everton FC will sub-lease from supermarket giants Tesco.
On November 25, 2009  Everton's plans to build a new stadium in Kirkby were rejected by the government. They are now exploring other options as well as working to fix the problems found in the Kirkby proposal. A shared stadium with rival Liverpool is also an option.
Liverpool City Council Regeneration and Transport Select Committee meeting on 10 February 2011, proposes to open the eastern section of the Liverpool Outer Loop line from Hunts Cross to Walton using "Liverpool Football Club and Everton Football Club as priorities, as economic enablers of the project".  This proposal would place both football clubs on a rapid-transit Merseyrail line circling the city giving high throughput, fast transport access. This would entail Liverpool FC abandoning the relocation plans from their Anfield ground to the planned nearby Stanley Park Stadium.