Computer Aid has provided over 175,000 high-quality, professionally refurbished, computers to educational institutions 
Computer Aid shipped its 100,000th computer in February 2008, sending PCs to more than 100 countries from its workshop and offices in North London.
Computer Aid has offices in London and Nairobi,Kenya with a dedicated team of 25 staff and 50 volunteers composed of techies, development professionals, geeks, fundraisers and linguists. At the Africa HQ in Nairobi 
Computer Aid has a number of experienced Programme Officers who work with educational institutions 
Computer Aid has a Board of Trustees that meet bi-monthly to provide strategic direction and fiduciary oversight.
Professor Denis Goldberg is Computer Aid's Honary Patron.
Computer Aid offers a decommissioning service to UK companies, government departments and universities that are upgrading their computer systems - donated PCs are data-wiped, refurbished and tested. Non profit organisations in the developing world can apply for refurbished computers and are charged a handling fee of   42 plus shipping.
Computer Aid offers a complete service to UK companies and organisations replacing their hardware. They are experts in end-of life IT asset management which includes data destruction, computer refurbishment, reuse, and recycling. Donating IT equipment to Computer Aid guarantees compliance with all UK legislation, including the WEEE Directive, Data Protection Act and Environment Act. Computer Aid donors include Dfid, Sainsbury's, Coca-Cola, Diageo, Orange, Virgin, Betfair, Pepsico, Investec, WWF, Christian Aid, BBC Worldwide and Ofcom.
Computer Aid supports a telemedicine project in partnership with African Medical and Research Foundation (AMREF). This project has equipped over 40 rural hospitals in Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda with digital cameras, computers, printers and scanners and provides training and technical support. The project enables doctors and nurses in remote rural areas 
Computer Aid, in partnership with Sightsavers International, has provided PCs installed with  for the blind and partially sighted in more than 20 different countries.
In Cameroon, Computer Aid is working with several not-for-profit organisations to provide PCs in secondary schools and community based organizations.  These include organizations like the British Council and Education Information Services International (EISERVI).
In Rwanda, Computer Aid has worked with the Kigali Institute of Education, The Ministry of Health and the Rwanda Information Technology Authority (RITA) in providing PCs to schools, health centers and tele centers country wide.
In Burundi, Computer Aid is working with La Fondation Buntu to provide PCs to widows and orphans who were victims of the war.  Computer Aid PCs are currently being used in various secondary schools in Burundi, both in Bujumbura and in the provinces.
In Zambia, Computer Aid has sent PCs to secondary schools through national distribution programmes supported by the national government and local NGOs.  
In Zimbabwe, Computer Aid has sent PCs to universities, tertiary institutions and the national consortium of libraries. Computer Aid is also working to establish relationships with Non Governmental Organizations (NGOs) working to promote development in Zimbabwe. 
In Malawi, Computer Aid enjoys a strong partnership with the Council for Non Governmental Organizations in Malawi (CONGOMA) 
Computer Aid has also sent PCs to Swaziland, South Africa, Namibia, Lesotho, and Botswana. 
In Eritrea Computer Aid is working with the British Council to provide PCs in public and school libraries. 
Ethiopia as a land-locked country has also not been left behind. Computer Aid works with not for profit organization such as , Ethiopia Knowledge and Technology Transfer Society (EKTTS), Christian Relief Development Association (CRDA). Over 6,000 PCs have been provided to Ethiopian in schools, tertiary institutions and other not for profit organization. New relationships have also been established with diaspora organisations such as Prospect Ethiopa, who are work directly with various government capacity building bureaus to ensure that they receive our PCs 
In Liberia, Computer Aid is working with Stella Maris Polytechnic to provide computers to institutions of higher learning and NGOs.
Computer Aid not only provide computers to organisations in Africa but also in Asia, in Eastern Europe in the Middle East and in Latin America. To give a few examples; in Colombia Computer Aid works with the International Organisation of Migration (IOM) to ensure that internally displaced children received the education they deserve to be better prepared for a brighter future. In Ecuador several hundred computers were donated to a Fair Trade Banana Producers to improve the day to day running of the fair trade banana enterprise and its trade unions. In Venezuela Computer Aid provided PCs to an indigenous solar powered school in the middle of the Amazonian jungle.
Power supply problems in rural areas of developing countries make it sensible to use the most power-efficient options. 
Computer Aid has asked ZDNET to survey the available choices for low-power computing. The initial survey has been 
As part of its commitment to removing the barriers to ICT access in developing countries, Computer Aid International has also developed a portable solar powered cyber cafe to offer a cost-effective and environmentally sustainable solution to getting rural communities online.  The solar powered cyber cafe can be shipped as a complete sea container and contains a fully functional cyber cafe, comprising a thin client network of eight monitors running off a standard P4 acting as a server.  Solar panels are fitted to power the container and a thin client network was adopted because solar panels are prohibitively expensive if using standard desktops.  The idea was developed in conjunction with Computer Aid partners in Zambia who have already used the containers to dramatically reduce the cost of internet and power access by sharing connectivity and harnessing the sun   s rays.
This year, the UK alone is expected to decommission over two million Pentium 4 PCs 
By donating their PCs to Computer Aid companies are able to fulfil their data protection and environmental compliance