The Avala Boys are the supporters group of the Bonnyrigg White Eagles Football Club (formerly known as FK Avala and still the name associated with the club) and were known to be first established in 1988.
The 1988 season was a huge one for FK Avala as they gained promotion to the top league in NSW and with this the reputation of the Avala Boys grew.
Situated on the North Bank of the Bonnyrigg Sports Centre (then the Bonnyrigg Serbian Centre), the Avala Boys would create fantastic choreography and support for their beloved football club. On one instance, the match against the Belconnen Blue Devils in 2002 was delayed as the fans lit over 40 flares to celebrate the return of the "Champions".
In the early days of the Avala Boys, the North Bank of the Serbian Centre was a hill and the fans were reknowned for getting "upclose" with opposition players which made the Serbian Centre the toughest ground in the land to come to and grab a point.
After a few lean years with the NSW State League becoming stale, the Avala Boys resurfaced in 2000 as the standard of the league grew. This was a fantastic year for the team and one of the most memorable for the fans as every game was filled with choreography and tifo support.
That year, the Bonnyrigg White Eagles won the championship and the Avala Boys were thanked personally by all players for their fantastic support.
The Avala Boys are also known for their strong ties with the worlds most famous supporter group the Delije of Red Star Belgrade. The Avala Boys who are also referred to Delije Sydney have travelled on numerous occasions to Serbia to support Red Star Belgrade, and in 2001 their dreams came true when Red Star Belgrade travelled to the Serbian Centre to face their club the Bonnyrigg White Eagles.
The Serbian Centre was jam packed, with the Avala Boys situated in the North Bank with some great choreography mixed with flares and banners of support.
They then followed Red Star to the game against Marconi Fairfield which resulted in a number of the fans being ejected after tussles with the police and security.
Kaitlin Jaffe is currently attending UC Berkeley in California.  Her interests include fishing, bowling, watching The Office on NBC, and interpretive dance.  She can benchpress roughly 8 oz. which is not even close to comparable to Joseph Dizon's ability to benchpress 9 oz.   
Department of Water and Power
Dizon, Joseph M.
GAP, Inc.
UC Berkeley
Justin Berdell is a bounty hunter from China. 
SOMA are a 3 piece political/alternative/metal band that formed in the northern suburbs of Perth, Western Australia in january 2006. Members of the band are Laurie Gollan: guitars and vocals, Clint Gatter: drums and Scott Paterson: Bass and Vocals. Laurie and Clint had played in bands together since 2001 but always had bass player issues and in june 2004 decided to go there seperate musical ways. Laurie met Scott in the summer of 2004/2005 and started writing material without a drummer meanwhile, Clint played with several bands but nothting ever became of them due to many reasons. In November 2005 Laurie and Clint re-united and Clint added drums to the music Laurie and Scott had writen earlier that year completing the line-up. After a rocky start due to Clint's commitment to other bands, Clint quit all other musical projects to focus on Soma full time. They recorded a short EP in april 2006 which they recorded live and all first take! Hoping to release there first album/EP in 2007, things are looking good for Soma. With such a strong politcal message and not a moment to soon, They want people to realise they are not slaves to this government. And now in a time where greed, vanity, poverty and blind obedience seem to rule this world, Now is the time people need to open there eyes and change it. Soma have.
Mihin Lanka is a proposed international airline in Sri Lanka. It is a fully Sri Lankan government owned enterprise and is named after the Sri Lankan president Mahinda Rajapakse. The hub will probably be the newly developed international airport in Weeravila. 
As of December 2006, the destinations of the new airline are not published.
Her work (literary and artistic) has been published in ''Skaald'', Alternative Press (music magazine), ''Valhalla''.
She has a very long resume.  She has been in about 20 plays (both musical and non-musical), two short films, and has sung for the likes of Senator Max Clevland and the Atlanta Braves.
In 2006, she was chairman of an effort to build wells in the disease-ridden country of Malawi through Watering Malawi. She aspires in the future to make a difference in the world. 
Alternative Press (music magazine) issue #221
Kevin Lyons is a professional trumpet player, originally from Clinton, MS.  Played in the pit for Attache Show Choir (whose alums include Lance Bass of Nsync, Merideth Edwards (country music singer,  Mandy Ashford (musician and model) and Keith Carlock (professional drummer). Currently resides in Atlanta Georgia.
Lally was born in South Boston in 1934 and received a degree in electrical engineering. He moved to California and worked with Krafft Ehricke at Convair Astronautice in San Diego. He published papers for the American Rocket Society related to manned spacecraft missions to planets. 
After having published technical papers related to space travel he was sought after by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) of NASA's Caltech. He joined the laboratory and continued to publish.
Lally was a member of the initial American Rocket Society Navigation and Guidance Committee along with C. Stark Draper of MIT and two Scientists from the Werner von Braun team of German scientists.
In 1961 while at JPL he wrote "Mosaic Guidance for Intreplanetary Travel" in which he proposed a concept to provide all-optical onboard guidance for manned planetary missions in particulat to Mars. The concept used a mosaic of detectors that would continually photograph stars and planets while in the trajectory toward Mars. Rather than the typical inertial and radio tracking guidance, this concept used recorded information from a mosaic image optical sensor in camera form that converted the optical signals from analogue to the digital domain. 
This concept later was considered the first design of a digital still camera and the "mosaic detectors" were later refered to as "pixels" in 1965 by another JPL scientist.
Lally later used this guidance and navigation concept in another American Rocket Society paper titled "To Spin or Not to Spin" in which two major portions of a manned planetary spacecraft on the 9 month trajectory to Mars would seperate and connected by cables be spun to create artificial gravity to protect astronauts from long term weightlessness.The mosaic guidance optical system was located at the center of rotation and provided the guidance and navigation information.
More to come.....
Used the two papers for reference.
East Lake High School is part of the Pinellas County School District in Tarpon Springs, Florida. It was built in 1986.
Charles Bishop, the teenage pilot who crashed a stolen Cesna 172 into downtown Tampa's Bank of American building on January 5, 2002, was a freshman at East Lake High School at the time of the crash.
Leigh Moody, Evening anchor on Tampa's 24-hour cable news channel, Bay News 9, graduated from East Lake High School.
The East Lake High School robotics team was featured on ABC's Extreme Makeover: Home Edition season 2, episode 21. The team assisted in building a robotics-themed bedroom for the Dolan family of St. Petersburg.
Caritor is a 3700 people strong organization with a culturally and geographically diverse population spread across four different continents. Employees own a significant portion of the company resulting in a strong sense of ownership for the success of customers and for Caritor.
Caritor builds customized, adaptive and reusable software solutions for its customers by leveraging their competencies in:
Caritor's consulting and outsourcing services formulate strategy, executes processes and manages technology to deliver top line growth and/or operational cost benefits. They have state-of-the-art development centres in India backed by fail-safe communications infrastructure connecting customers in real-time.
With mature and well-tested delivery processes, Caritor offers solutions to its customers through an onsite-offshore model. Cairtor's people, processes and technology are assessed at CMMI Level 5, SEI CMM Level 5, pCMM Level 5 and ISO 9001:2002
Caritor is financially solid with US $113M in revenues and profitable while maintaining a healthy balance sheet with significant cash reserves and zero debt. 
Caritor brings superior advantage to its customers' businesses by leveraging its unique strengths: values-based leadership, total customer partnership   , closer-to-customer presence of senior management, industry & domain expertise, best-in-class methodologies, industry-standard products, and continual innovation. 
Caritor leverages these strengths to enable its customers gain:
Caritor is a 3700 people strong organization with a culturally and geographically diverse population spread across four different continents. Employees own a significant portion of the company resulting in a strong sense of ownership for the success of customers and for Caritor.
Caritor builds customized, adaptive and reusable software solutions for its customers by leveraging their competencies in:
Caritor's consulting and outsourcing services formulate strategy, executes processes and manages technology to deliver top line growth and/or operational cost benefits. They have state-of-the-art development centres in India backed by fail-safe communications infrastructure connecting customers in real-time.
With mature and well-tested delivery processes, Caritor offers solutions to its customers through an onsite-offshore model. Cairtor's people, processes and technology are assessed at CMMI Level 5, SEI CMM Level 5, pCMM Level 5 and ISO 9001:2002
Caritor is financially solid with US $113M in revenues and profitable while maintaining a healthy balance sheet with significant cash reserves and zero debt. 
Caritor brings superior advantage to its customers' businesses by leveraging its unique strengths: values-based leadership, total customer partnership   , closer-to-customer presence of senior management, industry & domain expertise, best-in-class methodologies, industry-standard products, and continual innovation. 
Caritor leverages these strengths to enable its customers gain:
Yahoo! Xtra is a joint-venture company between Telecom New Zealand and Yahoo!7 (itself a joint venture between Yahoo! Inc and Channel Seven Network). The deal was signed on December 13, 2006.
Websites resulting from the joint venture are due to go live in early March, replacing the existing XtraMSN site (the result of a previous joint venture between Telecom New Zealand and MicroSoft.
From the Yahoo! Inc. perspective, Yahoo! Xtra will fill a 'Yahoo! New Zealand' role much as Yahoo!7 fills a 'Yahoo! Australia' role.
Porcupine has three key features:
Are a four-piece indie band from Brighton that have just returned from Italy after supporting the also Brighton-based band 'The Kooks'. 
In 1695 he became the leading bass singer in the company with which Henry Purcell worked, playing roles such as the magician Ismeron in ''The Indian Queen'', where he sang the major aria "Ye twice ten hundred deities". After Purcell's death he continued to work for composers Daniel Purcell and Jeremiah Clarke. Leveridge also began to compose himself, and in February 1699 all three provided music for ''The Island Princess'', in which Leveridge's performance was widely acclaimed. 
Two books of his songs were published in 1697 and 1699, and his popular theatre songs also appeared as single sheet music. After a spell in Dublin he returned to London in 1702 for a revival of ''The Island Princess'' and a new production of ''Macbeth'' billed as "with music Vocal and Instrumental, all new Composed by Mr Leveridge". He sang the role of Hecate in this work for nearly 50 years, and the music remained popular for more than a century after his death. 
Leveridge became involved in the new trend for operas in the Italian style from 1705. He then began a short association with Handel in 1713 to 1714, and acted in the first performances of ''Il pastor fido'' and ''Teseo'' and played Argantes in a revival of ''Rinaldo''. Later in his career, in 1731, he played the role of Polypheme in the first public performance of ''Acis and Galatea'', and several of Handel's Italian arias were published with English translations by Leveridge.
In 1714 he moved to work at the new theatre at Lincoln's Inn Fields, managed by entrepreneur John Rich. Remaining there for most of his career, he returned to his English repertoire and a new form, the musical afterpiece. These lightweight works were often comic, and in 1716 Leveridge produced his own afterpiece, ''Pyramus and Thisbe''. For this comic parody of Italian opera, he wrote the music, adapting the words from Shakespeare's ''A Midsummer Night's Dream'', and sang the role of Pyramus. 
From the 1720s he was the leading bass at Lincoln's Inn Fields and then at Covent Garden. His repertory exploited his firm and powerful voice, and his tunes often became popular favourites. He composed over 150 songs, and is best known for the patriotic ballad "The Roast Beef of Old England".
In between engagements Leveridge ran a coffee shop in Tavistock Street near Covent Garden, but enjoyed good health and reduced his performances only in the last few seasons before retiring in 1751.
Massimo Maglione is a historian and history teacher that teaches at the The Collegiate Schoolin New York City
He gave proof that made The Collegiate School the oldest operating secondary school in the country. It was once believed to be founded in 1938.
Dr.Massimo Maglione himself
Oatley campus is a school for year 11 and 12's coming from hurstville boys, penshurst girls and peakhurst high.  it has over 1000+ young adults (approx 500 yr 11's and approx 500 yr 12's) and is a very good school.  The teachers are the best!
Vortex Comics was founded in 1981 by Bill Marks, as a follow up to the short lived Miriad Magazine (1980-82).  Titles published by Vortex included Mister X, Yummy Fur, Black Kiss.  The company published the first professinal works of such notable artists as Chester Brown, Ty Templeton, Seth,  Maurice Vellekoop, Ted McKeever, and Fiona Smyth, and early works by Neil Gaiman, Jaime Hernandez, Dave McKeen, Gilbert Hernandez, Nat Gertler and others.
Vortex Comics were the official comic books of NASCAR from 1988 to 1993, Jeff Gordon won the Vortex Comics Rookie of the Year award in 1991.           -->
WIKIPEDIA . I HAVE REFERRED HISTORY OF INDIAN SCULPTURES ON YOUR SITE.WOULD YOU LIKE TO KNOW MORE ? email : ''(snipped)''
The Governor of Mendoza Province is the responsible for the Executive Power in Mendoza. As a Federal Country and a Republic, Argentina is divided in Estates called Provinces, each of them with the same division of Powers folowing the Republican sytem of government. 
The Mendoza Province as a political entity was created in 1820 when the old Province of Cuyo was dismembered into three new Provinces: San Luis, San Juan and Mendoza. Since them more than 80 governors ruled this andean province.
BTEC ITP CREW. Main boys CHRIS CARL LEWIS KYLE MATT EDD GREG
Front Line is a Dublin-based international foundation.  The organization's specific aim is to protect defenders of human rights and to provide them with practical support so that they can continue their work in some of the world   s most dangerous places.Front Line   s work in protecting defenders of human rights.
Front Line's mission is guided by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.  As such the organization is focused on providing urgent action to protect those at risk because of their work.  Front line helps human rights defenders to manage and cope with the risks they face and enables change and improved human rights at a local level by supporting those who peacefully work to protect the rights of their communities.
Front Line History'''
Front Line was founded in Dublin in 2001 with the specific aim of providing tangible support for Human Rights Defenders - people who work non-violently for any or all of the rights enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR). Since that time, the organization has supported human rights defenders in over 90 countries through a highly responsive, fast and flexible program that includes protection, networking, training and access to the mechanisms of the UN and other regional bodies.
Front Line has taken up over 600 cases of human rights defenders at immediate risk and has extended support to human rights defenders (HRDs) in over 100 countries through direct interventions, international advocacy, grant support, and emergency relocation.
Small Grants Program ''''' 
Front Line has disbursed over    300,000 in grant support to more than 200 human rights defenders in need of medical, legal and security assistance.
Front Line works with human rights defenders to deliver regional & international training on the topics of security & protection, capacity-building, IT Security and women human rights defender issues.  Front Line also publishes training packages designed to aid the work of at-risk human rights defenders.
Front line publishes detailed reports of the situation of human rights defenders at risk and has published reports in conjunction with human rights defenders in Brazil, Central Asia, Guatemala, Indonesia, Palestine, Rwanda, Sierra Leone and the USA.
Front Line hosts a bi-annual international meeting designed to promote exchange, provide learning & skill development, and facilitate engagement between human rights defenders and senior-level political and civil leaders.  Each Platform brings together over 100 at-risk human rights defenders from over 70 countries.
Front Line played a key role in lobbying for the EU Guidelines on the Protection of Human Rights Defenders adopted during the Irish Government   s Presidency in June 2004.  The EU Guidelines are a critical element in encouraging EU member states to engage more actively in support of human rights defenders at risk.  Front Line has established a EU office in Brussels to press for more effective implementation. 
Front Line also promotes the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders and in doing so supports the work of the UN Special Representative on Human Rights Defenders.  Front Line lobbies for human rights defender issues at the UN Human Rights Council and at other international for a including the OSCE and the Council of Europe.  
The Frank Jennings Internship provides practical support to the office of the UN Special Representative on human rights Defenders on a rolling basis.  Front Line also has an internship to support the Special Rapporteur on Human Rights Defenders of the African Commission on Human and People   s Rights. 
Each year the Front Line Fellowship brings two human rights defenders to Dublin for study and reflection on how best to strengthen human rights defenders protection in their countries and regions.  
Front Line also hosts an internship in cooperation with Peking University. 
Founder and fmr. Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of Esat Telecom Group plc.; Member of the court of the Bank of Ireland; Director of Digicel Ltd and MediaLab Europe; Chairman of the 2003 Special Olympic Games Organising Committee
Fmr. Director of the Irish Section of Amnesty International from 1988-2000
Secretary General of the Commission Nationale Consultative des Droits de l   Homme de la Republique Francaise; Board member of International Service for Human Rights (Geneva); fmr. director of the French section of Amnesty International; fmr. Secretary General of the 1998 Paris Summit for Human Rights Defenders 
Chief Executive of the Irish Labour Relations Commission
Noeline Blackwell is an Irish-based lawyer specialising in refugee law and practice; Chairperson of the International Human Rights Trust.
Treasury Director; member: Securities Institute
Director of Fundraising for the 2003 Special Olympics World Games; board member of Newstalk 106, the O   Brien foundation and the Digicel Foundation
History of Gaslight Square Saint Louis, Missouri 1953-1972
Gaslight Square was a compact thriving entertainment district that was far more notorious than Bourbon Street at the time. Original music was everywhere and the streets were lined with packed clubs and restaurants., and after hours coffeehouse discussion still remembered in the new millennium.
Founded by the beatniks of the early 1950's, it was a time before orbiting satellites, the Internet, cell phones and mass electronic media. This generation began questioning traditional majority values in art, literature, and political self expression. Like New York's Greenwich Village, a central hub of The Beat Generation, Gaslight Square in St. Louis supported and helped construct this important alternative American scene. Writers Jack Kerouac and Alan Ginsberg and others traveling coast to coast would make that delibrate stop in St. Louis to witness Gaslight Square.
Gaslight Square was one of the coolest and hippest neighborhoods on earth. Many top entertainers such as The Smothers Brothers, Lenny Bruce, Miles Davis, Barbra Streisand, Jackie Mason, Mike Nichols and Elaine May, Woody Allen, Dick Gregory, Jack E. Leonard, and Phyllis Diller, graced the stages of Gaslight Square early in their careers. The area boasted of live jazz, poetry, great food, Irish dancing, and street cars. It would take a half hour to go 2 blocks by car. Gaslight Square was truly a unique hot area of sophisticated entertainment.
Then Gaslight Square died. This focal point synthesized into a phenomenon that burned brightly for just a few years, was then allowed by lack of political will, police protection, and public apathy to fade, to dim, and to die.
Not a trace of Gaslight Square remains today, aside from the website: www.gaslightsquare.org
Two documentary were produced about Gaslight Square within the last several years. 
Track listing:
1. All Night Long 
2. Long Train Runnin' 
3. On Through the night
4. Hold Tight
5. Chinatown
6. Little Queen
8. Dragonfly
9. Never Goin' Home
10. The Hammer
11. Roller
12. Dolphenwulf
13. 'Til the livin' end
14. Ride to Live
15. Ever onward
Track listing:
1. All Night Long 
2. Long Train Runnin' 
3. On Through the night
4. Hold Tight
5. Chinatown
6. Little Queen
8. Dragonfly
9. Never Goin' Home
10. The Hammer
11. Roller
12. Dolphenwulf
13. 'Til the livin' end
14. Ride to Live
15. Ever onward
Marcusball was invented in 2005. When a young lad but the baseball between his Pink finger and Ring Finger and throw it is do some crazy movement.
Mixed High School and Specialist Science College on Manchester Road in Macclesfield, Cheshire, England. Catchment area of Hurdsfield, Bollington and Tytherington (North-East Macclesfield). A recent Ofsted report labelled the school as 'good' in all areas inspected. ()
Ofsted report - link above
Tytherington High School Website - 
Picture of Euglena
Christopher Skene or "da Skene" is a very noteable person from the Edinburgh Area in .
Christopher is a member of  and he is regarded highly from the area where he works.
Christopher has been voted  most good looking police officer in the years 2006 and 2006 and he is hot tip to be voted the same in 2007.
The Baltimore     Washington area is the birth place of a nuber of artist including Duke Ellington, Cab Calloway, Marvin Gaye, Dru Hill, Mya, and Little Mo   . It is also the home of a number of talened artist and musicians who have either sang background or have done a great deal of studio work. Carronne Jones Grant is such an artist.
Like others, Carronne was raised around family members who were musicians, producers, or National Gospel Recording artist. As a child Carronne fell in love with all of the musical creativity artound her and decided to join her family   s church choir.  As she matured mentally and musically, Carronne started to think about pursuing a solo career.
Carronne said    As long as I can remember music has always been a part of my exisistence.   
However, Carronne   s musical career would take a decidedly different route. During and after college Carronne traveled through out the Mid-Atlantic and recorded background vocals or hooks for many of the top producers in the industry. It wasn   t until she competeted in the Rising Star competition sponsored by Vicki Winans that Carronne decided to explore a solo career.
Carronne Jones Grant is listed in the Baltimore Sun and on the Genese Music and Entertainment website.
Scott A. Martin is  an American actor, producer, writer and director from West Virginia who owns and operates one of the only independent film companies in the state.  Born in Princeton, West Virginia, Feb 22, 1967.  Scott has worked on numerous films as an actor including the most recent film starring Dennis Quaid called "Smart People" where he plays the character "Weller".  Scott has worked to promote film in the state of West Virginia having done four films to date in the state with his first film called "Seven To Midnight" being labeled as one of the top ten independent films ever made in West Virginia.  Scott has worked along side of actors John Cusack on High Fidelity and then directed actors such as Stella Parton in his first feature "Seven To Midnight".  Scott is a graduate of Concord University with a degree in Journalism.  
The majority of Vaidikulu belongs to krishna Yajurveda School.  However, there are Rigvedis, Samavedis etc. also.  Some Brahmins had proficiency in several Vedas, e.g., Dvivedi is one who has proficiency in 2 Vedas, Trivedi in 3 vedas and Chaturvedi in 4 vedas and are known by those titles as such.  However, these titles became family names, even though the family members may not know any Veda at all today.  While Niyogis embraced western education, Vaidikulu had shunned Western education and as a consequence many Vaidikulu are poor and not well educated in Western education, contrary to the notion that Brahmins are rich and well educated. 
There are many subcastes in Vaidiki Brahmins as well:
Goldsack, Christopher.
Supermodel, opera singer and proffessor of physics.
Operations and Information Management (OPIM) is business discipline offered at several universities. 
Also referred to as:
Operations Management and Information Systems (OMIS)
Operations Management and Information Systems (OM&IS)
Information, Risk, and Operations Management (IROM) 
Babson College
Georgetown University
Haas School of Business
Marshall School of Business (USC Marshall School of Business)
Mays Business School
Northern Illinois University
Stern School of Business
University of Connecticut School of Business
The University of Scranton 
University of Wisconsin-Madison School of Business
Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania
Operations Management and Information Systems (OMIS)
Operations Management and Information Systems (OM&IS)
Information, Risk, and Operations Management (IROM) 
Ross Keane was born in 1992. He was an only child until his mother and his 2 sisters, paul and john, moved to Albania. He was left with his mother, Kathryn. Kathryn was a vicious man. He used to smash CD's at ross while ross would be talking to his friends. Kathryn also used to throw ross onto the ground and repeatedly jumped on his head. Ross would go into school the next day and his friends would say "What happened Ross?" and Ross would reply "I was playing with my cat". Ross used to get jocked by the teachers in school and the used to stick rulers and pens in him. Ross would then come home to Kathryn and he would beat him.
Ross grew up, with a strange obsession with touching little girls named Kathryn. He would stick rulers inside them and stab them with pens. He would sniff their hair when he was close enough...and then find himself with no teeth left in his mouth. He started reading an auto-biography about Albert Fish and took up his idea's about sticking needles and other things in himself. DJ Patzer made a contribution song to Ross about his troubles, but Ross threw a stereo at him and Ross was in jail for 5 months. Ross did not serve his full 5 years in Jail, but he recorded a song called "Litter tray" and asked DJ patzer to sing it with him. After DJ patzer got his mouth reconstructed, Ross totally forgot about his song about gay-love and moved on to studying the Penis. 
Ross has not been heard from in 2 years. His last major stunt was beating a cat to death and strangeling a young girl with his head phones DJ patzer used while he was on tour. Ross is the best example of someone with ADHD. His father died of throat cancer, so Ross says, and Ross half buried his body in a the ground, 4 graves down from former I.R.A. leader Frank Aikon ( type Frank Aikon in search for more details ). Ross also wrote a cook book while he was in jail called "Mein Kochen". 
Ross also received a letter from his mother, Ryan, 3 months after he escaped from jail. He complained of having back pains while he crawled under the barbed wire. They found his boxer shorts hanging on a stick in the french forest "Bastogne" (type Bastogne in search for more details).
Overall, his life was unsucessfull, a shit career, and a crapo lifestyle.
The End.
Beath Higher Grade School opened its doors in 1910, particularly for pupils hoping to progress to higher education. It was replaced with Beath Senior High School which was closed in 2003 due to subsidence. In 2003, it moved into a brand new school with a new rector.  
Beath high school is associated with primary schools from the Cowdenbeath and Kelty areas.
Dave Budd, a former NBA player, was born on October 28, 1938 in Woodbury, New Jersey. There he grew up and attended Woodbury Junior/Senior High School. By sophomore year, it was evident that basketball was his true calling. Standing at 6'6" and weighing close to 200 pounds, Budd was a man among boys. He possessed technical skills comparable to a point guard and blossomed into a star. He earned two first team All-Colonial Conference selections during his junior and senior years as well as an All-South Jersey selection during senior year. His talent interested many colleges, one of which was Wake Forest University.
After graduating high school in 1956, Budd went on to play for Division I Wake Forest. Due to NCAA rules (circa 1971 and earlier), freshmen in college were not allowed to play varsity basketball. 
When he became an eligible sophomore during the 1957-58 season, he played in 23 games, averaging 15.8 ppg on a 47.5 field goal % as a forward. He also grabbed 8.5 rpg and shot 66.8% from the charity stripe (free throw line). Assists were not yet tracked in college. 
Played in 24 games and averaged 14.6 ppg on 43.2% shooting. Snatched 8.6 rebounds per game and had a 66.8 free throw %.
Played in all 28 games while averaging 10.7 ppg and a career-high 10.0 rpg. Shot 49.7% from the field and 72.7% from the free throw line.
After enjoying success at the college level, Budd was drafted after his senior year by the New York Knicks in 1960. He was the 10th overall selection in the second round (back then there were fewer teams in the league and each round only had eight selections). He was drafted the same year that Oscar Robertson and Jerry West were picked #1 and #2, respectively. Though never an All-Star, Budd did enjoy moderate success while playing at the highest level. One of his claims to fame was that he was one of the five starters for the Knicks that attempted to guard Wilt Chamberlain on the night of his record-setting 100-point performance. He is the only person from Woodbury, NJ to ever play in the NBA.
Originally formed in Las Vegas, Nevada, in 2002, the band have undergone a massive reinvention since their debut full-length Histronics dropped in 2005. "I feel like this record definitely represents the Higher better than the last record," drummer Pat explains about On Fire, which was recorded earlier this year in Beverly Hills with Mike Green (Paramore, The Matches). "With this record we were really able to focus on writing the songs to the best of our ability," he continues. "We found our zone and just went from there, you know?"
Although On Fire's upbeat amalgam of emo, punk and R&B may catch some listener's off guard, there's enough diversity on the album to please everyone from Jawbreaker to Justin Timberlake. The infectious opening single "Insurance?" is a bonafide dance-floor anthem; "Guts" is a guitar-driven rock song that explores the group's darker side; and with its glitchy beat and stuttering synths, Patrick Stump from Fall Out Boy's remix of "Pace Yourself" is guaranteed to get even the most jaded hipster out on the floor.
The Higher have already converted Epitaph founder Brett Gurewitz (who signed the band after seeing them perform just once) as well as fans all over the world   and now it's your turn to get turned onto the Higher. Oh, and if you don't dig it, well, that's cool, too. "There's definitely going to be kids who hate it and there's definitely going to be kids who love it   but I think even those kids who hate it are secretly going to fall asleep listening to it," Tom says about punk purists' potential reaction to On Fire's soul jams. "I just think people should have an open mind and be ready for something different."
Clarence M. Kimball High School is located in Royal Oak Michigan.  It was recently closed and renovated during the Summer of 2005 and reopened as Royal Oak High School.  When the school reopened it had consolidated with Dondaro High School (also in Royal Oak).
Captain Chubism, is an organized religious following that recently accelerated amongst the ranks of Christianity, Pastafarianism, and other Religious Faith's, the following revolves around the illustrious Captain Chubs, and is what one might consider a tribute of sorts to his outstanding greatness Common activities include ritualistic exercises, containing but not limited to Cult-inspired Suicides, and Human Sacrifices, this isn't, however, to be confused with a Satanic following, as Chubs himself disapproves of the activities, and refuses to partake or acknowledge them.
Captain Chubism became increasingly apparent and legitly established at the turn of the millenium, when Captain Chubs's importance to society, and mankind as a whole had become known, originally Captain Chubism was thought of as a branch of Pastafarianism, however as time had progressed, the faith evolved from what might be considered a cult, into the vast, yet wealthy following it currently maintains.
The Organized Documentary of Captain Chubism.
David Roy Pescatore, a Philadelphia-area haircut model from 1983-1986. Went on to graduate from Princeton University with a Bachelor's Degree in English and a Master's and Doctoral Degrees from The London School of Economics. Pescatore wrote to USA Today in regards to Madonna's infamous "Sex" book. The letter was published on October 22, 1992 and touched off a firestorm critical of Madonna's project, putting the Superstar on the defensive for the first time in her career.
Sources-
Doc. Joseph Lattimer-Wandsworth University
Callum Spencer
Waypoint Pizza is an authentic pizza shop located in downtown Tiburon, California. It is famous for having celebrities such as Johhny Mosley, Pam Healy, and other Olympians dine at its 15 large tables. It is also a hotspot for kid's birthdays parties in the Belvedere-Tiburon Region because of its kid-friendly menu and party room. It has been providing nourishment since "people began to love pizza." The restaurant is well-known for its Thai-Chicken Pizza and the daily special soup. The menu also includes the world famous cheese pizza, and has a selection of many other options. This restaurant has been profitable since its opening, due partly to the number of tourists who ride the ferries from San Francisco to down-town Tiburon.
This restaurant is important becuase it provides high-quality natural food to many grocery stores. The brand "Waypoint Pizza" is reconized in Northern California because of all the frozen pizza it sells. Today in many grocery stores companies such as the California Pizza Kitchen face competition. Waypoint has plans to be franchised. 
A jolly old professor, well known for being quite jolly. He enjoys a wurst from time-to-time, and appreciates 'activity-x'.
Duncan Charles Hosie is a community activist for the Tiburon-Belvedere region. He is a member of the Democratic Party for his region, appointed by a Comittee because of his fairly liberal beliefs. He created the ""Hope for Hundreds" Charity that provides food and other resources to those in need in  Darfur Sudan.  He annualy organizes events that sponser the homeless, the terminally ill, and the enviroment. He is the chief organizer of the "Clean up the Coast" campaign for a 2 mile beach. He also prepares food on the weekends for over 50 terminally ill people and drops it off at their houses. He is also a strong supporter of helping the eldderly, and does this by working at senior centers such as The Redwoods in Mill Valley. He was born September 23, 1993.
Duncan is a pianist and has played for the past 7 years. He recently started Percussion too. He is a member of the Mount Tamalpais Concert Band. He plays sometimes for senior centers for the San Francisco/Belvedere region.
Duncan is a straight "A" student. In school he participates on the Student Council and excelles in many other organizations. 
Duncan helps his the members in his community who are in need prosper. He in excelling in organizations such as Humans Rights Watch and has dedicated himself to helping others. He has been awarded the citizenship award 13 times, which is an award dedicated to someone who has gone far and beyond to help their ccommunity.=== Sources ===
Becasue (bi-kaw-zu
The Encyclopedia of Latin Root Words and Adaptations 