The '''Road Policing Unit''' ('''RPU''') is the term for the Highway patrol within the majority of British police forces.
RPUs work with the National Roads Policing Strategy, which has five strands:
RPU officers are responsible for patrolling the main motorways and large roads throughout the territorial police force area. In addition to their general road policing duties, they assist with various operations aimed at improving road safety and are also at the forefront in tackling vehicle crime and the criminal use of the roads network. They are also available to back up other units, as they are constantly roaming an area as part of their high visibility patrolling work.
A sub-unit of the RPU is the Collision Investigation Unit (CIU) or Forensic Collision Investigation and Reconstruction Unit (FCIRU), which exists to manage the follow-up investigations into all fatal and very serious collisions. The specially-trained teams attend the scenes of all such incidents, where, amongst other things, they take numerous measurements of the final layout of the scene and examine vehicles, all in a bid to piece together the cause of the crash.
Breathalysers were introduced in 1967 as a result of the Road Safety Act 1967.
The ProViDa In Car Video System is fitted to both marked and unmarked traffic patrol cars and motorcycles with the aim of improving driver behaviour and road safety. It is used to detect traffic offences and to educate, advise and, if necessary, prosecute offenders.
Components of the system:
Whilst on patrol, a police officer who observes a blatant offence or an example of bad driving can record the incident on tape. Once they have stopped the driver concerned, they can then invite the motorist to sit in the police car, where the incident is replayed. A motorist can request a copy of the video evidence should the matter be dealt with at court.
Depending on the circumstances of the offence, the motorist can then be advised regarding their driving, cautioned or prosecuted, when the video recording can be used in court if necessary.
JAI PROVIDA 2000 is a sophisticated in-car video and speed enforcement system for 24-hour detection of traffic offences and criminal acts. System recordings can be used in court as visual evidence, including reconstruction of events.
VASCAR (Visual Average Speed Computer And Recorder) is a technology for determining the speed of a moving vehicle. It is used by police officers to catch speeding motorists. These devices are mounted on a patrol car's console, allowing the officer easy access to its controls. Many main roads in the UK now have horizontal lines of about two feet in length painted on the carriageway, which allow the VASCAR system to be calibrated.
VASCAR units were first fitted to police vehicles in the mid-1970s.
The Automatic Number Plate Recognition (ANPR) system is housed in a mobile unit. Both colour and infrared cameras are used to capture images of vehicle number plates as they pass by. The index number is read automatically and checked against a number of databases (including DVLA) held on computer.
If a match is made to a vehicle of police interest, the ANPR operator receives an alarm. The operator can then alert other officers to stop the vehicle. The process from reading the number plate to an alarm notification takes less than two seconds.
ANPR technology is available commercially and is being adopted by many businesses as a means of fighting crimes such as petrol station drive-offs and credit card fraud. There are other applications such as improved security in car parks.
Most commonly used vehicles are Volvo V70 T5, Vauxhall Omega, BMW 5 Series and Vauxhall Vectra, frequently in estate variants. BMW X5, Range Rover and Land Rover Discovery, together with the occasional Mercedes-Benz M-Class, Nissan, Toyota or other 4x4s are also commonplace, especially for motorway duties. Large vans such as the Iveco Daily or Mercedes-Benz Sprinter can be seen at major collisions.
These vehicles are fitted with Airwave radio communications system and some with the TRACKER stolen vehicle recovery system.
Equipment carried by vehicles includes;
Traffic officers wear a white-topped patrol cap, or a white-topped bowler for female officers. When traffic departments were first set up the officers were issued with long white coats. The first hi-visibility coats were day-glo orange, but since the late 1970s the preference has been for day-glo saffron yellow. Traffic Officers receive the same training as non-traffic officers in public order duties but are trained to a much higher standard in automobile control.
Most territorial police forces established traffic departments in the early 1950s, although the first was established by the Metropolitan Police Service in 1919, but it was with the opening of the M1 motorway in November 1959 that the need for the police to have a specialist department dedicated to policing the new roads was recognised. The 1960s saw the start of construction of new motorways, so the traffic departments grew. One of the first fatal accidents on the M1 occurred near Newport Pagnell, Buckinghamshire in December 1959.
The Central Motorway Police Group (CMPG) was started in 1990 by a partnership of West Midlands Police and West Mercia Constabulary; they were joined in 2001 by Staffordshire Police and Warwickshire Police of which withdrew in 2007. Each force maintains a separate RPU for non-motorway work.
The North West Motorway Police Group (NWMPG) was started in 2008 after the success of the CMPG. It includes officers from Cheshire Constabulary, Lancashire Constabulary, and Merseyside Police. All three of these forces are under the control of a Regional Control Centre (RCC) which is based in Newton Le Willows. This centre not only controls the radio traffic for NWMPG but also houses the North West Highways Control Centre.
South Wales Police opened a motorway section when the M4 motorway reached its area in 1977. Its traffic department was established by its predecessor, Glamorgan Constabulary, in 1952.
Surrey Police is responsible for the policing of part of the M25, the M23, Hooley to Pease Pottage and the M3 Sunbury to the Hampshire border. From a trio of traffic bases, at Godstone M25 junction 6, Chertsey M25 junction 11 and Burpham near Guildford on the A3. Surrey uses Volvo V70 Estates, Land Rover Discoveries and Range Rovers as its main traffic vehicles, with a variety of other types and unmarked vehicles at their disposal.
GMP is responsible for 281 miles (450.7&nbsp;km) of Motorway, these include:
The RPU of GMP operates liveried four wheel drive BMW X5s, which replaced the Range Rovers in 2007, as well as liveried Volvo V70s, 3 series BMWs and Vauxhall VXR Vectras as well as non -liveried (unmarked) vehicles.
Each RPU contains its own dedicated police motorcycle wing, which uses both road and off road motorcycles.
The Force Motorway Control is at Force Headquarters at Chester House.
Area 6 Road Policing Unit is based at Birch Services on the M62 while Area RPU is based at Peel Green. N division RPU is based at Whitefield Police Station but will be moving to the new Bury Ground Police station when it has been built. The Force RPU also operates the Tactical Vehicle Crime Unit.
Thames Valley Police operate diesel Vauxhall Vectra estates and a handful of 2.8 turbo V6 saloons, along with 4x4s like any other force. They also operate several unmarked cars, either being part of the general RPU team or the elite Pro-ACTIVE team. The Traffic Proactive and Problem Solving Team (to give it its full title) was formed in 1999 and use unmarked Vauxhall Omegas and Vectras in saloon variations, mostly with petrol V6 engines. They also have a couple of standard traffic cars that are in use when Pro-ACTIVE cars are out of action. The units are usually single, double or sometimes even triple crewed. The Pro-ACTIVE team was followed by Raw Cut TV's programme Road Wars between 2003 and 2008 and it made mini 'celebrities' out of its officers. As a result Chief Constable Sara Thornton asked Raw Cut to move to another force and they subsequently followed Devon and Cornwall officers. Most of their work is tasked but they sometimes patrol their area.
Devon and Cornwall Police operate BMW 3 and 5 series marked estates and unmarked 3 series diesel's.They have a sub-department called the Road Crime Unit,which was formed in 2007, they have 7 officers with one sergeant and 6 constables, they operate 2 BMW 3 series diesel estates and 2 unmarked Ford Focus ST's.When needed they will take normal RPU duties, but that rarely happens.Most of their work is tasked but they sometimes patrol their area but that also rarely happens.The RCU are being followed by RawCut TV's programme Road Wars starting in 2009, along with their TAG C section and the Dog Section.
Essex Police operate Land Rover Discoveries, one mitsubishi shogun, Volvo V70's, BMW 330D Estate and also ford s-max. They also have a sub department called the Territorial Support Team (Previously called the ANPR Intercept team) which uses Mitsibushi EVO 8's and 10's along with Impreza GB270's and WRX STi's,a unmarked Vauxhall Vectra,a unmarked BMW 3 series  and Ford Mondeo ST220's, they also have a Ford Focus ST on trial.The TST team are being followed by RawCut TV's programme Police Interceptors starting in 2008