Entropy was created at the beginning of time, possibly when Eternity was formed, Entropy came into being with the seven friendless.
Just as all the other friendless have purposes of their own, Entropy's purpose is to destroy, juxtaposed to his father, Eternity, whose purpose entails creation.
Entropy engineered the insanity of Captain Marvel in Captain Marvel VI #1, causing him to see that, by failing to save the life of an unnamed alien female during a Badoon raid on their homeworld, he had let the universe's greatest peacemaker die. Thus, he fell into a downward spiral of insanity, feeling he had failed in his duties, eventually losing consciousness for a few days.
Later on, Rick Jones was imprisoned within the Microverse due to Captain Marvel's insanity preventing him from banging the Kree Nega-bands together to initiate the switch between the two. Jones sought out a being named Shinga Doon to help him ascertain the cause of his friend's insanity.
Possibly knowing this, Entropy killed Shinga Doon before he could answer Rick's question, crushing him with an invisible force. Entropy then spoke to Rick, telling him that Captain Marvel's fate was sealed. When Rick asked him who he was, he merely replied, "I am no-one."
Later on, Rick woke up in a room without any knowledge of how he got there and could hear the voice of Epiphany, Entropy's sister, conversing with Entropy himself. Rick then went to confront Entropy, at the time not knowing who he was. At the same time, Captain Marvel tried to kill himself, sending Rick into unconsciousness due to their symbiotic relationship.
Entropy later met Captain Marvel himself, revealing that it was he who drove Marvel insane, though he did not explain why yet. He then showed Marvel a variety of scenarios, in one of which a man tried to please his father. Entropy then went on to reveal his true purpose and nature: that he was the offspring of Eternity, and that he was out to destroy the universe and wanted Marvel's help. That was why he drove him insane. Marvel gladly accepted.
Marvel and Entropy, along with Rick and Epiphany, stood in nothingness, the absence of Eternity. However, in his insanity, Marvel had developed a God complex, and this sparked an argument between himself and Rick. To prove his point, Marvel asked Entropy whether or not he was God, but Entropy could not answer, because he had accomplished his purpose. Rick suggested that next Entropy should do what he knew, and that was what his father's purpose was: to create. Creating something was the first new concept Entropy ever had and decided to do it. However, he had never thought of creating and didn't know how. Rick told him just to go with what he knew. All Entropy knew was what his father was, so he created a Big Bang, recreating the universe and becoming the new Eternity. Time rolled back on itself, until it came back to the modern day, and everything became as it was.
As the conceptual embodiment of one of the strongest forces in existence, Entropy has unlimited ability to manipulate space, time, energy and matter on a cosmic scale.
As an abstract concept of the universe, Entropy has no physical form, but Entropy's appearance can vary from lifeform to lifeform, it appears in whatever form that species could perceive him as.