Sacco earned his B.A. in journalism from the University of Oregon in 1981 in three years. He was greatly frustrated with the journalist work that he found at the time, later saying, " a job writing very hard-hitting, interesting pieces that would really make some sort of difference." After being briefly employed by the journal of the National Notary Association, a job which he found "exceedingly, exceedingly boring," and several factories, he returned to Malta, his journalist hopes forgotten. "...I sort of decided to forget it and just go the other route, which was basically take my hobby, which has been cartooning, and see if I could make a living out of that," he later told the BBC.Ben Arnold (August 27, 2004).  (.ram file, source: ). ''BBC''. URL accessed April 26, 2006.
He began working for a local publisher writing guidebooks. Returning to his fondness for comics, he wrote a Maltese romance comic named Imhabba Vera ("True Love"), one of the first art-comics in the Maltese language. "Because Malta has no history of comics, comics weren't considered something for kids," he told ''The Village Voice''. "In one case, for example, the girl got pregnant and she went to Holland for an abortion. Malta is a Catholic country where not even divorce is allowed. It was unusual, but it's not like anyone raised a stink about it, because they had no way of judging whether this was appropriate material for comics or not."Hillary Chute (July 19, 2005). . ''Village Voice''. URL accessed April 26, 2006.
Eventually returning to the United States, by 1985 Sacco had founded a satirical, alternative comics magazine called ''Portland Permanent Press'' in Portland, Oregon. When the magazine folded fifteen months later, he took a job at ''The Comics Journal'' as the staff news writer.Gary Groth (October 4, 2001). . ''The Comics Journal'' (a magazine owned and operated by Fantagraphics Books). URL accessed on April 26, 2006. This job provided the opportunity for him to create another satire: the comic ''Centrifugal Bumble-Puppy'',Fantagraphics Books. . URL accessed on April 25, 2006. a name he took from an overly-complicated children's toy in Aldous Huxley's ''Brave New World''.
But Sacco was more interested in travelling. In 1988, he left the U.S. again to travel across Europe, a trip which he chronicled in his autobiographical comic ''Yahoo''. The trip led him towards the ongoing Gulf War (his obsession with which he talks about in ''Yahoo'' #2), and in 1991 he found himself nearby to research the work he would eventually publish as ''Palestine''.
The Gulf War segment of ''Yahoo'' drew Sacco into a study of Middle Eastern politics, and he traveled to Israel and the Palestinian territories to research his first long work. ''Palestine'' was a collection of short and long pieces, some depicting Sacco's travels and encounters with Palestinians (and several Israelis), and some dramatizing the stories he was told. It was serialized as a comic book from 1993 to 1995 and then published in several collections, the first of which won an American Book Award in 1996.
Sacco next travelled to Sarajevo and Gorazde near the end of the Bosnian War, and produced a series of reports in the same style as ''Palestine'': the comics ''Safe Area Gorazde'', ''The Fixer'', and the stories collected in ''War's End''; the financing for which was aided by his winning of the Guggenheim Fellowship in April 2001.. URL accessed October 7, 2006. ''Safe Area Gorazde'' won the Eisner Award for Best Original Graphic Novel in 2001.
He has also contributed short pieces of graphic reportage to a variety of magazines, on subjects ranging from war crimes to blues, and was a frequent illustrator of Harvey Pekar's ''American Splendor''. In 2005 he wrote and drew two eight-page comics depicting events in Iraq published in ''The Guardian''. He also contributed a 16-page piece in April 2007's issue of ''Harper's Magazine'', entitled ''Down! Up! You're in the Iraqi army now''. His most recent major journalistic work is ''Footnotes in Gaza''.
Sacco currently lives in Portland, Oregon.
Sacco's ''Footnotes in Gaza'' was nominated for the 2009 Los Angeles Times Book Prize Graphic Novel award.