The first sub-project is Openmoko Linux, a Linux-based operating system designed for mobile phones, built using free software.
The second sub-project is developing hardware devices on which Openmoko Linux runs. The first device released was the Neo 1973,
On 2 April 2009, Openmoko canceled planned phones and will probably concentrate on other kinds of hardware, but will still support and sell the current Neo FreeRunner.
Originally Openmoko Inc. developed its own operating system for the phones, which was called '''Openmoko Linux''' or '''Om'''. It uses the Linux kernel, together with a graphical user environment built using the X.Org Server. The OpenEmbedded build framework and opkg package system were used to create and maintain software packages. The initial version named '''Om 2007''' used the GTK+ toolkit and the Matchbox window manager. '''Om 2008''', which was released in August 2008, added support for the Qt toolkit and Enlightenment 17. Despite continuous improvements both of these versions did not reach a stable state. As a result, Openmoko started developing '''Om 2009''', which had the goal of providing a stable environment based on the middleware from freesmartphone.org, a project that was financed by Openmoko. However, this version was not finished either, and in April 2009 Openmoko cancelled the development of software.
This task was taken over by a several efforts of the community. Several groups have created modified versions of the original software or ported other systems to work on the phones. Among others, the Openmoko phones now support Android, Debian, Gentoo, Qt Extended Improved, QtMoko, and SHR.
Openmoko hardware aspires to the term open-source hardware although in various areas the availability of cell phone components and legal requirements prevent full conformance to this term.
As do many other vendors, Openmoko Inc., notoriously failed to meet the publicly announced hardware release dates, and postponed releases many times.
The first supported phone, the Neo 1973 GTA01 (version: Bv4), was distributed exclusively through openmoko.com from July 2007 to February 2008.
The second revision of hardware based on the GTA01 design is the Dash Express, an automotive navigation system. The Dash Express has a faster CPU (Samsung 2440) and Wi-Fi ability.
The third hardware platform, the Neo FreeRunner codenamed GTA02 is an improved version of the Neo 1973.
The Neo 1973 (codenamed GTA01) phone was a "developers only" release.
This phone supports the 900 MHz, 1800 MHz and 1900 MHz GSM frequency bands. Many Linux and unix programs used on desktop and server platforms, including utilities and games, have been successfully run on the phone. In addition to Linux, the NetBSD, FreeBSD and L4 kernels have been adapted by users to run on the platform or are under development.
This hardware platform can be emulated in software with a high level of compatibility using a version of Qemu included in the Openmoko software suite.
The Neo FreeRunner (codenamed GTA02) is the new revision of the Neo 1973. The changes include a faster processor (clocked at 400 MHz), 802.11b/g Wi-Fi, two accelerometers and 3D graphics acceleration. It was released for the mass market on 25 June 2008.
On 2 January 2008 the Dash Express, a GPS device, with hardware developed by Openmoko Inc. was announced running Openmoko Linux. This device, initially codenamed the , seems to use little or none of the openmoko user-interface, simply using patches to the kernel developed by Openmoko Inc, and running an application from  on it to provide navigation and a user interface.
The next phone, GTA03, would have been based on newer and more powerful system-on-a-chip. It would presumably differ from the Neo FreeRunner by having a 3.5 mm audio jack connector (instead of a 2.5 mm connector), EDGE and a camera. GTA03 would not include support for 3G networks.
The fourth Openmoko planned, GTA04, would have been based on a different system-on-a-chip. It would have had 3G support.
The latest product is the WikiReader, a device to read Wikipedia articles offline.
Openmoko was announced the 7th November 2006 by its founders First International Computer (FIC).
The Initial core team for Openmoko project included:
The name ''Openmoko'' is an initialism for Open Mobile Kommunikations. The company was named OpenMoko until early 2008 when it was renamed Openmoko.
The codename for the phone product series, ''GTA'', is an abbreviation of "GSM-TI-AGPS" which indicates the main components of the phone.