The family is of ancient Swedish nobility (''fralse'') from Paimio in Finland Proper. Squire Nisse Pedersson is regarded as the most likely first head of the family. He held tax exempt property (fralsejord) in Loppis of Paimio, which was subject to the kings general reduction in 1396 (Nykopings recess) which decision was executed in Finland 1405. Nisse Pedersson sealed a property transaction in 1399. His son Peder Nilsson participated in a summons of the nobility in Turku in 1439. His son, squire Nils Pedersson of Hevonpaa is mentioned 1464; he wears a hunting horn in his seal 10 March 1471. His son, squire Peder Nilsson of Hevonpaa, was married to the daughter of Klas Henriksson (Horn of Kankas), member of the privy council and lawspeaker, and Kristersdotter Frille. Peder Nilsson was acting as the first lawspeaker in a land court in Kemio of Finland Proper 1500.
Peder Nilsson of Hevonpaa's grandson's grandson, Colonel Christer Classon of Spurila had his family introduced in the Swedish House of Nobility with number 86 (later amended to 114) when the House was established by Gustavus II Adolphus in 1625. Colonel Classon's son Johan Henriksson of Spurila was a page of Gustavus II Adolphus until the king's death in the battle of Lutzen (1632). The name Jagerhorn af Spurila was given only about 1634 apparently to avoid confusion with another family with a similar coat of arms that was introduced to the House, namely Jagerhorn af Storby. The Jagerhorn af Spurila family was assumed in the knights class of the Swedish nobility in 1778, and it was introduced in the Finnish House of Nobility in 1820 with number 5.
In old genealogies the Jagerhorn af Storby and Jagerskiold families as well as other noble families with similar coats of arms were assumed to be of the same origin as Jagerhorn af Spurila. Later research has, however, not verified such conclusions.
A family tree dated 1769 presents a legend about the origins of the Jagerhorn family, most likely inspired by the Song of Roland; this family tree also ties the Jagerhorn af Spurila, Jagerhorn af Storby and Jagerskiold (von Jagerhorn) families together (translation from Swedish):
This family is so old that it is impossible to establish the time of ennoblement with certainty. However, the forefathers of this family have truthfully explained that the first head of the family was called Rotker Ingesson, whom king Eric IX or Eric the Holy as he is called, took as his squire due the handsome appearance, unseen strength and manhood, during the king's visit in Finland in the 1150s. The king took this man with him when returning to Sweden. This Rotker Ingesson was in 1160 commanding a group of cavalry during a fight between the Swedes and the Danes and was carrying a signal horn of that time. When attacking the Danes with great force making them retreat, he blew the sound of victory, which made the Danish Army flee trembling with fear. The Danes left its conqueror valuable treasures with which the church of Uppsala was built and Rotker Ingesson was thenceforth called Jagarhorn* 