The primary protagonist was the title character, Frank Cannon, played by William Conrad.
In 1973, ''Cannon'' spawned a spinoff series, ''Barnaby Jones''. 
Some time before the events of the debut episode, Frank Cannon was a detective with the Los Angeles police department.  However, he resigned after the deaths of his wife and son in a car accident and later became a private detective. The cause of death of Cannon's wife and child is not clear. In one of the later season it is mentioned that Cannon's wife and child were killed in an explosion caused by a bomb meant for Cannon. 
Although the noticeably overweight Frank Cannon had expensive tastes, especially in food and cars (his primary vehicle was a silver '71 Lincoln Continental Mark III), he also felt there was a need for someone to help people who had little or no money.  For this reason, he charged his more affluent clients hefty fees so he could aid the less affluent.
The second-season episode "Requiem for a Son" introduced the character of Barnaby Jones (Buddy Ebsen), an aging veteran private investigator who had retired and turned over his agency to his son, Hal.  However, Hal is killed.  With the aide of Cannon and Hal's widow, Betty Jones (Lee Meriwether), they hunt down Hal's killer.  Afterward, Jones decides to come out of retirement. 
There was additional "crossover" between the series.  The first part of the two-part episode, "The Deadly Conspiracy", was aired during a fifth-season ''Cannon'' episode on September 17, 1975; the second part was aired two nights later as ''Barnaby Jones's'' fourth-season premiere.
In an episode of his Thames Television-produced series, British comedian Benny Hill parodied 1970s American detective shows.  In the skit, Hill played several staple characters of the genre: Frank Cannon, Robert Ironside, Theo Kojak, Sam McCloud and, although he was not a part of the genre, Agatha Christies' Belgian detective, Hercule Poirot.  A female cast member played the role of Pepper Anderson.
The comedian Franklin Ajaye does a routine where he mentions that it takes Frank Cannon so long to get out of his car 2-3 times a show that there is hardly time for anything else.
In an era decades before cell phone use, Cannon was using a "mobile phone" in his car, which was highly rare at the time.  He would begin by asking the mobile operator to dial a call for him.  Phones of this type were precursors to modern cell phones.  The phone itself, in his car, actually looked like a standard handset of the day with a dangling wire.
In the first season, a young Martin Sheen had a recurring role as ex-policeman Jerry Warton, but the character did not extend beyond the first year   in fact, in the third season, Sheen guest starred as a lawyer who murdered Cannon's client. Other notable guest stars include: a young Willie Aames, Sharon Acker, Anne Baxter, Lloyd Bochner, Brooke Bundy, Cathy Lee Crosby, William Daniels, Burr DeBenning, former Monkee Mickey Dolenz, Andrew Duggan, Shelley Duvall, Dana Elcar, Jason Evers, Mike Farrell, Paul Fleming, Joan Fontaine, Burt Freed, future ''Starsky and Hutch'' star Paul Michael Glaser, Clu Gulager, Peter Haskell, Robert Hays, David Hedison, former ''The Fugitive'' star David Janssen, Claudia Jennings, L.Q. Jones, Dan Kemp, Sondra Locke, Robert Loggia, Tina Louise, Barbara Luna, former ''Route 66'' star George Maharis, Robert Mandan, Vera Miles, future ''Knots Landing'' star Donna Mills, Leslie Nielsen, Nick Nolte, Sheree North, John M. Pickard, Stephanie Powers, Judson Pratt, future ''Dukes of Hazzard'' star Denver Pyle, Dack Rambo, Marc Reuss, Wayne Rogers, John Rubinstein, Tom Skerritt, future ''Starsky and Hutch'' star David Soul, Peter Strauss, Vic Tayback, Joan Van Ark, a young Vincent Van Patten, John Vernon, Jesse Vint, Jessica Walter, future soap opera legend (''The Young and the Restless'') Jess Walton, future ''Laverne and Shirley'' star Cindy Williams, William Windom, and Dana Wynter.
CBS DVD (distributed by Paramount) has released the first two seasons of ''Cannon'' on DVD in Region 1.
In Region 4, Shock Entertainment has released the first two seasons on DVD in Australia.