Granger Community Church is a multi-site church. The service times at the Granger Campus are Saturdays at 5:00 and 7:00 p.m. and Sundays at 9:30 and 11:30 a.m. There is also a campus in Elkhart, Indiana at the RV/MH Hall of Fame with services on Sundays at 9:00 and 10:45 a.m. Childcare is provided through the All Stars ministry for newborns through 5th grade. Midweek services are held on Wednesdays at 6:30 p.m.
Mark Beeson is the Senior Pastor at Granger Community Church. In 1986, Mark and his wife, Sheila, started the church in their living room, with fewer than ten people. Their dream was to reach out to people who weren't currently attending church, instead of pulling from other churches. Mark is known for focusing on the areas in which he excels, and he gives the rest of his leadership team the freedom and encouragement to do what they do best, without micromanaging them.
Mark has delivered the keynote address at Rick Warren's Purpose Driven Church Conference. He earned his Bachelor of Science degree from Ball State University, his Master of Divinity degree from Christian Theological Seminary in Indianapolis, Indiana, and his Doctor of Ministry degree in leadership development from United Theological Seminary in Trotwood, Ohio.
Tim Stevens is the Executive Pastor at Granger Community Church. He has the responsibility to hire and lead the staff at the church. Tim is also involved in strategic planning, overseeing projects, and shaping the weekend series. He has been instrumental in completing five major construction projects and developing the church's nationally recognized children's center.
Before he was hired at Granger Community Church, Tim held various leadership positions with Life Action Revival Ministries for nearly 10 years. He used his skills in information technology, resource development and executive management.
Rob Wegner is the Pastor of Life Mission at Granger Community Church. After Mark Beeson, Rob is the featured speaker at the greatest number of weekend services. Along with teaching, he contributes to the church mission work in Indiana and in Tamil Nadu, India. His tasks are planting churches, developing partnerships, equipping leaders, assisting the poor, caring for the sick and educating the next generation. Rob graduated from Taylor University in Upland, Indiana.
Mark Waltz is the Pastor of Connections at Granger Community Church. He is the leader of the First Impressions teams at the church and the pastor of the Elkhart campus. Mark works to ensure that members and guests have a relaxed, rejuvenating and relevant experience. He helps people discover where they should volunteer in the church, since there are over 200 opportunities. Mark is also responsible for the many groups and retreats.
Before being hired at Granger Community Church, Mark served as a student pastor at Rainier View Christian Church in Tacoma, Washington. His ministry experience is complimented by his marketplace expertise, which includes retail management, employment and recruitment.
On December 7, 2009, Jason Miller replaced Butch Whitmire in a new role as the Pastor of Arts and Teaching at Granger Community Church. Jason is currently studying for his Master's Degree from Notre Dame University. Jason oversees a team of 14 staff and over 200 volunteers. They include actors, musicians, sound and lighting crews, singers, dancers, set designers, production crews, and stagehands.
DC Curry is the Director of Student Ministries at Granger Community Church. He is a former American football linebacker and played college football at Notre Dame where he was a Team Captain and an honorable mention All-American middle linebacker. In his roll at GCC, he oversees the 6th-12th grade student ministry.
Kem Meyer is the Communications Director at Granger Community Church. She leads creative, technology and digital media teams to champion clarity and flow across departments and campuses. Her marketplace career spanned 15 years and involved roles in the advertising, business consulting, technology and global financial services fields before joining the staff team at Granger Community Church in 2002.