The '''Leyland Lynx''' is a single-decker bus built by Leyland between 1984 and 1992. It was designed to replace the ageing Leyland National.
Production vehicles began to enter service in 1986. From 1990 to 1992 the updated '''Lynx II''' version was produced. It could be recognised easily by its protruding front dash/grille panel, which on the original design was flat.
Although the large majority of Lynxes carried the Leyland body, seven underframes were bodied by Alexander with N-type bodywork for Citybus (Belfast), including the first prototype. A small number of other underframes for export were bodied by other coachbuilders, including an Alexander PS type for Singapore Bus Service and 2 PMC Metro 90 (Galvastress MKV) bodied ones for Sydney, Australia.
The type saw service all over the UK, with the largest fleet being based in the West Midlands, owned by West Midlands Travel (now National Express West Midlands), with a total of 255 operated; however, the final three were withdrawn from normal passenger use in March 2009, although 10 remained in the driver training fleet until March 2010.
 The latter is registered K853 MTJ, 57. Halton Transport still operates a small number of Lynxes on school contracts. However in early October 2010, all of Halton's remaining Lynxes were sold, the last 2 Lynxes ever made went into preservation.
Following the takeover of Leyland by Volvo, the Lynx was superseded by the Volvo B10B. Total production of Lynxes was approximately 1060 vehicles, including six prototypes (one of which was not bodied) and several development vehicles. About 140 of the total were Lynx II.
Several Mk1 and Mk2 Lynxes have now gone into preservation, with some requiring extensive rebuilds to bring them back to original condition due to body corrosion, as well as reversing modifications made by companies during their history. One such example is the removal of all of the patterned body skirts, combined with the replacement of the square wheel arches with non-patterned round ones. Both of these modifications were made to make it easier to replace such parts in the event of an accident.