There was previously a '''KCCL''' at 101.9 FM which featured an oldies format.   With studios in Sacramento and transmitter at Shingle Springs, this version of KCCL went on the air in the Spring of 2000.   Known as "KOOL 101.9" and later as "BOSS 101.9," this station flipped to a modern country format (KNTY, "The Wolf") in the Spring of 2007.   Three of the current airstaff, Joey Mitchell, Big Jim Hall, and Sweet Lou Gallagher were part of the staff at "KOOL 101.9" along with veteran personality Rick Shannon.
Long-time Sacramento radio personality, Joey Mitchell, currently hosts the morning show on KCCL/K-HITS weekdays from 6:00am to 8:00am. Starting in 1969 in Southern California on radio station KVFM located in Panorama City in the San Fernando Valley, Joey gained attention thanks to the 1971 San Fernando 6.6 earthquake. Waking to the 6am shaking, Joey ran to the radio station located in the fourteen story Panorama Towers on Van Nuys blvd. and began broadcasting emergency information to the local community. He was forced to evacuate the tall building by local police when aftershocks deemed the building unsafe. Joey didn't leave the studio until he had the police actually order him to go live on the air. That story was heard by KPRO 1440 AM Riverside's general manager Howard Fisher and he immediately offered Joey a job. 
KRPO was then owned by TV and radio personality Dick Clark and Joey's involvement with the station led to a longtime association with Dick Clark. In 1975, Joey moved his wife and sons to Northern California and Mitchell began an amazing 20 years as Sacramento's most-popular morning man with famed country station KRAK. His comedy and off-the-wall antics are legendary. He was named ''Billboard'' magazine's "Best Country DJ" in 1988 and was nominated again in 1992. Local TV station KXTV named him Sacramento's top radio personality two years-in-a-row. He has been featured in ''Sacramento Magazine'', the ''Sacramento Bee'', and other local publications. The State of California once declared a "Joey Mitchell Day." His on-air presence expanded country's popularity in the Sacramento market.
Despite his success at KRAK, he was not immune to the changes on the radio dial. With music on the AM side becoming an extinct species, Joey Mitchell join KHYL-FM, an oldies channel, where "Mitchell and Company" was able to raise station ratings. When the new KRAK-FM with a country oldies format went on-the-air, Mitchell was brought aboard as the morning man. But continued movement on the FM dial and an eventual move to 1470AM would prove confusing to listeners. Even Joey Mitchell would find himself doing "afternoon drive." To keep up with all the changes, Willie Nelson's "On The Road Again" would receive substantial airplay. After the final demise of KRAK, he would returning to playing oldies, first at KOOL 101.9, now at KCCL/K-HITS 92.1. Joey Mitchell also owns his own advertising and production company, known as "Joey Mitchell Productions."
Coming up on 35 years in Sacramento radio, Joey Mitchell remains a local on-air favorite.
Big Jim Hall, a veteran of 35-years on the Sacramento airwaves, currently hosts the afternoon show on KCCL/K-HITS weekdays from 4:00pm to 6:00pm.   Called the "World's tallest disc jockey," Big Jim started his radio career at Merced's KYOS-AM before moving to Sacramento's KROY.   But it was at the legendary country station, KRAK-AM, where Big Jim Hall found his greatest fame.   For two decades he held the 2-6:00PM afternoon "drive" and like his friend and colleague, Joey Mitchell, was responsible for increasing the interest of country music in the greater Sacramento market.   After KRAK flipped it's format, Hall moved to smooth jazz-oriented KSSJ then joined the original KCCL "KOOL 101.9" as the "Midday Mayor."   After this station flipped to a modern country format in 2007, both Hall and Mitchell joined the new KCCL.   
Big Jim Hall stands 6' 7" and has made commercials for "Wagner's Big and Tall," "Yardbirds," "Denio's Farmers Market and Auction," and "Folsom Chevrolet."   He currently represents "Hall's Window Center" and "Big Mountain Heating and Air."   He and Mitchell work together in advertising and production.   Hall is also a familiar face and voice on Sacramento's PBS station, KVIE, and is a ring announcer for professional boxing in the region.    Big Jim has long been very active in church, charitable, and community activities.