 It connects with the Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority's Metro Rail lines at Union Station in Downtown Los Angeles, and with the San Diego Coaster and Sprinter lines at Oceanside. It also connects with Amtrak's Pacific Surfliner, Coast Starlight, Southwest Chief, and Sunset Limited trains. It serves 55 stations on  of track ( with shared miles excluded) throughout Southern California. Average weekday ridership for the fourth quarter of 2009 was 38,400. Ridership increases almost every year; in July 2008 ridership saw a record 16% increase over the previous year. For 2010, Metrolink was allotted an operating budget of $168.1 million. It is headquartered in the MCI Center in Los Angeles.
The SCRRA is a joint powers authority governed by five county-level agencies: the Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority, the Orange County Transportation Authority, the Riverside County Transportation Commission, the San Bernardino Associated Governments, and the Ventura County Transportation Commission. Ex officio members include the Southern California Association of Governments, the San Diego Association of Governments, and the state of California.
The Metrolink system is operated under contract. The original operator was Amtrak, who operated it from 1992 to July 2005. The system was then operated for five years, from 2005 until 2010, by Connex Railroad/Veolia Transport. Amtrak regained the contract to operate Metrolink beginning in July 2010.
Beginning in 1990, the member agencies of the SCRRA acquired track and other property from several freight operators: 175 miles of track, maintenance yards, and stations were purchased from Southern Pacific for $450 million and the rights to use Los Angeles Union Station were purchased from Union Pacific for $17 million. The SCRRA was formally founded in 1991.
When Metrolink service began on October 26, 1992, it only operated on three lines: the Ventura, Santa Clarita, and San Bernardino Lines (the Santa Clarita Line later became the Antelope Valley Line). In 1993 and 1994, service was expanded to include the Riverside and Orange County Lines, respectively. The Inland Empire-Orange County Line opened in 1995, becoming the first suburb to suburb commuter rail line in the country. The system realized its current form in 2002 with the addition of the 91 Line.
In the fall of 2009, inward-facing video cameras were installed in locomotives in order to monitor engineers. Crash energy management cars are being prepared for service in the fleet; they are designed to lessen the toll on passengers in the case of an accident As part of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act, over $200 million has been allotted to the SCRRA in order to implement positive train control, a crash-avoidance system.
Metrolink's fare structure is based on a flat fee for boarding the train and an additional cost for distance; fares are calculated in 25-cent increments between stations. Prior to July 2004, Metrolink fares were based on price zones radiating outward from Union Station, but a restructuring converted fare calculation to the current system. Fare increases normally occur annually in July to coincide with increased fuel and labor expenses and have generally averaged between 3.5% and 5% per year (although the restructuring caused a larger jump in rates). The oil price increases since 2003 are partly to blame for consistently increasing fares as Metrolink trains are powered by diesel fuel.
Metrolink riders can ride most buses in Los Angeles and Orange County, as well as the Metro Rail, free with their valid ticket or pass, and monthly pass holders in Orange and Ventura Counties can use Amtrak Pacific Surfliner and Thruway Coach services through the Rail 2 Rail program.
The rail system experiences its peak ridership during weekday mornings and afternoons. To reflect the demand of its mostly-commuter ridership base, most Metrolink trains operate in the morning between 5 a.m. and 9 a.m. and in the afternoon between 3 p.m. and 9 p.m. Even lines with high ridership (such as the San Bernardino line) operate very few trains outside of the commuter rush hour schedule. Metrolink has been willing to add additional trains when funding becomes available, as was the case in Orange County, when the county decided to subsidize more service.
As a commuter rail system, Metrolink serves mainly to connect Los Angeles to its adjacent suburbs and provide increased accessibility to employment and activity centers. The system offers travel to multiple destinations, including Downtown Los Angeles, Bob Hope Airport, California State University, Los Angeles, Angel Stadium, and the San Clemente Pier. Special service has also been extended to the Pomona Fairplex, the Ventura Fairgrounds, and the Auto Club Speedway for certain events.
Metrolink's Central Maintenance Facility (CMF) is located on the east bank of the Los Angeles River near the intersection of the 5 and 110 Freeways, just south of the location of the former Southern Pacific Taylor Yard. The facility is operated by Metrolink's equipment maintenance contractor, Bombardier Transportation.
Coaster's Stuart Mesa Facility is located between San Clemente Pier and Oceanside at the southwest end of Camp Pendleton. This yard is owned by the North County Transit District and also services Metrolink trains.
Metrolink's Eastern Maintenance Facility is located in Colton. Metrolink's first crash-resistant cars were displayed at the facility at an event in May 2010.
Metrolink has grown in popularity in parallel with rising gas prices and the increasing cost of driving. In addition to higher ridership, station parking capacity has also been strained.
In 2005, the Orange County Transportation Authority approved a plan to increase frequencies to 76 trains daily on the Orange County and Inland Empire-Orange County Lines by 2009, and funding for increased Metrolink service was included in the renewal of the Measure M sales tax for transportation approved by voters in November 2006. However, in 2010, to save money in the face of funding cuts, the Metrolink board voted to reduce mid-day service on the Inland Empire   Orange County Line, as well as weekend service on both the Orange County and Inland Empire   Orange County lines.
The Redlands Corridor, a  eastward extension linking San Bernardino with Redlands and Mentone,  is planned by the San Bernardino Associated Governments. The association is considering whether to extend commuter rail along the corridor or to install either bus rapid transit or light rail lines.
The Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority has proposed adding commuter rail service along the Harbor Subdivision corridor, so as to provide service to Inglewood, Los Angeles International Airport, the South Bay, the Port of Los Angeles, and/or the Port of Long Beach. A decision whether to employ commuter rail, light rail, or bus rapid transit in this corridor has not yet been reached.
In 2008, lobbyists pushed for a rail line to Temecula in southwestern Riverside County via the 91 Line's La Sierra station. While this proposed line could follow the route of an abandoned freight line, it would require significant money, as freight service ceased almost 30 years ago. Despite this, the Riverside County Transportation Commission's 2008 Commuter Rail Feasibility Study still lists this route as one possibility being considered.
The cities of the Coachella Valley (Palm Springs, Cathedral City, Palm Desert, and Indio) have requested commuter rail service from Los Angeles and Orange County, but the Union Pacific Railroad opposes further passenger service on its tracks. Nonetheless, as recently as 1999, the Coachella Valley Association of Governments was investigating the possibility of two daily round trips via the 91 Line from Los Angeles's Union Station through Fullerton and Riverside to stations in Palm Springs and Indio (with a possible stop near Palm Desert), possibly through a partnership with Amtrak. What effect these might have on the 91 Line's Perris Valley extension (or vice versa) is not discussed. This extension would likewise require significant money for infrastructure improvements: at least $500 million, according to the California State Rail Plan of 2005.
The Metrolink fleet consists of 52 locomotives and 171 Bombardier BiLevel Coaches with 117 Rotem Bi-level cars on order. As of March 2010, the cab car portion of the fleet consists of 33 Metrolink-owned cab cars. The trailer portion of the fleet includes 103 Metrolink-owned trailers, 10 leased from Utah Transit Authority, and 15 leased from New Jersey Transit.
Most Metrolink-owned units are painted in the Metrolink livery, white with blue streaks. The agency is currently in the process of rolling out a new blue and green "ribbons" design. Locomotives are being given the new livery during downtime for maintenance and the new Rotem Bi-level cars are coming from the factory with the updated designed already applied.
On April 23, 2002, a BNSF Railway freight train collided head-on with a Metrolink train in Placentia, near the Atwood Junction, at the intersection of Orangethorpe Avenue and Van Buren Street. Both trains were on the same east   west track moving toward one another. The Metrolink had the right-of-way; it was supposed to switch to a southbound track. The BNSF train was supposed to slow and stop just before the switch while the Metrolink passed, but the crew missed a signal one and a half miles back warning them to slow down. By the time the crew saw the red "stop" signal at the switch and the Metrolink train, they were going too fast to avoid a collision. Although there was speculation that the signals alerting the BNSF to slow and stop had malfunctioned, an investigation later concluded that it was human error by the crew that caused the accident. Two people died in the crash and twenty-two were seriously injured.
On January 26, 2005, a Metrolink passenger train collided with a vehicle parked on the tracks, and as a result derailed and jackknifed, striking a stationary freight locomotive and a Metrolink train moving in the opposite direction in what was then the deadliest train accident in Metrolink's history.  Eleven people were killed (including an off-duty sheriff's deputy and a train conductor) and over 100 people were injured, about 40 seriously. The man who parked the vehicle on the tracks, Juan Manuel Alvarez, was apprehended and charged with 11 counts of first-degree murder with special circumstances, including murder by train wrecking. On June 26, 2008, Alvarez was convicted on the 11 murder counts and sentenced to life imprisonment without the possibility of parole.
A Metrolink commuter train in the Chatsworth district of Los Angeles carrying 222 persons collided head on with a Union Pacific freight train, toppling one of the passenger cars and the locomotive onto its side. 26 people died, and 135 people were injured, with 81 transported to hospitals in serious or critical condition. The speed of the trains was fast enough that the Metrolink locomotive telescoped into the first passenger car.