The Founders Fund, a private venture capital firm, invested "more than $1 million   .
Charles River Ventures, a private venture capital firm, has also invested US$10 million.
At the website users enter names and email addresses of their parents, siblings, and other relatives, as well as profiles with various fields of biographical information about themselves and their relatives. From there users may graphically manipulate sections of their connections network to create a complete personal family tree.
The service uses the contact information to invite additional members to join, and builds a comprehensive social network database from the information collectively entered by members. For now users may only see information belonging to themselves and to people in their immediate network who have given them permission.
New features and enhancements get added to Geni regularly (approximately every 1-2 month).
Members of each family are ranked by the number of contributions they make to the family tree and are given awards within the family tree itself.  Contributions categories include Number of Profiles Added, Number of Invitations Made, Photos Uploaded, Videos Uploaded etc. The top 13 people in each category receive awards. This feature urges users to generate more contact and to compete with each other.
Each family tree features a family discussion forum where messages can be posted and responses made. It can be used as such a digest for family news.  There are also public discussions as well as project discussions.
Each person who has linked to their family tree via their email address can elect to be notified about various activities on the tree, such as when new people are added, if any pictures are uploaded, when someone posts a message on the discussion forum, or someone has a birthday etc.   Notification frequency options include none, instant, daily and weekly.  
While Geni has the ability to allow users to import their family history using the GEDCOM format, this facility has been 
Around August 2008, Geni facilitated the ability to merge family trees where they overlapped via common ancestors or living relatives.   Individual privacy is maintained by settings that allow tree members beyond a selectable distance of relationship to only see limited information about a person such as their name and relationship to them.
The rate at which these extended trees grow tends to increase as the trees become larger.   Some extended trees or "forests" have snowballed.   One in particular has become significantly larger than any other.  As of January 27, 2009 it contained 7.7 million profiles and is growing at the rate of approximately 2 million profiles per month.  On July 11 it surpassed 20 million profiles and on August 16th it crossed 23 million profiles. At the end of February 2010 it had passed 35 million profiles and as of December of 2010 it was just short of 50 million.  It is colloquially referred to by many Geni genealogists monitoring this phenomena as "The Big Tree" or the "World Family Tree".
Geni offers a premium service, known as the Geni Pro Account, for US$12.95 per month (payable upfront as an annual payment of US$99.95), paid by credit card. Premium members are known as Geni Pros and have the Geni Pro Badge displayed in their profile, have a priority support service, and are able to export their forest (that is, their tree and also trees connected to it) as GEDCOM file (up to a limit of 100,000 individuals).
The company also plans to make money by targeting advertising to users based on the demographic information they provide.
After Geni's launch, several (mostly international) companies have appeared trying to copy its product and business model. For example, the German website Verwandt.de makes unauthorized usage of the Geni Flash application, and copies the family networking aspect of Geni in its entirety.  Geni is to some extent modeled after social networking site LinkedIn, a popular site for business-related social networking.