North Carolina is 47th in the nation in terms of dentists per capita and is especially lacking in dentists in the eastern part of the state. There are four counties       Tyrrell, Jones, Hyde and Camden       without any primary practicing dentists.  To remedy this situation, ECU and UNC-Chapel Hill have jointly developed a plan to increase the number of dentists in the state and to establish the ECU Dental School.  The ECU School of Dental Medicine plans to create 10 community service learning centers, and they will be located in rural and underserved areas throughout the state. The fourth-year students will be learning and providing care for the community for one year in these community centers.
The first mention of a School of Dental Medicine came from Phyllis Horns, Interim Vice Chancellor for Health Sciences.  On March 19, 2002, Vice Chancellor Horns announced at the Faculty Senate that ECU was looking into pursuing a Dental School.
Programs - The committee approved the proposal to plan a Doctor of Dental Surgery (DDS) degree program at ECU.http://intranet.northcarolina.edu/docs/bog/minutes/2006/11-10-06_minutes-open.pdf
The lack of dentists in Eastern North Carolina has been the primary motivation for East Carolina University to pursue the foundation of a dental school.  North Carolina ranks 47th in dentist per 10,000 residents.  Four counties, all in Eastern North Carolina have no dentist (Tyrrell County, Jones County, Hyde County, Camden County). Only eight counties have dentist to patient ratio which exceeds the national average (Wake County, Durham County, Orange County, Alamance County, Guilford County, Forsyth County, Mecklenburg County, New Hanover County). Twenty-eight counties have less than two dentists. Seventy-nine counties are recognized as federally designated dental shortage areas.
East Carolina plans to create 10 Community Dental Centers. Each dental center will be located in rural and underserved areas throughout the state. Fourth year students will live for a year in these communities.  Dental school faculty members will be based in the centers, along with advanced dental residents and five senior students who will receive enhanced dental education in real practice settings. The students and faculty will offer much-needed dental care to citizens in the areas surrounding the centers.  Each clinic will have an office with 14 operatories, X-ray equipment, educational spaces, among other things.
On October 20, 2009, the first three locations were announced: Ahoskie, Elizabeth City and Sylva.  The Ahoskie clinic is planned to be beside Roanoke-Chowan Hospital.  The Elizabeth City clinic is planned to be built on a parcel of land across from Albemarle Hospital and College of The Albemarle.  The Sylva clinic will be located on a site located at Southwestern Community College in Jackson County.
On January 19, 2011 the fourth community dental center was announced.  The center will be located in Lillington in Harnett County.  It will be located beside First Choice Community Health Center, a primary care facility.  The  facility will house 16 treatment rooms, X-ray equipment, educational space and more.
The other six locations will be announced at a future time.