The building was opened in 1979, originally designed to accommodate around 900 pupils. However, as a result of changes to the curriculum, the addition of new subjects and departments, as well as new educational initiatives, school capacities across the city were re-assessed by the local authority. Subsequently, the school's capacity is now less than 760.
Although the secondary schools Associated Schools are Balgownie, Balmedie, Scotstown and Upper Westfield, it currently accommodates pupils who have enrolled from other primary schools, including some as far apart as Africa, France, Russia and the United States.
The school campus is currently shared with the former Upper Westfield Primary School (now known as Braehead Primary) and St Columba's Church of Scotland and Roman Catholic Church. Adjacent to the school is Westfield Park and playing fields.
The classrooms are modern, well-equipped and carpeted throughout. Practical subjects have open plan areas and classrooms/laboratories. Other facilities include a Drama Studio, Music Practice and Tuition rooms, Games Hall, 25 metre Swimming Pool, Library, Assembly Room and Dining Hall/Cafeteria. Bridge of Don Academy provides a high standard education to all of its pupils in which they can enjoy and succeed in. 
The school regularly performs a Sponsored Walk for a selected charity every August in which all pupils participate. The walk usually starts from the school, down to the mouth of the River Don, along the beach to Balmedie Beach picnic area and back. This was introduced by the former headteacher Bob McClymont who retired in 2006. The walk is enjoyed by all pupils and staff and creates a large boost of will power from everyone participating.  
1979 - Founded in 1979, the school is set in a building that is typical of the period with a flat roof and a modern concrete design.
The school was originally designed for 900 pupils but due to changes in the schools design and change of subjects taught it currently has a capacity of around 760.
2005 - The Deputy First Minister officially opened the school's solar panels on Monday 23 May 2005.  Designed by UK solar heating specialists Riomay, the 180 square metre installation covers the entire roof of the swimming pool with 60 state-of-the-art, low maintenance solar panels.
2008 -  the school began a renovation in which the top floor science departments and ground floor HE department were modernised with new science benches and Smart Boards added to the science department and new practical equipment and a walk-in cooler in the HE department.
2009 -  Headteacher Jack P Harland improved the schools badge and uniform, using ideas from pupils, teachers and the parent council. Pupils and Staff were given the chance to democratically vote for or against different uniform ideas.
2010 - The school timetable was changed to as follows: 
Monday & Tuesday 8.34 - 15.55
Wednesday to Friday 8.43 - 14.55
This change was welcomed by staff and pupils as more time for after school activities and leisure was introduced.
Bridge Of Don Academy is mainly made up of pupils who had previously gone to either Braehead Primary, Scotstown Primary, Greenbrae Primary and Balmedie school.
Current subjects taught:
The School uses a house system and is split into four and named after different Scottish isles, these are: