Players may join at any time during the season without fees or buy-ins. The tour consists of a three-tiered "Monthly Venue Championship", "Semi-Annual Regional Championship", and "National Championship" structure. Wagering/gambling is prohibited at 
APL events, and taverns pay for the rights to host league events.
The game played at APL events is No Limit Texas Hold 'Em. Players are staked 10,000 worth of chips, and the top 16 players receive points. 
BREAK (5 Minutes) Color up all 100 chips
BREAK (5 Minutes) Color up all 500 & 1000 chips
Blind levels last from 15   30 minutes, depending on the venue.  Shorter blind levels are used in venues with more than one event occurring that day.
The APL provides venues (Taverns, Bars, etc.) a league structure for No-Limit Texas Hold 'Em poker.
These venues are grouped by the APL into local regions.
A player's score for each game is determined by cross-referencing the number of players registered in the game with 
Members also receive "reward points" for placing in tournaments and for other promotions as offered by Amateur Poker League.  These points can be rewarded for prizes such as shirts, hats, hotel vacation packages and NASCAR events.
The venue ranking is used to qualify for the Monthly Venue Championship.
The Venue Ranking for a month is based on the combined total of points at APL events awarded to the player at that location during that month.
The regional ranking is used to qualify for the Semi-Annual Regional Championships.
The Regional Ranking for a six month period is based on the combined total of points at APL events awarded to the player within a region during the period.
The National Ranking is based on the combined total of points at APL events awarded to the player at any venue during that season.
A player may qualify by placing first at any event held at the venue, or by placing in the top 10% of points earners in the Month among those without a first place finish. Extra players (if needed) will be invited by top point ranking.
A player may qualify by placing first or second at any Monthly Venue Championship during the qualifying six month period, with extra players (if needed) invited by top point ranking.
The Regional Championships provide seats at the National Championships to the final table (top 8).
The top 5% of players 
The Regional Point Championships provide seats at the National Championships to the top 5% in the tournament.
The point leader in the region qualifies directly to the National Championships and may elect to skip the Semi-Annual Point Leader Championship.
A player may qualify for the National Championships by being at the final table of a Semi-Annual Regional Championship, the top 5% of a Semi-Annual Regional Points Championship, or by placing first in a region's point ranking for the six-month period.
The grand prize of the APL National Championship is a buy-in for a top World Poker Tour or World Series of Poker event.
The Amateur Poker League has major sponsorship agreements with products related to those who frequent venues, and one sponsorship with a poker magazine. 
Bluff Magazine is listed as a the "official magazine" sponsor of APL events. 
Budweiser (Anheuser-Busch, Inc) is listed as a "sponsor".
ClubWPT is the official online poker room of the APL.
Mike Caro, Chris Moneymaker, Cowboy Kenna James, online phenom Nick Brancato and Doyle Brunson have been guests at National APL events. 