I don't know about a gallon of milk, but I frequently consume a half-gallon jug with my meals in about 15-20 minutes. (Of course, I don't drink the milk all at once. I eat some, sip some milk, eat some more, etc.)       18:48, 21 January 2007 (UTC)
The osmolality of milk ranges around 480 to 590 mosm/kg. It's not at all the same as drinking water. -   22:47, 21 January 2007 (UTC)
It can be done - 2 kids on my swim team did. --   18:45, 23 January 2007 (UTC)
I'm looking for any program that sponsors research into the use of supercapacitors for use as:
1.) an energy storage device for vehicles under 750 watts, and 
2.) for capture and storage of random power generated by ultra high voltage sources, i.e, static electricity and in particular lightning.
The potential of solar power is 1000 watts per square meter. With sufficiently large value capacitors or batteries solar panels need not be on the vehicle but instead used to feed the grid from many locations. The advantage of capacitors for vehicles is in regenerative braking and other high power, short time span recharge instances where batteries are unable to recharge or discharge at the same rate or power level for the duration that capacitors can. This advantage also applies to capture of lightning and static electricity. Until solar panels are 100% efficient keep them on the farm.       08:46, 22 January 2007 (UTC)
It's not strictly related to your question, but you may be interested in the media buzz surrounding .  --  11:15, 24 January 2007 (UTC)
Why is an hour 1/24th of a day and night and how long would a Moon or Mars hour be? --   04:21, 21 January 2007 (UTC)
I was given the task of:
But how on earth can I test the "turgidity" of the potato cylinders? Thanks    The preceding   comment was added by   ( ) 07:25, 21 January 2007 (UTC).
This is a common school experiment. See our article on osmosis and for example:
Note that teachers have access to the internet too so read the essays above, understand them, then write you own report. Do not copy and paste from them.   |   08:51, 21 January 2007 (UTC)
I have some questions about some ideas I have on how it could be possible to make a "sun" here on Earth. I would like to talk to someone live if possible because i don't know the lingo or have the mathmatical skills to work out the problems on my own?  09:58, 21 January 2007 (UTC)
Hello there,
I can not find anywhere the answer to the following question I came over in some past exam papers.
Why does a tin-plated iron, when it is scratched at a certain point and the iron is exposed, rust at that point?
But, why does a zinc-plated iron that is scratched hardly get any rusting?
Thank you    The preceding   comment was added by   ( ) 10:17, 21 January 2007 (UTC).
Would the same apply to why rather use alluminium rivets two join two pieces of iron than copper rivets?
I'm confused by the pages relating to the boltzmann distribution. Can someone clarify what the assumptions are in the model that is used as a basis for the distribution. (I thought it was that each energy state is equally likely and each distinct energy state is counted once?)  12:41, 21 January 2007 (UTC)
This afternoon, around 2 PM local time, I saw what looked like a meteor while walking just east of , France, just over the border from Geneva, Switzerland.  It was south of me, moving roughly east-northeast.  There were actually three distinct objects, all very bright and moving near each other, easily visible despite it being daytime.  They looked kind of like the pictures of fragments of the Space Shuttle Columbia disaster (although they didn't leave trails), but there was nothing else visible in the sky to imply that it was debris from any kind of accident.  Is there any news anywhere about what this might have been?  If a meteor, how large and close would it have to be to be visible in the daytime like that?  References preferred, but speculation is ok provided it's more educated speculated than I could make. ;)  --   17:30, 21 January 2007 (UTC)
I saw something just like that over east kent a few months ago:) At the time I thought it could be a crashing aeroplane, or a UFO:) There are lots of things falling all the time, and of course something very small but close would appear brighter than something huge but far away:( You could ask at your local airport, see if they saw it too:)  17:50, 21 January 2007 (UTC)
I suspect it was a meteor that split into 3 parts, and was much farther away then you think.  They probably did burn up in the atmosphere, as most do, after they went out of view.   05:58, 22 January 2007 (UTC)
Probably space junk!  Most meteors arrive at very steep angles.  It's a matter of probability: if you take pot-shots at a sphere, you'll tend to hit the "center," and only very few impacts will occur at the "outer edge."  On the other hand, most manmade space junk is falling out of orbit and arriving with a nearly horizontal trajectory.--  02:01, 24 January 2007 (UTC)
I am a class 10 student so if i say anything wrong don't get cross
If I am wrong please correct me.
A few days ago the only answer to a question about the size to weight ratio of an ornithopter was that it was very difficult to work out. So I have decided to try a different way of asking.
1 Does anyone know anyone that could help me with this?
2 Can anyone give me any advice on how to work it out? If I can get a little bit or information from a few people, I might be able to work out the rest myself.
3 Can anyone tell me how I can calculate the ratio from a smaller version, multiplying each value by a cetrain amount?
4 &c.  17:42, 21 January 2007 (UTC)
According to E=mc2, the energy is equal to the mass x the speed of light in a vacuum squared, but what if something that has no mass, such as a photon, is introduced to the equation. Shouldn't that come out to be E=0? That couldn't be true because a photon is a small packet of energy. Please explain what I'm missing here. :-)    18:05, 21 January 2007 (UTC)
Why is it difficult to formulate a simple definition of life?    The preceding   comment was added by   ( ) 19:48, 21 January 2007 (UTC).
I recall an episode of '' '' that addressed this issue. When a crew member tried to define life, Data pointed out that fire met all the given criteria.  
Formulating a simple definition for life is not difficult. What is difficult is coping with it. &mdash;   21:32, 21 January 2007 (UTC)
Fire fails the sensitivity test. A fire will move towards a forest if it's blown that way, but it doesn't know there is a good "food" source there. It's not alive.   |   22:36, 21 January 2007 (UTC)
It would be remiss to let this issue go without looking at what our article on life has to say:
If I had to pick one fundamental property off that list, it would be adaptation. Failing to adapt means death.  
See, that's my point. For the most part of our history, we regarded life as a magical, mysterious thing. We even thought only live things could generate organic molecules. Nowdays, from a strictly scientific point of view, life is but a collection of atoms moving about in a certain curious way. There's nothing physically or chemically special about it anymore, and that's why most definitions of life fail: because people are not '''willing''' to give up the idea that life is "special" and fundamentally defined by a single, special aspect (oh yeah, see soul for the most popular one.) ''Movement, respiration, sensitivity, nutrition, excretion, reproduction, growth''. By this definition, early "pre-life" on Earth wouldn't be alive. They were just chemical replicators, without feeling, senses or respiration. You may ask yourself, is this reproduction? I say yes, it is, because their numbers increased by their own means. Was the capture and processing of random chemical substances nutrition and excretion? Opinions will divide this case, but I also think yes, it is nutrition and excretion. Isn't it basically the same thing that happens with modern life? Just because we're complex wrappers for basic molecular behaviors doesn't mean we're any better than initial life on Earth. We're more complex, but that's it.
So in a way, I believe we are, in fact, just unwilling to decide ourselves. We ''want'' life to be special, we want it well defined on its own, when it is, in fact, just another spectrum of the natural workings of our Universe, like so many other things we've encountered so far.
If I had to come up with a definition of life, it would just be something like "an unitary, chemically isolated  entity of matter that has the ability of chemical self-assembly and self-replication." A virus wouldn't be alive, since it is unable of self-assembly or self-replication (it needs to hijack something that does.) A prion wouldn't be alive either, it can just modify existing entities. Nor would be a crystal, because its units are not chemically isolated. (is there any form of modern life that's not isolated?) The important thing is, if you want to come up with a '''definition''', it has to be a line that divides everything in two groups. The subjects won't change because of the definition, so whatever definition you pick is largely irrelevant, but at least you made up your own mind about what to call them, and that's as good as it gets. Just make a decision and deal with it. &mdash;   10:09, 22 January 2007 (UTC)
Lots of living things don't meet these criteria:) Men can't reproduce, and many people choose not to but are still alive:) Some things don't adapt, but haven't become extinct:) And they think life doesn't have to be carbon based, we just haven't found anything that isn't yet:)
I have an apple that has turned to a giant bruise and is started to leak liquid that smells like vinigar. Can I mash it up and incorporate it into banana bread? --  ''' ''' 20:16, 21 January 2007 (UTC)
Taste a bit - If as I imagine it will taste vile then you will have your answer.  20:51, 21 January 2007 (UTC)
Please stop eating the bread and throw it away. Thanks.   -   04:26, 22 January 2007 (UTC)
Feed it to your least favorite son   21:19, 22 January 2007 (UTC)
What do those cackles, squawks and gabbling noises mean when they're all close together eating? --  22:17, 21 January 2007 (UTC)
Are their any foods or supplements that naturally act as a mild antihypertensive?  -  22:45, 21 January 2007 (UTC)
Did you read the article you linked to? See http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Antihypertensive#Herbals_provoking_hypotension although do note that the list lacks citations.   |   22:51, 21 January 2007 (UTC)