The novel was an immediate bestseller in Britain. It has sold over three million copies and has been translated into 25 languages.
The story begins in Nazi Germany, the Third Reich in April 1964, in the week leading up to Adolf Hitler's 75th birthday. The plot follows detective Xavier March, an investigator working for the Kriminalpolizei (''Kripo''), as he investigates the suspicious death of a high-ranking Nazi, Josef Buhler, in the Havel, on the outskirts of Berlin. As March uncovers more details he realises that he is caught up in a political scandal involving senior Nazi party officials, who are apparently being systematically murdered under staged circumstances. In fact, as soon as the body is identified, the Gestapo claims jurisdiction and orders the Kripo to close its investigation.
March meets with Charlie Maguire, a female American journalist who works for ''The New York Times'', who is also determined to investigate the case. They both travel to Zurich to investigate the private Swiss bank account of one of the murdered officials. Ultimately, the two uncover the horrific truth behind the staged murders. The Gestapo is eliminating the remaining officials who planned the Holocaust (of which the German people are not generally aware) at the Wannsee Conference of 1942. This is being done in order to safeguard an upcoming meeting of Hitler and President Joseph P. Kennedy by ensuring that the crimes of the Nazi regime are not revealed. Maguire heads for neutral Switzerland with the evidence, hoping to publish it in ''The New York Times''. March, however, is denounced by his ten-year-old son and apprehended by the Gestapo. 
In the cellars of Gestapo headquarters at Prinz-Albrecht-Strasse, March is severely tortured but does not reveal the location of Maguire. Kripo Chief Arthur Nebe stages a rescue, intending to track March as he meets with Maguire at their rendezvous in Waldshut-Tiengen on the Swiss/German border. March realises what is happening and heads for Auschwitz, leading the authorities in the wrong direction. 
The Gestapo catches up with March at the unmarked site of Auschwitz's completely dismantled extermination camp. Being sure that Maguire has crossed the border into Switzerland, he searches for some sign that the death camp was real. As the Gestapo agents swarm around him, March uncovers bricks in the undergrowth. Satisfied, he pulls out his gun while leaving the readers to draw their own conclusions.
The attendees of the Wannsee Conference are central to the plot, although most of them are already dead at the time of the novel's events.
Throughout the novel, Harris gradually explains the fictional historical developments that allowed Germany to prevail in World War II. The earliest point of divergence mentioned is that Reinhard Heydrich survives the 1942 assassination attempt in Prague which actually killed him. Shortly afterward, Germany embarks on a series of decisive victories.
The German armies on the Eastern Front are stopped at the gates of Moscow at the end of 1941, as in our history. However, the second major offensive into the Caucasus proves far more successful than it was in reality, cutting the flow of oil to the Red Army. With his armies immobilised for want of fuel, Joseph Stalin is forced to flee to the east and a rump Soviet government surrenders in 1943.
Around the same time, German intelligence (in a way never explained) learns the British have cracked the Enigma code, which is leading to the sinking of German submarines. They withdraw their submarines from the Atlantic temporarily and send false intelligence to lure the British fleet to destruction.  The U-Boat campaign against the United Kingdom resumes, starving Britain into accepting a humiliating armistice in 1944. King George VI makes Canada his predominant country of residence and prominent British officials, such as Winston Churchill, follow him there in exile. Edward VIII regains the British throne at the helm of a pro-German puppet government and Wallis Simpson is his queen.
Germany tests its first atom bomb in 1946, and fires an unarmed "V-3" missile that explodes above New York City, to demonstrate Germany's ability to attack the continental United States with long-range missiles. Following this demonstration of power, the United States signs a peace treaty with Germany. This results in the Third Reich being one of the two superpowers of the world, along with the US, which defeats Japan in 1946 (a year later than in reality).
Having achieved victory in Europe, Germany annexes Eastern Europe and most of the western Soviet Union into the Greater German Reich. Following the signing of the Treaty of Rome, Western Europe and Scandinavia are corralled into a pro-German trading bloc, the European Community. 
The surviving areas of the Soviet Union, still led by Stalin, wage an endless guerrilla war with German forces in the Ural Mountains. Mounting casualties (at least 100,000 since 1960, according to the novel) have sapped the German military, despite Hitler's earlier statement (quoted in the novel) about a perpetual war to keep the German people on their toes. The novel describes dead German soldiers being returned to Germany in the middle of the night, and German citizens being encouraged to make ever-larger contributions to Winterhilfswerk ("Winter Relief").  
By 1964, the United States and the Greater German Reich are caught in a Cold War and an arms race to develop more sophisticated nuclear weapons and space technology. It is suggested that German boasts about being ahead of the Americans in the Space Race are justified.  
The novel takes place from April 14-20, 1964, as Germany prepares for Hitler's 75th birthday celebrations on the 20th. A visit by the President of the United States, Joseph P. Kennedy, is planned as part of a gradual detente between the United States and the Greater German Reich. The novel suggests that the Nazi hierarchy is desperate for peace, because the German economy has been staggering since the end of the war. 
The Holocaust has been explained away to the satisfaction of many as merely the relocation of most of the Jewish population to the East into areas where communication and travel are still very poor, explaining why it is impossible for most of their relatives in the West to contact them. Despite this, many Germans suspect the government has eliminated the Jews.
The first few pages of ''Fatherland'' feature two maps; one of the city centre of Berlin, and another showing the extent of the massively expanded Greater German Reich.  The map shows Germany stretching from Alsace-Lorraine (Westmark) in the west to the Ural Mountains and the lower Caucasus in the east. 
The Reich has retained Austria (now known as the "Ostmark"), the Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia (formerly part of Czechoslovakia), and Luxembourg (now named "Moselland"). In the East, Germany has annexed Poland, and Russia west of the Urals has been divided into five Reichkommissariats: Ostland (Belarus and the Baltic states), Ukraine, Muscovy (from Moscow to the Urals), and Caucasus, along with ''Generalkommissariat Taurida'' (Southern Ukraine and the Crimea). Also, the Reich holds control over the Antarctic territory known as New Swabia.
Berlin has been extensively remodelled as Hitler's "capital of capitals," designed according to the wishes of Hitler and his top architect, Albert Speer. By 1964, the city boasts gargantuan Nazi monuments; the Great Hall holds over 160,000 people at the highest Nazi ceremonies; the enormous Arch of Triumph is inscribed with the names of German soldiers killed in the two World Wars, and straddles the Grand Avenue, an immense boulevard lined with captured Soviet artillery and towering statues of Nazi eagles.  The Reichstag and the Brandenburg Gate are dwarfed by the vast, severe, granite civil buildings which dominate Berlin's city centre; the Grand Plaza, the sprawling Berlin railway station, Hitler's mammoth palace, the headquarters of the German Army, and the parliament of the powerless European Community.
The rest of Western Europe, excluding Switzerland, has been corralled by Germany into a European Community, formed from twelve nations: Norway, Sweden (which has surrendered its policy of neutrality), Finland (which has absorbed Karelia from Russia), Denmark, Great Britain, Ireland (which appears to have regained Northern Ireland from Britain), France, Spain (as in real history led by Franco), Portugal, Belgium, the Netherlands and Italy (it is unspecified if Mussolini is still in control). Other countries of ''Fatherland'''s Europe include Croatia, Greece, Romania (which has recovered Bessarabia from the old USSR), a greatly expanded Hungary (which has retaken Transylvania from neighbouring Romania, the state of Slovakia is still led by Jozef Tiso and Slovak People's Party, Bulgaria (which appears to have annexed Central Macedonia and East Macedonia and Thrace from Greece), Albania, Serbia,  Iceland, and Turkey. 
A virtually powerless "European Parliament" is based in Berlin. At the European Parliament building, the flags of the member states are dwarfed by a swastika flag twice the size of the other flags.  The nations of ''Fatherland'''s EC, despite being nominally free under their own governments and leaders (such as Franco and Edward VIII), are closely watched by Germany.  The military forces of the "free" nations of Europe are only just sufficient to police their own territory and their colonies.  European nations are under constant surveillance by Berlin and are subordinate to Germany in all but name. 
Switzerland has not been annexed by the Reich and is not a member of the European Community. By the time the Reich had turned its eyes to it, the stalemate of the Cold War was setting in, and Switzerland had become a convenient neutral spot for American and German intelligence agents to spy on each other. Consequently, Switzerland is the last true democracy in Europe.
The novel also makes many references to the world outside of Europe. The United States is locked in a Cold War with the Greater German Reich. Since the end of the war in 1946, both the US and Germany have been racing against each other to develop sophisticated military, nuclear, and space technologies. Japan is said to have been defeated by the U.S. after the United States detonated two atomic bombs on Japanese territory. Japan seems to have recovered quickly since its defeat and Tokyo is the host for the 1964 Olympic Games. The United States is said to have not participated in the Games since 1936, but is expected to in 1964.
China is a weak independent state     a passing reference hints at China being ruled by a harsh government     and Sino-German relations do not seem particularly strong. A greatly reduced Russian rump state exists, with its capital at Omsk. The United States supplies Russia with weapons and funds, which are used by the Russians to wage an endless guerrilla war with German forces in the Ural Mountains. Although German propaganda plays down the war in the east, the death toll on the Eastern Front is severe. Africa and the rest of Asia are still controlled by the old European colonial empires. South America is not referred to in the novel.
A point left unclear is whether the Holocaust was confined to Nazi-occupied Europe or was extended to the rest of the world. In the novel, the Nazis' Holocaust has never been revealed, and instead the ''Holodomor''     the massive planned famines of the 1930s, in the Ukraine and elsewhere in the USSR     is known throughout the world as "Stalin's Holocaust".
The British Empire appears to be a strong entity and retains its territories in Africa and Asia. Canada, Australia and New Zealand are closely allied to the United States. Princess Elizabeth resides in Canada, continuing to reign over the remaining Commonwealth realms and claiming the British Crown from Edward VIII following the presumed death of her father George VI. Winston Churchill, also in Canada, speaks out against the Greater German Reich, German-controlled Europe, and the puppet British regime. However, Great Britain is afforded a great deal of respect from the German Reich as its Empire and historical institutions were greatly admired by Adolf Hitler and German society in general even in the years before World War II. 
The novel does not make references to the League of Nations or to a possible existence of the United Nations. The International Red Cross exists in the world of ''Fatherland''. 
The novel describes that since the end of the war between Germany and the United States in 1946, a nuclear stalemate has developed, which seems to overshadow international relations. Various references in the book suggest that Germany is paranoid of a nuclear war. New German buildings are constructed with mandatory fallout shelters; the ''Reichsarchiv'' (German National Archive) claims to have been built to withstand a direct missile hit. Despite the catastrophically high death toll on the Eastern Front, the German military is afraid to use nuclear weapons in case they provoke an American nuclear attack on the Reich. It is not explicitly stated whether Germany and the United States are the only nuclear powers in the world of ''Fatherland''.
In the novel, Western Europe has been left relatively untouched by the Reich, as Germany concentrates on the conquest of what is left of the USSR. The United Kingdom holds on to the remains of its empire and Germany relies on the British to keep the peace in Africa and Asia.
Although Hitler has taken some steps to soften his image, no substantive changes have taken place in the Nazi regime's basic character.  The Reichstag Fire Decree and the Enabling Act of 1933, the legal bases for Hitler's dictatorship, still remain in effect.  The press, radio and the new medium of television are very tightly controlled.  Dissenters are dealt with very harshly, often being sent to concentration camps.
In the novel, the bedrock of Nazi ideology is still the policy of blaming subversives for social problems. Jews (see anti-semitism), communists, homosexuals, incest, and interracial relationships (particularly between "Aryans" and Slavs) continue being scapegoats for the Nazi Party. The Nazi view of other peoples has also been forced to change. With the extermination of the Jews now completed and most of Europe and Russia under German control, the Nazi Party appears to have spent the early 1960s blaming the United States for causing Germany's problems. Nazi propaganda has previously depicted America as a land of corruption, degeneracy and poverty. However, as the diplomatic meeting between Hitler and Kennedy nears, German propaganda is forced to change its image of America to a more positive view. In 1964, the Nazi Party no longer has any internal or external enemies left to fight and as a consequence, the very structure of Nazi society is starting to fall apart.
Despite its ideological and moral decline, Germany enjoys a very high standard of living, with its citizens living off the high-quality produce of their European satellite states and freed from physical labour by thousands of Polish, Czech and Ukrainian slaves. The European nations produce high-quality consumer goods for German citizens while also providing services, such as the SS academy at Oxford University and German holiday resorts in Spain, France, and Greece. Products from across Europe and their colonial empires flood into Germany, providing German citizens with a wide choice of high-quality goods. Hitler's crabbed, banal personal tastes in art and music have become the norm for society, creating a stagnant and boringly repetitive cultural atmosphere.
The social structure of Nazi Germany has changed considerably from the 1940s. Military service is still compulsory, but recruits have a choice of service. Eastern Europe has been colonized by German settlers (although local partisan resistance movements are very strong and active) and the German population has soared as a result of Nazi emphasis on childbirth. Increasing numbers of Nazi officials are university-educated bureaucrats. The SS serves as the country's police force, and concentration camps are still in existence for political dissidents, occasionally given staged inspections by the International Red Cross. 
According to the main characters, however, German society in the early 1960s is becoming more and more rebellious.  An increasing number of people have no memory of the instability that paved the way for Hitler's rise to power.  Student protests, particularly against the war in the Urals, American and British cultural influence (including the rise of The Beatles' popularity, already denounced in the official German press), and growing pacifism are all found in Nazi society.  Jazz music is still popular and Germany claims to have come up with a version which is free from "negro influence".  In spite of the general repressiveness, the Beatles' real-life Hamburg engagements have happened here as well.  Germany appears to be under constant attack by terrorist groups, with officials assassinated and civilian airliners bombed in-flight. Religion is now officially discouraged by the state, and the Hitler Youth is compulsory for all children. Universities are centres of student dissent, and the White Rose movement is once again active. The Nazis continue with their policies for women, encouraging women to remain in the home and bring up many children. Nazi organisations such as ''Kraft durch Freude'' still exist and fulfil their original roles. A sprawling transport network covers the entire Reich, including vast autobahnen and railways in the manner of the actually proposed ''Breitspurbahn'' system, carrying immense trains.
The level of technology in ''Fatherland'' is much the same as in the actual 1960s, and in some respects, is more advanced. The German military makes use of jet aircraft, nuclear submarines, and aircraft carriers, while civilian technology has also advanced considerably. Jet airliners, televisions, hair-dryers and even photocopiers are used in Germany. 
The novel makes references to the space programmes of the United States and the Third Reich, both of whom appear to possess sophisticated space technology. Judging by a reference made by Maguire, both the United States and the Third Reich launched the first artificial satellites into orbit shortly after the war, from White Sands and Peenemunde respectively. The extent of space technology and exploration in the world of ''Fatherland'' is unknown.
A TV movie of the book was made in 1994 by HBO, starring Rutger Hauer as March and Miranda Richardson as Maguire for which she received a Golden Globe Award in 1995 for Best Performance by an Actress in a Supporting Role in a Series, Mini-Series or Motion Picture Made for TV. Rutger Hauer's performance was also nominated, as well as the film itself. The film also received an Emmy nomination in 1995 for Special Visual Effects.
Although the basic plot remains the same, the 1994 film differs in many ways from the book. The film changes the historical time line divergence in the novel to the Germans successfully defeating the Allies during the D-Day invasion in June 1944. 
Following the loss at D-Day, Princess Elizabeth and Winston Churchill flee from the United Kingdom to Canada, while Dwight D. Eisenhower resigns in disgrace. With defeating Nazism in Europe now seemingly hopeless, America turns its back on the war in Europe and focuses on Japan, thus allowing Germany to regroup and defeat the United Kingdom and the Soviet Union. It also states that in 1964, the 85-year-old Joseph Stalin is still alive and leading a Soviet Union rump state similar to the version in the novel in an endless guerrilla war against Germany. Unlike the novel, no European Union is formed as Western and Southern Europe are annexed into the Reich, now known as "Germania". Unlike the novel the German Border with the Soviet Union is shown to be the same as it was in 1941 before Operation Barbarossa (apart from the Baltic States which are part of the Reich). This coincides with the film's story of the war ending in mid-1944, by which time German forces had been mostly pushed out of Soviet territory.
There were major and significant character changes in the film version. March and Maguire seem to be older than in described in the novel, and they do not have a sexual relationship. In the book there is a Gestapo record on March that shows his distance to the regime very clearly and becomes dangerous to him; Maguire is decidedly against president Joseph Kennedy whom she considers to be antisemitic. These views are changed in the film to reflect more of the Cold War between Germany and America. Maguire is pro-American and rather hopeful for Kennedy's visit, while March expresses the opposite view.
The most important alteration may be the way how the Holocaust is revealed to the main characters and to the American public. In the novel it is March who has an old and genuine interest in the fate of the Jews and who finds out the truth through Luther's documents hidden in a Berlin airport. In the film, Maguire gets the documents from Luther's mistress who does not know about his death and believes that she will later go with him to America. The mistress is radically anti-Semitic and reveals full of joy the murdering of the Jews to a shocked Maguire. When Maguire tells this to March in a park, the patriotic March in the beginning does not want to believe the story but the documents, with photographs of murdered people, convince him.
While the novel sees Maguire escape to Switzerland with the documents she is going to publish in America, in the film she passes them to a colleague. In the film the American president is actually visiting Germany (in the book the visit is scheduled only for September). Hitler waits for Kennedy in front of a huge audience, but Maguire's friend breaks through the cordon and presents the papers to the US ambassador and Kennedy just as their motorcade stops before the president meets Hitler. Kennedy, appearing shocked by the photographs, abruptly leaves the scene. A loudspeaker tells the crowd (and Hitler) that Kennedy is returning to America immediately. 
As in the novel, March is denounced by his son to the Gestapo. However, the ending then diverges from the novel as March is killed by the Gestapo in Berlin when trying to take his son with him to America. The film diverges from the novel as well for Maguire as she is last seen waiting for March and his son so they can escape back to America together. In the end a voiceover from March's son tells that Maguire was captured by the Gestapo as the revelations of the Holocaust and the lack of a strategic alliance with the USA causes the Nazi regime to collapse.
The novel was also serialised on BBC radio, starring Anton Lesser as March and Angeline Ball as Charlie Maguire. It was dramatised, produced and directed by John Dryden and first broadcast on 9 July 1997. The ending is changed slightly to allow for the limitations of the medium: the entire Auschwitz death camp is discovered in an abandoned state, and Charlie Maguire's passage into Switzerland definitely occurs.
The unabridged audiobook version of the novel was released by Random House Audio in 1993, read by Werner Klemperer, best remembered for his two-time Emmy Award-winning role of bumbling Colonel Klink on the 60s TV series ''Hogan's Heroes''.