The article was '''kept''' (22:24, July 26, 2007).
The article is of good quality and I think it would pass a good article nomination, but it is not of featured article quality anymore. 
I am confused by Fred's description.   21:54, 6 July 2007 (UTC)
Pasted from talk page:
Hi. While I am inclined to support Obama (we're both left-handed smokers), my BS detector lights up a little after reading this. In the Political Image section it describes him as being neither lefty nor righty. He's been against the Iraq war since day one (a position typically reserved for the extremes on both sides - like Ron Paul or Denis Kucinich), is pro-choice and advocates universal healthcare. In 2007 America this combination puts you on the left.
Hellfire made an edit in September. Essentially, it says that Obama got the endorsement of the Fraternal Order of Police and a citation is given. However, looking at that citation , the Chicago Tribune article actually said " 'I don't see him as pro-law enforcement," said Wheaton police Chief Mark Field. "I could spend hours with this man talking about his voting record. It is very anti-public safety." The crowd of 60 police officials applauded only once during Obama's 20-minute remarks. The whole article is about the chilly reception that Obama got.
I don't feel Barak's picture is from a neutral point of view. This looks like an image from the campaign for his presidency. 
Since his Senate race in 2004, some American politicians and commentators, many African-American, have asserted that Sen. Obama is not "African-American" or not "black like me" because he was not descended from American slaves. His "blackness" has been questioned.
In November 2006, Barack Obama acknowledged his participation in a real estate deal to which Antoin "Tony" Rezko, an Obama campaign contributor, was a participant. Under the deal, Obama and Rezko purchased adjoining properties, with Rezko later reselling part of his parcel to Obama. No laws are alleged to have been broken and Obama is not under investigation. Obama acknowledges that the exchange may have appeared improper, and said "I consider this a mistake on my part and I regret it." 
After reviewing the ongoing discussion regarding Senator Barack Obama's categorization as an "Irish American Politician," 
As far as I can tell, after four days, there is not a single editor in the extended commentary above who agrees that this article warrants review.  My own review of Feddhicks' concerns is:
If Feddhicks has content issues, I suggest he follows the procedures for dispute resolution. Perhaps an argument could be made that Exernal links need pruning per   and  ;  Wiki isn't Obama's personal website, and the links are a bit out of control.  That is the only deficiency I can find in the article:  I suggest that External links be pruned, and '''move that this FAR be closed'''.    ( ) 01:39, 11 July 2007 (UTC)
The continual relegation and of this does smack of ownership. I realize this is an FA and consideration should be taken when editing it, but come on, this is getting out of hand. Torturous Devastating Cudgel 18:51, 11 July 2007 (UTC)''
As noted, there is a POV issues with the article, that is actively being discussed. If no progress one way or the other has been made on this, then it is time to delist the article from FA status.   19:58, 11 July 2007 (UTC)
I thought  dealt with things well and solves the issue. (However, it has since been reverted.)  I think the incident should be mentioned in the article itself in a few sentences.  Obama released a statement on it and everything.--  17:39, 12 July 2007 (UTC)
I saw on ABC a story about sites like wikipedia used by supporters to help their candidate.  It wasn't specifically about Obama but did mention Obama's article.  There was mention of his travel section.  Since they mentioned about that, let me give you my 2 cents worth.  The travel section is pure spin.  Maybe someone is trying to make him look like a world leader.  It really doesn't belong in any biography unless the biography is book length.
So overall, if we are serious about featured article status, the whole article needs to be revamped to make it a biography, not a campaign press release, like ABC said.  Cut the travel section, maybe move it to the campaign article, clean up some misleading statements, move most of the campaign news off, after all the articles like FDR doesn't have his campaign details, etc.
If we want to award all the people running for president a featured article star, then it's equal treatment that we give Obama one.  Since ABC mentioned grass roots people supporting their candidate on the internet, like wikipedia, we don't want to ruffle their feathers and can make everyone happy by giving everyone the featured article star.   04:57, 22 July 2007 (UTC)