The organization is led by Executive Director Rev. Cindi Love.  It was founded in 1998 by the Rev. Dr. Mel White who was a ghostwriter for Jerry Falwell, Billy Graham, Pat Robertson, and others until he came out as a gay man.
Soulforce has sought nonviolent dialogue with leaders of every Protestant denomination and the Roman Catholic Church, as well as religious leaders such as James Dobson, Jerry Falwell, and Pat Robertson.  When dialogue is denied, Soulforce, as directed by the principles of nonviolence, begins to plan and implement direct actions which have included vigils, protest rallies, sit-ins, marches, and various forms of peaceful civil disobedience.  Soulforce has also helped share the stories of many ex-gay survivors, most recently by creating the Ex-Gay Survivor Conference in 2007.  Through the American Family Outing project, LGBT couples and parents, as well as straight ally families, created dialogue about sexual orientation and gender identity at six of the largest mega-churches in the country, including those pastored by Dr. Rick Warren, Joel Osteen, Bill Hybels, and Bishop T.D. Jakes.  The Seven Straight Nights for Equal Rights campaign galvanized hundreds of new straight allies, and its Right to Serve Campaign protested the Don't ask, don't tell policy in the United States military. Soulforce has also challenged policies at many Christian colleges and universities that allegedly deny academic freedom to LGBTQ students through an almost annual bus trip by young activists called the Equality Ride.
Since 2006, Soulforce has supported a project called Equality Ride led by young adults known as "Soulforce Q" or "Equality Riders".  In 2007 it was divided into two different trips (eastern and western), each leg visiting 15-20 different colleges.  At nearly every school, the young adults (known as Soulforce Q) find that many students are hungry to have conversations about faith, sexual orientation, and gender-identity.  Some school administrators choose to allow the conversation between students and Equality Riders.  Other schools deny access, and this sometimes results in well-orchestrated nonviolent civil disobedience to help educate the public about the supposed indecency inherent in the school's discriminatory policies. The Equality Ride was founded by Jacob Reitan
Caleb Price, an analyst with the Evangelical Christian organization Focus on the Family, has stated that churches "that have been targeted by Soulforce need to be clear about the real agenda behind these staged actions... It's not for dialogue and greater understanding -- it's to tempt them to embrace a false doctrine, which will keep many from the gospel message of hope and transformation for those who are trapped in homosexuality."