In May 2006, it was announced former ''Dream Team'' actor Jamie Lomas would arrive in Hollyoaks as "bad boy" Warren Fox. Along with his casting, it was announced his former ''Dream Team'' co-star Ricky Whittle would take on the part of "mysterious" Calvin Valentine. Speaking of Lomas and Whittle's casting, a ''Hollyoaks'' spokesperson stated: "We're delighted to welcome Ricky and Jamie to the ''Hollyoaks'' cast. Their characters are set to bring lots of drama to the show!"
Warren immediately showed a confrontational personality from his original appearance on ''Hollyoaks''. He always put himself first, and would do anything to get what he wants involving money, women and business opportunities. Warren is selfish, arrogant and devious.
Following the announcement of Warren's return in October 2010, Jamie Lomas was asked whether he thought the character would have changed since his last appearance. He replied, "I don't think you can really change a character like Warren. I think it would be a little boring if he came back as some sort of softie but, like I say, there are new people around now for him to bounce off."
In 2009, Jamie Lomas decided to quit the soap after three years. Speaking of his decision, Lomas stated: "I've had a fantastic three years at ''Hollyoaks'' but having fully explored the character, I felt the time was right for me to move on. I'm delighted to be going out as part of such a dramatic storyline and my final scenes are some of the most dramatic I've ever filmed. I'm sure viewers will be hooked!" He continued to say: "I've had a great time playing Warren and have thoroughly enjoyed being part of the ''Hollyoaks'' cast where I've made some brilliant friends and worked with some great people."
During an interview with ''Digital Spy'', Lomas admitted he initially wanted to stay on the show for only two years: "Well I wanted to go after two years. I sat down with Bryan Kirkwood who told me what he had in store and it was too good to refuse! The storyline was so fantastic." He later revealed how he felt about his final appearance, admitting: "To be honest with you, when I knew I was filming my final scene     obviously I've spent three years of my life there and I've got lots of good friends there - I got really emotional. I had to take myself off and have a word with myself and say 'Come on     you need to pull it together!' It was great because all the producers came down and clapped me and bought me a bottle of champagne. It was very emotional."
Lomas's final appearance as Warren also saw the return of Gemma Bissix's character, and Warren's enemy, Clare Devine, and featured a fire in The Loft, which caused Warren's death.
 Series producer Paul Marquess commented on Warren's return, saying: "We were hopeful that Jamie's return would be the best-kept secret in soap history, but when Jamie arrived on set it proved impossible. When Warren Fox died in the Loft fire, we all thought that was the end of the dangerous gangster that terrorised the residents of Hollyoaks village. But when our writers made the shocking suggestion to bring back Warren in a juicy plot, it was just too irresistible to ignore as they not only made it feasible that Warren could have escaped the fire and fled the village, they created an explosive and very clever plot with lots of twists and turns that is guaranteed to have the audience hooked. When the idea was pitched to Jamie, he knew it was too good an opportunity to miss. Warren Fox was one of the soap's most memorable villains and we're very excited about his return." He returned on 29 October 2010.
Lomas later expressed his feelings about returning, saying: "I'm really excited. I got the call and I got told about the storyline and it was great     full of twists and turns. I kind of thought that my character had run his course with the other characters that were around before, but there's a new breed in now, so that means plenty of potential for Warren to come back in and cause some more mayhem."
 On-screen, flashback sequences were filmed to show how Warren survived the fire. ''Hollyoaks'' announced a special episode centred around Warren and how he survived the fire to be broadcast on 1 December 2010, shown to viewers in various flashbacks.
Warren was put into foster care along with younger sister Katy (Hannah Tointon) when they were just children. They were fostered by a woman who had a son named Spencer Gray (Darren John Langford). Spencer had special needs and formed a close bond with Warren. However, Warren's foster mother regularly physically abused Warren and Katy. This led to Warren leaving home as a teenager. As a young adult living in Spain, Warren was arrested and subsequently jailed, after former friend Sean Kennedy (Matthew Jay Lewis) testified against him in court. He was released in 2006.
Warren arrives in Hollyoaks in 2006 to find Sean. Warren demands money from Sean as compensation for having him jailed, but is willing to write off Sean's debts he owes him in exchange for a night with his wife, Louise Kennedy (Roxanne McKee). Louise refuses to sleep with him, and tells Sean that the only way to settle the debt would be to give Warren ownership of Evissa. Sean agrees, and Warren gets shared ownership. Warren has an affair with Clare Cunningham (Gemma Bissix), whilst she is still married to Max Cunningham (Matt Littler). One of their encounters is taped by Mel Burton (Cassie Powney), which she shows to Sam "OB" O'Brien (Darren Jeffries) and Sophie Burton (Connie Powney). Mel and Sophie are then killed, and OB is severely injured, in the explosion at The Dog in the Pond. After Clare is exposed for attempting to kill Max, OB tells him about the affair and Max fires Warren from The Loft. Warren pretends to take the news in stride, but actually hires thugs to trash The Loft. Max reluctantly signs his half of The Loft over to Warren to stop the vandalism. When Clare returns, she and Warren are partners in owning The Loft. However, it is not long before Warren and Clare fall out with each other. Warren and Calvin Valentine (Ricky Whittle) begin to have a rivalry for Louise's affections.
Mercedes McQueen (Jennifer Metcalfe) sleeps with Warren after being hurt by boyfriend, Russ Owen (Stuart Manning). Warren begins teasing her with the possibility of telling Russ the truth. When Warren discovers that Sean has returned, demanding   10,000 from Louise after discovering Warren has given her co-ownership of Evissa, he agrees to help Louise get the money. However, Warren later kidnaps Sean and kills him, burying him in nearby woods. Louise and Calvin break up, and Warren supports her. After they sleep together, a guilty Louise reconciles with Calvin. Justin Burton (Chris Fountain) then moves in with Warren, who is angered by his romance with Warren's sister Katy, who arrives to stay. Warren is arrested for Sean's murder after Clare alerts the police. He is however released after a failure to find Sean's body. Shortly after, Clare is pushed over the balcony of The Loft in an attempt on her life. Justin catches Warren and Mercedes sleeping together as he plans to leave with Katy. Justin heads to the train station and is run over by a van. Warren is arrested for the attempt on Clare's life, but is innocent. During his court appearance, Warren is found not guilty when Mercedes admits she was with him on the night Clare was pushed. Warren goes to see Justin in hospital, revealing he ran him over. Katy is disgusted to learn that Warren killed Sean.
Warren grows fonder of Justin, who begins working for Warren, as Louise and Warren's relationship becomes more serious. Clare continues attempts to drive Louise and Warren apart. However, Warren threatens to push her from the balcony if she does not sign over The Loft to him and leave Hollyoaks, to which she agrees. Days later, Warren returns home to his flat to find it trashed and no sign of Katy. Warren, Justin and Max begin looking for her, and are later called by Clare, who tells them she has Katy. Clare tells Warren that she wants revenge on Justin for pushing her over the balcony. Warren pretends to kill Justin. However, Clare is not fooled, so drives off with Katy tied up in the car. Warren, Max and Justin follow her. As Clare swerves to avoid cyclists, she crashes over a cliff and into water below. Warren, Justin and Max jump in, rescuing Katy. Clare meanwhile, disappears underneath the water, apparently dying. Some time after, Louise is notified that a body has been found, and it may be Sean. Louise identifies the body, but it turns out to not be Sean's. Katy attempts to try to tell Louise that Warren killed Sean, but he ends up proposing to her, to which she accepts. During their engagement party, Louise becomes suspicious of Warren's dealings, and is later attacked in Evissa by Ste Hay (Kieron Richardson), who ends up setting fire to it and leaving Louise for dead. Calvin saves Louise, and the next day, Warren beats up Ste.
Following a poker game with Tony Hutchinson (Nick Pickard), Mike Barnes (Tony Hirst) and Darren Osborne (Ashley Taylor Dawson), Warren ends up winning Darren's half of The Dog. Warren tells Louise he has bought her The Dog for Christmas. When they inform Jack (James McKenna) and Frankie Osborne (Helen Pearson) that they now own a half of The Dog, Jack ends up having a heart attack. As Jack recovers, Frankie goes through the unpleasantness of having to share The Dog with Warren and Louise. Warren's old friends appear at The Dog and hold everyone hostage, which ends with Darren getting shot. Louise feels she cannot trust Warren anymore, but forgives him when he signs back his half of The Dog to the Osbornes. Barry Newton (Nico Mirallegro) and Lauren Valentine (Dominique Jackson) find Sean's body, and Warren confesses to Louise that he killed him. Louise is furious, but becomes more angry when she finds out Katy knew. Louise then exposes Katy and Zak Ramsey (Kent Riley)'s affair to Warren. Katy is angry when Louise agrees to become an alibi for Warren on the night of Sean's death as she does not want him to go to prison. Katy tells Warren to admit to the murder but he refuses. Katy decides to leave, but is dragged from a taxi by Louise and Warren. After Warren attempts to convince Katy to stay, she leaves. Louise is later arrested for Sean's murder. Warren and Darren persuade mentally unstable Jake Dean (Kevin Sacre) to confess to Sean's murder, to which he does. Louise is then released.
Mandy Richardson (Sarah Jayne Dunn) and Louise become wedding planners. Mandy then starts to help Warren plan his wedding to Louise. Louise becomes very suspicious of Warren and Mandy, believing they are sleeping together. Cindy Cunningham (Stephanie Waring) pushes Louise further into believing this. Louise turns to alcohol, which finally drives Warren to confide in Mandy and begin an affair. Ravi Roy (Stephen Uppal) ends up finding Mandy and Warren sleeping together on one occasion, but agrees to keep quiet. Nige Foster (Sam Townend) is revealed to be alive, despite Warren telling Calvin, who thinks he killed him, he is dead. Warren pays Nige money to stay hidden so that it keeps Calvin on his side. Calvin agrees to take part in a raid on The Loft after he is approached by DI Mark Gascoyne (Craig Russell). Not having time to warn Warren about the raid, Calvin goes along with Mark and two other officers, whom he later discovers are not police officers and that the raid is unofficial. Mark gets Calvin to beat Warren up as revenge on him after he beat him up. Calvin has to agree, however he phones an ambulance afterwards.
Mandy tells Louise about the affair and the pair plan revenge on Warren, after Louise tells Mandy that Warren killed Sean. They then come up with a plan to steal Warren's money and go to the police about the murder. Louise sees CCTV footage of Warren and Mandy sleeping together in The Loft and decides to murder Warren and frame Mandy. On the wedding day, Warren's foster brother Spencer turns up, stating his mother has died. Warren asks him to be his best man. Warren, Ravi and Spencer arrive at the hotel where the wedding is being held. Warren goes up to Louise's room where he hides a necklace for her, however, he finds the gun which she plans to use to kill him. Warren takes the gun and removes the bullets as Louise returns to the room. He gives her the necklace and asks if the gun was his present. Louise reveals she hates Warren because he had ruined her life, killed her husband and cheated on her. Warren begins crying and apologises to Louise, telling her that he wants to start a family with her. Louise picks up the gun and tells him she could never bring his child into the world. However, Louise discovers the gun is empty and Warren reveals he has the bullets. Warren attacks Louise for trying to kill him. A struggle breaks out and Warren ends up killing Louise. The wedding party believe Louise left Warren due to his affair, unaware of her death. A heartbroken Warren watches as Mandy leaves the village with Tony. Carmel and Calvin approach him in an attempt to comfort him. Carmel mentions that Louise was pregnant, leaving Warren devastated.
Warren captures the affections of Sasha Valentine (Nathalie Emmanuel), who Warren asks to help look after Spencer. Warren and Sasha share a kiss. Warren upsets her by having a one-night-stand with Sarah Barnes (Loui Batley). However, Warren and Sasha eventually begin a relationship, with Sasha moving in. Calvin makes numerous attempts to stop his sister from seeing Warren, however it only pushes her away. Calvin then records a confession from Warren that he murdered Sean, and also admits to Louise's murder. Mark arrests Warren, but later tells Calvin that the recorder has not worked and that Warren will be released. Calvin goes to see Warren at The Loft and a fight breaks out. The fight gets out of hand when Warren is knocked over The Loft balcony. Sasha breaks them up as onlookers watch. After Calvin announces Warren as a murderer in front of the villagers, Sasha takes Warren's side.
Warren starts to become the victim of a hate campaign with posters spread around the village declaring him to be a murderer. He receives mysterious phone calls and poison pen letters. In an attempt to leave the village with some money, Warren makes a deal with Justin to burn down The Loft for   5,000 so that he can claim the insurance money and Justin can get money to start a new life with Hannah Ashworth (Emma Rigby). Justin agrees and goes to meet Warren at The Loft, but is stopped by Calvin who tells him not to get involved with another of Warren's schemes. Changing his mind Justin leaves only to be seen by Sasha. While waiting for Justin in the club, Warren is knocked out by Clare using a baseball bat. When Warren awakens, he finds himself tied to a chair and is shocked to see that Clare is alive. She tells him that both he and Justin have ruined her life and makes Warren call Justin to meet at The Loft. Calvin then arrives to speak to Warren and finds Warren tied up, Clare with a match and The Loft covered in petrol. He initially proceeds to do the right thing by calling the police, but after Warren taunts Clare by saying that he always wins, Calvin backs off and leaves his fate in Clare's hands. Hannah arrives at The Loft to find Justin, and Clare accidentally knocks her out. She wakes up and attacks Clare, who drops a match onto the bar, the pair fall through the banister to the floor below unconscious. Justin enters The Loft through the upstairs door, where he finds Warren tied up. Justin asks him where Hannah is and Warren tells him that she is not there. Justin starts to untie him but he hears Hannah's calls for help and realises that Warren lied. He leaves him in the fire and escapes with Hannah. Clare is nowhere to be seen and has escaped. Warren unties himself and realises he cannot get out of the balcony door so jumps down the cellar door, he lands on his ankle on the stairs and breaks it. Warren looks up at the ceiling mirror and notices the support chains are on fire. They break and the mirror collapses onto Warren, apparently killing him instantly.
Over a year after his supposed death, Warren returns to Hollyoaks in October 2010, revealing he is alive. He breaks into Chez Chez and leaves a dead fox for club owner Cheryl Brady (Bronagh Waugh). The next day, Warren follows Mandy in the village and is seen by Tom Cunningham (Ellis Hollins), who claims to have seen Warren's ghost. Warren is later seen by Tony walking past the village walls. Mandy and Warren meet, revealing they are in a relationship and have had contact since their last encounter. Warren tells Mandy that they are going to destroy Tony, as revenge for him leaving her abroad. On the same night, a fire is started in Il Gnosh by an unseen character and Steph Cunningham (Carley Stenson) and Malachy Fisher (Glen Wallace) are killed.
The following day, Warren and Mandy argue and she threatens him. Later, Warren enters the McQueens' home where he asks Theresa McQueen (Jorgie Porter) who she has told and mentions that someone else knows, but does not reveal what he is referring to. It is later revealed that Theresa witnessed Warren escaping The Loft and since then, he has been blackmailed. On another occasion, Warren threatens to push Theresa from a roof in the village if she does not tell him who has been blackmailing him. He also reveals how he escaped the fire. In flashback scenes, days before the fire Warren meets a suicidal man named Dale Greer (Chris Geere). Dale and Warren bond and he begins working for him. When Clare starts the fire and Warren is apparently killed by the mirror, the floors collapsed and Warren is found by Dale in the cellar. After being rescued by Dale, Warren realises everyone believes he is still in the club. Warren kills Dale before putting his body in the cellar. Warren then threatens to kill Theresa, who witnesses him escaping, if she tells anyone. Warren then leaves the village. With Warren still threatening to push her from the walls, Theresa admits she killed Calvin and this forms the beginning of their relationship, as friends, in which they both help protect the other's secret.
Warren breaks into Chez Chez and tries to break the floor with a sledgehammer, however is interrupted by Brendan Brady (Emmett J. Scanlan). Brendan asks who Warren is. Warren lies that he is Cheryl's boyfriend before phoning Mandy for information about him. Warren enters The Dog to the surprise of local residents. Claiming to have suffered from amnesia, Warren pretends to regain some of his memory of several people. Warren later confronts Tony and the pair have a stand off with Tony threatening to attack Warren for telling Dom to burn down his restaurant which resulted in the death of Steph and Malachy. Warren then leaves and Brendan Brady tells Tony to call the police and inform them that Warren is still alive. Warren is later arrested and taken into custody where he is interviewed by DC Ethan Scott. Warren tells Ethan to speak to his commanding officers and later Warren is released. After returning to the village Warren meets with Cheryl in time for Christmas and she believes he truly has feelings for her. A few days later Warren returns to the club where he starts to dig up the floor. Danny Houston watches Warren doing so on the club's CCTV and calls Brendan. Danny tells Brendan to find out what Warren is up to, believing him to be in league with the police. Brendan then locks Warren in the cellar and asks him to tell him everything but Warren doesn't. Brendan then leaves Warren locked in the cellar until he admits to what he is up to.Warren and Brendan plan to get Danny's half of the club from him however things don't go to plan and Brendan kills Danny. Warren helps Brendan get rid of Danny's body in the pond by the dog.
Warren finds out that Mandy had been sending him the texts in order for him to come back to Hollyoaks with her. Warren frightens her out the village. When Kyle Ryder is due in court Theresa faces prison. In order to stop her being sent down Warren arranges for Kyle to be beaten up meaning the court case has to be postponed. Brendan helps Warren by getting Kyle to escape from hospital leaving him to go on the run. Brendan jumps to the wrong conclusions believing that Warren really killed Calvin and that Theresa is taking the blame for him. Brendan pretends to be Warren and encourages Kyle to seek revenge on Theresa, hoping that the truth will come out.
Although Warren is supposed to be with Cheryl, he soon returns his cheating ways when Mitzeee (Rachel Shenton) grabs his attention. Warren doesn't understand why she is interested in Brendan, unknowing their relationship is fake. Warren and Mitzeee almost sleep together but are stopped before they have chance when Cheryl walks in. Cheryl is none the wiser but Brendan cottons on and warns Mitzeee not to make a fool of him. 
Warren reassures Theresa when she hears that Kyle is still about, thinking that Brendan has ensured that Kyle has taken the money and run. Warren becomes suspicious when Kyle comes to Chez Chez asking for Warren and Warren later sees him talking to Brendan. Warren does everything he can to persuade Theresa not to leave with her baby in fear of Kyle but she leaves anyway. When Warren phones Theresa and Kyle answers telling him that he is doing what they had arranged Warren realises that Brendan has been pretending to be him. At first Brendan refuses to tell Warren where Kyle has taken Theresa but when he realises that Theresa and her baby Kathleen-Angel might die he tells him. Warren turns up and Kyle knocks him out. Later, Warren has regained consciousness and shoots Kyle in the back not knowing that he is holding Kathleen-Angel, and Kyle falls down the lift shaft with the baby. Theresa is horrified and believes that Warren had been plotting with Kyle all along after what Kyle had said on the phone. Ethan, who had been pushed down the lift shaft by Kyle previously, helps Warren to get Kathleen-Angel out but cannot get out himself. Warren urges Theresa to leave with Carmel and the baby but she doesn't listen and goes back to save Ethan. She falls into the lift shaft while trying and then forces Warren to save Ethan before she lets him save herself. He saves Ethan and then suddenly the lift plummets with Kyle's dead body and Theresa still on top of it.
In hospital as Theresa fights for her life Carmel accuses Warren of being in love with Theresa and his face leads the audience to think this is true.
During ''The British Soap Awards'', Jamie Lomas has been nominated for several awards for his portrayal of the character, including 'Sexiest Male' in 2008, 'Villain of the Year' in 2007, 2008, 2009 and 2011 'Best Actor' in 2008 and 2009. He has also been nominated at the ''Inside Soap Awards'' for 'Best Bad Boy' in 2007 and 2008 and also 'Best Actor' in 2009.
Ruth Deller of entertainment website ''Lowculture'' has often criticised Warren; in one feature she slammed his final storylines stating: "Apparently he's still around and there's some tedious and unlikely 'romance' between him and Sasha. Oh, and he's bedded Swimbint (Sarah Barnes) for good measure. Really, didn't this character's point expire about two years ago now?"
Gareth McLean of ''Radio Times'' has been critical of Warren stating: "There are many bad apples in Hollyoaks, but only one that's rotten to the core. Warren Fox has caused so much misery to so many people - Russ, Mercedes, Ste, Cindy, the Barneses, the Deans and don't forget Justin - it's a wonder the villagers haven't ganged up, Murder on the Orient Express-style, and offed him."