During the first season reunion, Hoopz announced that her relationship with Flavor Flav was over, saying "It's like that, but it's not ''like that''." When discussing the upcoming season, Flav emphatically told the producers "No more gold diggers!"
Filming began in May 2006 and consisted of an 11 episode season, with another episode for a reunion show. VH1 uploaded videos of contestant auditions on IFilm and encouraged viewers to rank the contestants.
The show premiered with 3.3 million viewers. The format of the show largely stayed the same as the first season, with the exception of Flav's deliberations with Big Rick as to who he would keep or send home before the actual ceremony; this angle was dropped during the second season. The second series' season finale was the second highest non-sports basic cable program of the year drawing over 7.5 million viewers which is the highest rated show in VH1 history.
On November 28, 2006, the complete second season was released onto DVD.
The following numbers indicate which type of date the contestant won:
Twenty new contestants arrive at the mansion and discover that are were only fourteen beds. When H-Town and Saaphyri fight over a bed, Flav asked them what happened. After finding out who started the fight, Saaphyri is disqualified for physically assaulting H-Town. Flav revealed that he had a spy in his house; this turned out to be Eye'z. She told Flav that Bamma is too quiet, Somethin is crazy, Hood was sent to the show by her agent, Wire was on The Fifth Wheel, Tiger wasn't into Flav, Choclate didn't say much, and Toasteee drinks too much. Later, Sumthin shared an intimate moment with Flav, and Spunkeey called her out on lesbian statements she made before. Somethin erupted and begins to scream; the producers added a demonic voice for humorous effect. After the five girls Hood, Bamma, H-Town, Choclate and Saaphyri were eliminated, the contestants discovered that Somethin had defecated on the floor during the elimination ceremony because she couldn't hold it in or go to the bathroom.
Flav challenges the remaining fourteen Flavorettes to a blind speed dating competition so he could get to know them without appearance being a factor. Things fell apart when Flav realized he couldn't eat something he couldn't see. The girls were each given ten minutes to leave a lasting impression on Flav as he stumbled from table to table. In the end, Flav chose Tiger, Like Dat, and Buckwild as the winners while indulging in a bucket of KFC.
In the morning, Buckeey commented on Like Dat's slovenly table manners. Later in the day, the three girls who won the speed dating competition accompanied Flav on a group date to the "gonzoleers" (gondolas) in the LBC. Flavor Flav tried to stick to the tradition of kissing all the girls as they passed under the bridges, however Tiger had no interest in kissing him. She claimed that she didn't like kissing him after other girls. Later that evening, Flav had a mixer, and all went well until Wire watched Buckeey and Flavor Flav kiss. She stood there until Flav asked her to go inside. She then played the piano very loudly and ruined Buckeey's date. Toasteee gave Flavor Flav advice on who he should eliminate, and he took this into consideration that night in the elimination ceremony. Wire and Spunkeey were both eliminated. Spunkeey cried hard when she was eliminated and was sad that he kept "the beauty queen over her" and the "girls who want to have sex with other girls". She also said "maybe I should've shit on your floor" as she hugged Flav goodbye.
Flav divides the girls into two groups. Buckwild, Krazy, Toasteee, Somethin, Bootz, and Deelishis have to work at one of Flav's favorite restaurants. Sumthin gets fired for not taking it seriously, and Bootz wins the challenge. The next day, the second group has to clean a disgusting house after a crazy party the night before. The group consists of Beatuful, Buckeey, Tiger, Payshintz, Nibblz, and Like Dat. They find out they are cleaning hip-hop legend Warren G's house. While half of the girls are cleaning, back at the mansion Buckwild, Krazy and Deelishis watch as Bootz and Somethin are arguing. The winner is Nibblz, and she and Flav have a king and queen dinner. Bootz and Payshintz then start fighting. Many of the other girls joined in and started making racial comments, furthermore accusing her of not knowing who she or Flav is. Bootz tells Flav that Tiger, Somethin, and Payshintz should all go home. Flav takes this into consideration, and eliminates Tiger and Sumthin. He has a clock for Payshintz as well, but she chooses not to accept it because she couldn't take the drama with Bootz, and a few of the other girls anymore.
The episode begins on the night of the previous elimination, when Toasteee and Nibblz share Flav's bed that night. In the morning, Flav holds a hip-hop dance contest. The girls are divided into three teams of three each. Krazy, Nibblz, and Deelishis end up winning. Each girl gets a private date with Flav; that night, Krazy goes with him on a romantic candlelit dinner to KFC, Nibblz spends the next morning in his bedroom and has breakfast with him, and Deelishis goes with him to a strawberry field.
In the meantime, Toasteee tells the other girls that the night before, she heard noises and concluded that Nibblz was giving Flav a handjob. Nibblz retaliates by revealing to Flav that Toasteee apparently admitted that she has done pornography on the internet and in a magazine. Toasteee denies the allegations, so Flav does some internet research to see who's lying. Toasteee goes to Flav, letting him know that she's leaving because she can't handle the drama anymore. Flav tells Toasteee that if she leaves now, she's basically implying that Nibblz was right. Toasteee agrees to stay. In that evening's eliminations, Flav has both girls promise they're telling the truth. But right after that, Flav holds up a pornographic picture of Toasteee. Everyone is shocked. Toasteee claims that it's not necessarily evidence against her as she leaves.
This episode starts with the girls finding out that they must throw a party for some of Flav's famous friends. Like Dat confronts Buckwild about her speech patterns, claiming that she is talking like she's black and that it isn't how she really talks, but Buckwild says that she's not a fake. Bootz, Like Dat, and Buckwild get into a fight about Buckeey and Deelishis not working hard. After all the fights, the girls are excited to find out who will be coming to the party. The special guests are Three 6 Mafia, Warren G, Don Magic Juan, DJ Quik, the Ying Yang Twins, and G-Unit. When the guests first arrive Bootz entertain them with her booty dancing, and Nibblz gives them lap dances. The Ying Yang Twins ask Bootz to dance in one of their videos and she declines because she didn't want to risk her relationship with Flav. During the party, Nibblz drinks too much liquor and is in the bathroom vomiting, resulting in Like Dat having to lay her down on her bed. Also, Three 6 Mafia asks Krazy to sing any of Flav's songs. She says she knows one of them, but she can't sing it. Bootz and Krazy have an argument about Krazy being real or not. Like Dat and Buckwild then get into the same argument again. Buckwild says that when she is around different races of people, her voice changes. She then wants to leave but Like Dat convinces her to stay. Flav spends time with Buckeey, Bootz, and Like Dat before elimination. However, Like Dat is sent home because Flav only sees her as a friend. The girls are then shocked to find out that another guest will be joining them tomorrow: Season 1's New York.
The episode begins the night, that Flav welcomes Season 1's Tiffany Pollard aka New York back to the house as a guest to help him decide about tomorrow night's eliminations for the seven remaining ladies. All the girls are pissed that New York returned to the house, because a lot of them don't like or get along with New York. Flav leaves the girls alone and New York asks the girls about each other and Bootz lets New York know that she doesnt like her and doesnt want her there and that she's just another bitch trying to steal her man. New York and Bootz get into an argument, where New York calls Bootz a "dreamer" meaning she's just dreaming of Flav being her man. Later that night, Krazy talks to Flav about Beatuful, saying she think she might have a cold sore, which she did not. Krazy wanted to get Beautiful off the show, The next day, the girls wake up and are told to go to a photoshoot for URB Magazine. New York is in charge of how the women look. New York is yelling at everybody because they were late and screams to them to come down stairs. New York gets into an argument with Bootz when Bootz is late coming downstairs for the evaluation. New York has rude things to say to all of them, except for Deelishis and Beatuful.
The girls head to the photoshoot and New York is once again giving the girls nasty comments. After the photoshoot, Buckwild and New York get into a fight over Buckwild being "darker then what she is". Flav steps in and takes Buckwild's side. New York runs out crying and feels disrespected by Flav. Meanwhile, the girls are upset that New York is there and Krazy decides to call her out. The two fight because Krazy is saying that New York is not in control of elimination and New York went on top of the table and touched her on the head which lead Flav to come and stop it.
Flav then takes New York and asks her about each of the girls. She wonders if Buckwild is actually there to be in a romantic relationship with Flav. Beatuful is a little reserved and she feels that both her and Buckeey lack energy. Nibblz is filthy and too sexual. New York believes that both Bootz and Deelishis are there to be with him, while she believes that Krazy is there for the wrong reasons.
Back at the house, Krazy calls Deelishis out when Deelishis spreads the word that Krazy is fake to all of the girls back at the photoshoot.
At eliminations, New York states that Krazy, Beatuful, and Nibblz are the three women that should go home. Flav eliminates Beatuful and Nibblz, Beautiful because she is too laid back Nibbles because she wouldn't fit with his children. Krazy gets her clock. Flav has a surprise and invites New York back as a full-time competitor. The girls are pissed and Buckwild returns her clock because New York returned and she was afraid she would violate her probation with New York there.
Five girls remaining: New York, Krazy, Bootz, Buckeey, and Deelishis. Flav instructs them to put pictures of the two girls they think most deserve elimination into a box. They choose Krazy and New York, and as a result, neither of them get dates that evening. They pick Krazy because they think she is fake. New York is picked because she came on the show later than the others, and they felt that she wouldn't be a good mom for Flav's children. Flav takes Buckeey on a date to a bowling alley and teaches her how to bowl. For his second date, Flav has a romantic evening with Bootz in the backyard. But Bootz tells Flav that she is going to wait until she gets married to have sex. Flav is shocked and upset by this. The next day, Deelishis is getting ready for her date when New York comes in and argues with her for saying that New York is fake.
Big Rick must come in to break up the fight. When New York leaves, she says that she just ruined Deelishis' date. However, Deelishis and Flav have a great time on an exotic camel ride date. Buckeey and Krazy then get into a dangerous fight when she hears Krazy say "Buckeey" to New York, plus trashing Bootz and Deelishis. Buckeey almost pushes Krazy off of the second-floor outside balcony. New York laughs and tries to break them apart. At the elimination ceremony, Buckeey is eliminated for almost killing Krazy. New York then states her plan, which is that Deelishis and Bootz will be her next "victims". She also says that Krazy thinks that they are friends, but New York is just using her to eliminate the other girls.
With the four remaining women, the episode begins with Bootz and Deelishis still in their beds discussing their disdain for New York. Then all the girls go downstairs where Rick delivers the Flav-O-Gram which New York reads. Flav pairs Deelishis and Krazy for the first date to LBC. As usual New York becomes openly upset and goes upstairs. After she leaves Deelishis snidely says that New York is a "loony" and begins to read the Flav-O-Gram aloud again and discovers that New York said slicking where the Flav-O-Gram said slicing. Soon afterward Deelishis follows New York to the balcony where she is standing visibly upset that she hasn't had a date with Flav in four days. The conversation is short but almost escalates into a confrontation after Deelishis tells New York to redirect her hostility. After the discussion Krazy and Deelishis set off for their date with Flav. When they get there Flav greets them and the two climb aboard the yacht. Flav eventually makes out with Deelishis, which upsets Krazy. But soon Deelishis leaves Flav's side, seasick. Krazy and Flav speak intimately. After they get off the yacht Flav takes the girls to the RMS Queen Mary for accommodations where the girls prepare for dinner. During dinner Flav asks Krazy how she feels about him and what she feels they share in common. When she fails to answer appropriately, he asks her to sing. She says she would love a record deal, but doesn't have the money. Afterward he asks Deelishis how she feels about him. Deelishis declares her feelings for him, through tears. Flav decides to spend the night with Deelishis. Flav turns and bids farewell to Krazy but mistakenly calls her Deelishis. Deelishis and Flav retire to their room where eventually they fall asleep together.
The next day New York and Bootz meet Flav at a winery where a woman brings them three horses. Bootz gets on her horse up immediately but New York is hesitant and panics. Eventually all three of them go for a ride through the winery fields. They stop at a beautiful spread where they sip wine and Flav tells Bootz he is really feeling her. Naturally New York is angry. Tensions rise but soon all three wind up stomping grapes together. After they shower they leave the winery and go to the Pechanga Resort and Casino where Bootz and New York prepare for dinner. During the date all Flav's attention goes to Bootz. New York feels ignored and demands attention, then storms off. Flav gives chase and asks her to spend the night with him, which New York later reveals was her plan. Bootz and New York then argue over dinner. After dinner they leave for their room and New York reveals that she again had sex with Flav.
After the two dates they are all faced yet again with the elimination ceremony. The first clock goes to New York, the second goes to Deelishis and the third goes to Krazy, despite Flav's worries about her intentions, because he feels that they have a strong connection. Flav then eliminates Bootz because she said she wouldn't have sex with him until she is married. But before she leaves, she gives him her phone number for him to call her when "he gets sick of those ho's".
Flav decides to have the three remaining girls parents to come over so he can get to know them. Hours before the remaining girls' parents arrive, everyone is cleaning and preparing rooms for the parents. Suddenly New York is bothering Deelishis because she believed that Deelishis intentionally took the room that New York chose her parents to stay in. Deelishis, unknowing of what New York is so upset about, has a brief confrentation with New York over who gets the room. Then Deelishis' parents arrive. Flav immediately likes Deelishis's parents. New York's parents arrive and as was shown from Season 1, New York's mother doesn't like Flav. This leads to a confrontation early on, and we discover that New York's mother will do anything to keep her daughter from being together with Flav, even fake a terminal illness. Flav then invites his six children and two grandchildren to the house to get their input on who would make a better stepmother. Later, he takes the women and their mothers over on separate dates: Deelishis and her parents go to a magic show and dinner; Krazy, her mother, and her grandmother go to the hair salon; and Flav orders an assortment of soul food for New York and her parents. That night during elimination, Flav eliminates Krazy because he suspects she is only on the show to further her singing career. At the end, he announces that Deelishis and New York will be going to Placencia, Belize the next day. The show ends with New York's mother yelling, insisting that New York is coming home right now. New York, however, does not leave the mansion.
This episode shows highlights of the second season with unseen footage. The pivotal quote of perhaps the entire series took place during the unseen footage aired on this episode. New York's mother, Michelle, told Deelishis that her posterior was so large that she was capable of moving her bowels for an entire year. Deelishis had no comment. There was a scene where Flav was in a photo shoot with some girls from Flavor of Love Season 1. He said, "I'd throw all of y'alls in my crib, except Hottie."
The episode begins where Episode 9 ended, when Flav announced the two remaining girls were going to Placencia, Belize. New York's mother knocks on Flav's door and informs him that she is going to get her daughter out of the mansion, but gets nothing more than a rise from Flav and New York. New York's mother then ends up leaving, but not before she tells Flav that he can't marry her daughter (to which Flav responds that if he asked New York, she would marry him).
The next day it's New York's turn, and she and Flav go on a small cruise liner. There is a misunderstanding between the two when New York makes remarks that suggest that she wants to take control of his life and money; Flav thinks New York is sounding like her mother. However, later New York apologizes for what she said, and decides to accept Flav's decision-making power. That night, Flav invites her to his hotel room for a nightcap. At first she declines, but later decides that she can't put up with the hurt going on inside, and eventually accepts.
The following night, amid a rainstorm, the two girls are invited to the dock where Flav makes his final decision. Flav talks about his feelings for the two girls, both what he likes and what he dislikes. In the end, Flav decides that Deelishis is the winner. New York, angry that she lost again, starts a vulgarity-laced outburst towards Flav, resulting in the two trading insults. After mooning Flav, she says that she no longer has feelings for him and will someday find "another man who is right for me". While storming off and sobbing uncontrollably, she says to the camera, "Do I look like I give a fuck cause I don't". She also says she wishes that one day she will find the man of her dreams. Flav gives Deelishis a shiny gold grill to match his, and he says he can't wait to meet Deelishis' daughter Jasmine (as he has a daughter with the same name).
The twenty-one women from the second season reunite on stage. La La hosts once again. She introduces all the girls (with the exception of Deelishis and New York, who arrive later, and Eye'z and Payshintz, who did not show up). After this introduction, La La asks Saaphyri and H-Town to come up on stage and discuss the fight they had, after showing the tape of it. Saaphyri says H-Town threw flowers at her, meaning she couldn't do anything about it. Saaphyri later admits to having gone to anger management classes, in consideration of Flav saying she was too violent. She later says she got a certificate, which amuses everyone. Later, Goldie from the first season makes an appearance. She asks Krazy why she thought New York was her friend and says that Somethin is strong for dealing with what happened with her on the show. She also asks Bootz, Buckwild, and Like Dat to do their booty dancing again from the fourth episode. After entertaining the crowd, La La, and the girls, Flavor Flav appears. La La asks Krazy to come up on stage, and she asks if Krazy thought being on the show helped or hurt her career. She says "it helped us all in our own way." Beatuful later asks her why she came on the show. Krazy tries to avoid answering, but Beatuful asks again, and Krazy admits that she did come on the show for that purpose. Next, Krazy sings for Flav and appears to have mostly negative receptions.
Then Flav asks Deelishis to come out. They state that they have been apart for four months so that no one would know the outcome of the show. La La asks what Nibblz thought of his decision. She says it was a great choice for him because of her "fabulous ass". Deelishis' daughter Jasmine meets Flav for the first time, but this moment doesn't make it onto the final edit of the show.
After a few minutes, New York is brought out. Buckwild throws a shoe at New York, which narrowly misses New York's head. La La tells Buckwild to respect her, since she never disrespected anyone and that the shoe almost hit her. After this warning, La La asks Bootz whether she still wanted to say anything to New York. Bootz and New York confront each other and exchange insults causing Bootz to run backstage and fight New York, New York tries pulling Bootz hair and hit her in the arm and Bootz hits New York with her shoe then swing again and punches her in the face, New York then pulls Bootz dress, and Bootz swing one more time and hits her in the nose then security took them apart.  Several of the contestants attempt to intervene, and in the end cast members "Buckwild", "Saaphyri", "Buckeey," "Bootz", and "Deelishis" were asked to leave. "Deelishis" and "Saaphyri" were later brought back before the reunion concluded.  It was later revealed that New York would be featured on her own show, ''I Love New York'', which premiered in January 2007.