 As the world's traditional automotive center, the city hosts the annual North American International Auto Show in January, a multi-day event. Other major multi-day events that reflect the region's culture such as the Motown Winter Blast and the Windsor-Detroit International Freedom Festival, typically held the last week of June, can draw super sized-crowds of hundreds of thousands to over three million people.Bailey, Ruby L (August 22, 2007). The D is a draw: Most suburbanites are repeat visitors.''Detroit Free Press''. New Detroit Free Press-Local 4 poll conducted by Selzer and Co., finds, "nearly two-thirds of residents of suburban Wayne, Oakland, and Macomb counties say they at least occasionally dine, attend cultural events or take in professional games in Detroit."Fifth Third Bank rocks the Winter Blast.''Michigan Chronicle''. (March 14, 2006). In 2006, the four-day Motown Winter Blast drew a cold weather crowd of about 1.2 million people to Campus Martius Park area downtown. Metro Detroit is one of thirteen U.S. cities with teams from four major sports.
Besides casino gaming, the region's leading attraction is The Henry Ford, America's largest indoor-outdoor museum complex, a museum entertainment complex with an IMAX theater next to the Automotive Hall of Fame in Dearborn. The Detroit Institute of Arts in the cultural center downtown is another leading attraction.Corley, Irvin (April 30, 2003). ''City of Detroit'' Memorandum to Graham Beal, Director, Arts Department. Retrieved on November 10, 2007. "The Detroit Institute of Arts (DIA) is the second largest municipally-owned museum in the United States and contains an encyclopedic art collection worth over one billion dollars."  The Detroit Festival of the Arts in Midtown draws about 350,000 people. ''Model D Media''. Retrieved on April 4, 2007. The Detroit Zoo in Royal Oak has the nation's largest polar bear exhibit, the Arctic Ring of Wildlife.Mink, Randy, and Karen Mink (July 2001).Detroit Turns 300 - Detroit 300 Festival. ''Travel America'', World Publishing Co., Gale Group. The zoo has a train which encircles the park. Together, The Henry Ford, the Detroit Institute of Arts, and the Zoo attract about 2,500,000 visitors annually., (February 2007). ''Detroit Tourism Economic Development Council''. Retrieved on September 18, 2007.
An estimated one million spectators attended the 2009 Woodward Dream Cruise held annually in  August. Another automotive attraction cataloging the history of the industry is the Chrysler Museum in Auburn Hills. Historic tours of the mansions of the auto barons such as Meadowbrook Hall in Rochester Hills, Edsel and Eleanor Ford House in Grosse Pointe, Henry Ford's Fair Lane Estate in Dearborn, and the Lawrence Fisher Mansion in Detroit are available. The New York Times listed Detroit among its 53 world travel destinations for 2008.Lee, Danny (December 9, 2007)..''The New York Times''. Retrieved on December 10, 2007.
Movie studios in the metro area help establish the state as a legitimate contender in the 12-month-a-year film business.
The Passenger Terminal and Dock of Detroit on Hart Plaza near the Renaissance Center receives major cruise ships such as the MS Columbus and tall ships. The Great Lakes Cruising Coalition supports passenger ship cruises through a joint U.S-Canadian venture to Great Lakes Ports and the St. Lawrence Seaway. William G. Milliken State Park and Harbor in downtown Detroit offers public docks for boaters.
Besides its casino resorts, the Detroit area has tens of thousands of hotel rooms.Gray, Kathleen and John Wisely (March 31, 2009)..''Detroit Free Press''. Retrieved on May 2, 2009. The city's hospitality industry has hosted many major conventions as well as sporting events. The Marriott corporation and Starwood Hotels (Westin and Sheraton) have a significant presence in the region. The area has many luxury hotels and resorts including the historic Westin Book Cadillac Hotel which was restored in 2008. Detroit Marriott at the Renaissance Center and the Omni Detroit Hotel at River Place have waterfront views. An example of investment in the city's Midtown area is the restored Inn on Ferry Street, a collection of Victorian bed and breakfasts in the East Ferry Avenue Historic District, adjacent to the cultural center near the Detroit Institute of Arts. Downtown Detroit has about 5,000 hotel rooms, with 4,000 in walking distance of its Cobo Hall convention center. The suburb of Novi has about 5,300 hotels rooms within a  radius and the suburb of Pontiac has about 5,800 within a  radius.
In 2003, General Motors completed a $500 million redevelopment of the Renaissance Center as its world headquarters. The east riverfront promenade development was planned at and additional $559 million, including $135 million from GM and $50 million from the Kresge Foundation. The International Riverfront is linked by the River Walk, a promenade along connecting the cruise ship dock on Hart Plaza to a series of parks, restaurants, retail shops, and other venues from the Marriott at the Renaissance Center to the Omni Hotel at Riverplace on the historic Stroh's riverplace site. Compuware CEO Peter Karmanos would played in the financing to reconstruct the city's historic restoration of Campus Martius Park which now hosts events such as the Motown Winter Blast in January attracting large crowds.
Several traditional street-side shopping districts with clusters of restaurants may be found throughout the region in addition to those surrounding enclosed shopping malls and open-air lifestyle centers. Downtown Detroit contains Greektown, the Lower Woodward Avenue Historic District (Merchant's Row), and the shops and restaurants at the Renaissance Center along the International Riverfront. The Eastern Market, a farmer's distribution center in the central east side neighborhood area of Detroit, is the largest open-air bedding flower market in the United States and has more than 150 foods and specialty businesses.  On Saturdays, about 45,000 people shop the city's historic Eastern Market.  Other notable street-side shopping districts include ''The Village'' on Kercheval Avenue in Grosse Pointe and the downtown areas of Birmingham, Royal Oak, and Rochester.
A proposed shopping center, the Shoppes at Gateway Park, is planned within Detroit's city limits. When complete, the outdoor mall will provide the city of Detroit proper with its first full-line department store in nearly a decade.Trop, Jaclyn (April 1, 2009)..''The Detroit News''. Retrieved on July 8, 2009. The  Fairlane Town Center mall in Dearborn is about 15 minutes from downtown Detroit. Another proposed shopping mall, the Pavilions of Troy, is mixed-use development with an open-air lifestyle center planned for the Detroit suburb of Troy.
 In 2007, complementing the MGM Grand Detroit, DTE Energy announced a $50 million transformation of the area around its downtown headquarters into an urban oasis with parks, walkways, and a reflecting pool. Completion of the MGM Grand Detroit resort hotel in 2007 has opened new prospects for future development downtown with the west riverfront area and the area from MGM Grand Detroit to the Michigan Central Station. The question of how to finance a new convention facility to accommodate the expanding needs of the North American International Auto Show generated media attention and speculation with Oakland County Executive L. Brooks Patterson's proposal for a fourth casino resort hotel in Detroit to anchor the convention center following the example of the Las Vegas Sands Expo convention center which would need approval from a state wide referendum. Governor Jennifer Granholm ultimately signed legislation on July 2, 2009 for a nearly $300 million expansion of Cobo Center; the plan calls for a  addition.Nichols, Darren A. (July 3, 2009).. ''The Detroit News''. Retrieved on December 30, 2009. The legislation created a five-member board, appointed by the governor, the City of Detroit, and Wayne, Oakland, and Macomb counties to oversee the operation of the center with the city retaining ownership. The project, which also calls for the demolition of Cobo Arena in order to expand the center began October 1, 2009. Redevelopment design concepts include the possible addition of glass walls to connect the complex with the waterfront.Gallagher, John (November 30, 2009).. ''Detroit Free Press'', Architect Magazine. Retrieved on December 30, 2009.
Detroit's geographic proximity to Windsor, Ontario provides for spectacular views and nightlife, along with Ontario's 19-and-older drinking age.
A strategy entitled ''Pure Michigan'' resulted in the State's tourism website ranking as the busiest in the nation. Metro Detroit ''"urban destinations"'' such as The Henry Ford, the Detroit Institute of Arts, and the Detroit Zoo were also emphasized in the strategy. This led to support for proposals for increased funding in 2008 for the ''Travel Michigan'' budget from Detroit area legislators.
The Midtown Detroit surrounds Wayne State University, while the adjacent New Center area contains the National Historic Landmarks Cadillac Place and the Fisher Building.  Midtown attracts millions of visitors each year to its museums and cultural centers. Other significant cultural centers include those in Dearborn, Bloomfield Hills, Grosse Pointe, Rochester, Royal Oak, and Ann Arbor. The fortunes of region's auto barons and business leaders continue to facilitate philanthropy for museums and cultural centers.
The Cultural Center Historic District in Midtown Detroit contains the Detroit Institute of Arts, the Rackham Education Memorial Building, the Detroit Historical Museum, the Detroit Science Center, and the Charles H. Wright Museum of African American History. The Detroit Public Library is part of the Cultural Center Historic District listed in the National Register of Historic Places adjacent to Wayne State University campus and across the street from the Detroit Institute of Arts.  Designed by Cass Gilbert, the Detroit Public Library (1921) was constructed with Vermont marble and serpentine Italian marble trim in an Italian Renaissance style. His son, Cass Gilbert, Jr. was a partner with Francis J. Keally in the design of the library's additional wings added in 1963. Cass Gilbert also designed the United States Supreme Court building in Washington, D.C..
Entering the Detroit Institute of Arts' hallway, visitors pass the armor collection of William Randolph Hearst.  Through the entry way is a grand marble court lined along the upper and lower levels with Diego Rivera's ''Detroit Industry Murals'', commissioned by Edsel Ford.  The French-American architect Paul Philippe Cret designed the building. The museum is part of the city's Cultural Center Historic District listed in the National Register of Historic Places.
The Institute is among the largest art museums in the United States and contains over 100 galleries. The museum houses the 1150-seat Detroit Film Theatre, also used to showcase famous collections.  Officials at the DIA have ranked the American paintings collection third among museums in the United States. Works by American artists began to be collected immediately following the museum's founding in 1883.
The collections of the Detroit Institute of Arts include ancient Greek, Roman, Etruscan, Mesopotamian, and Egyptian material, as well as a wide range of Islamic, African and Asian art of all media.
Theatre in Detroit is part of the Broadway theatre circuit. The Windsor-Detroit casino resorts have nightclubs, restaurants, and large performance centers for shows. Star performances in the city's theatre district complement major events such as North American International Auto Show. There are a number of popular nightclubs including the Necto in Ann Arbor, the three-level St. Andrews Hall in Detroit, and the casino resorts.
Live music has been the prominent feature of Detroit's nightlife since the late 1940s bringing the city worldwide attention. The metropolitan area has two of the top live music venues in the United States: DTE Energy Music Theatre and The Palace of Auburn Hills  The Detroit Theatre District is the nation's second largest after Manhattan's Broadway. Major theaters include the Fox Theatre,Hodges, Michael H. (September 8, 2003).. Michigan History, ''The Detroit News''. Retrieved on November 23, 2007. Masonic Temple Theatre, the Detroit Opera House, and the Fisher Theatre.  Detroit's Orchestra Hall is the home of the Detroit Symphony Orchestra.  The city hosts several annual music events, including the Ford Detroit International Jazz Festival, the Electronic Music Festival, the Motor City Music Conference (MC2), the Urban Organic Music Conference, the Concert of Colors, and the hip-hop Summer Jamz music festival.
The area which has hosted several major sporting events in order to attract large crowds such as Super Bowl XL; in fact, Detroit is the only northern city to have hosted two Super Bowls. Ford Field hosted the 2009 NCAA Final Four, where North Carolina defeated Michigan State; in April 2007 it hosted WrestleMania 23. Major League Baseball's 2005 All-Star Game was held at Comerica Park, as were 2006 World Series games due to the Detroit Tigers success. The 2005 All Star Game injected $52 million into the area economy, while Super Bowl XL injected $270 million.Alberta, Timothy J. (April 2, 2009)..''Wall Street Journal''. Retrieved on April 10, 2009. In 2008, the Detroit Tigers at Comerica Park reported 3.2 million visitors with a 98.6 percent attendance rate..''ESPN''. Retrieved on May 25, 2009. Comerica Park and Ford Field stadiums are located near the Grand Circus Park Historic District.
The area has a  network of "metro parks" which receives about 9 million visitors annually Outdoor activities in the metro region include downhill and cross-county skiing at Alpine Valley Ski Resort, Mt. Brighton, Mt Holly, and Pine Knob Ski Resort, Huron River kayaking and canoeing available through the Huron-Clinton Metroparks, and fresh water beaches such as Metro Beach, Kensington Beach, and Stony Creek Beach. Golf is an important sporting activity in the metropolitan area with a variety of courses, country clubs, and resorts. The Detroit River International Wildlife Refuge is the only international wildlife preserve in North America, uniquely located in the heart of a major metropolitan area. The refuge includes islands, coastal wetlands, marshes, shoals, and waterfront lands along  of the Detroit River and Western Lake Erie shoreline.