The '''Volvo S80''' is a mid-size executive saloon/sedan from Swedish automaker Volvo Cars, and was introduced in 1998 to take the place of the rear-wheel drive Volvo 960/S90 saloons in the model range.  The Volvo S80 was built at the Torslanda Plant (Torslandaverken) in Gothenburg, Sweden.  Unlike most Volvo models, it did not have an estate / station wagon version for its first generation.  Now, the third generation V70 wagon is marketed as the estate version for the second generation S80 saloon.  This is a part of a major product overhaul at Volvo, including a most luxurious large estate and saloon.
The first generation was notable for being one of the first Volvos to depart from the company's traditionally very boxy, conservative styling.  The S80's styling, with its pronounced beltlines and tail lights that narrow and go from curves to points as they go up, was later adopted throughout the Volvo line, especially on the S60 and S40 saloons.
The first generation Volvo S80 had one of the highest crash test ratings in the world for five years.  The second generation Volvo S80, in June 2007, scored the highest "good" rating in the IIHS crash test performance for frontal, side, and rear impacts, continuing in the success of the first S80 sedan, earning it the IIHS Top Safety Pick.  The second generation S80 is better engineered than the previous model, in part due to a more rigid chassis.
The first generation S80 is based on the Ford D3 platform.  More than 368,000 first generation S80s were built before the introduction of the new model.  The all-new S80's styling has pronounced beltlines and tail lights that narrow and go from curves to points as they go up.
This S80 saloon, being Volvo's flagship model, was heavily equipped with numerous safety systems to ensure all occupants safety, including SIPS and WHIPS.
 although this is quite false, since British Leyland produced passenger cars using the E6 engine from 1970 to 1981 in cars such as the Austin Kimberley and Austin Princess.  No existing manual gearbox would fit in the engine bay with the six cylinder engine, so Volvo had to develop their own, claimed to be the world's smallest manual transmission, the M65.  The previous record holder was also a Volvo gearbox, the M56 developed to fit the wide five cylinder transverse engine first used in the 850 series cars.  Thirdly, the S80 was the world's first car with an environmental specification, covering aspects such as those directly relating to the car such as allergens from textiles and fuel economy and the life cycle of the car from production to dismantling.
For Volvo, the S80 was a major step forward into the age of modern car design, particularly with the use of canbus multiplex wiring.  It is said that the S80 has more than 40 onboard computers, with at least one in every door.  A popular expression says there's more electronics in the S80 than in the F15 fighter.
The S80 was initially available with four different engines.  Starting the range was a detuned 2.4&nbsp;litre  five-cylinder.  This was also available as a compressed natural gas (CNG) and as an liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) version.  The fully tuned version produced .  Next up was a 2.9&nbsp;litre  six-cylinder, then  T6, and finally, the  2.5&nbsp;litre Volkswagen-sourced Turbocharged Direct Injection (TDI) diesel engine.  The 2.9 has a straight-six engine, while the T6 was powered by a destroked twin-turbocharged version.
In 2000, there was the addition of the  2.5T, available with standard all-wheel drive.  The 2.5T model featured a light-pressure turbocharger.
Late 2001 introduced the  five cylinder common rail diesel D5, detuned to  and sold as 2.4D in some markets.
In some European countries, the entry level S80 came with a 2.0&nbsp;litre five-cylinder turbocharged engine producing .  These were sold in countries where larger capacity engines were penalized by heavy taxes.
Minor exterior design changes occurred between 2003 and 2004 versions, notably front grille styling (in pre-2004 version (pictured above), it has vertical metallic pattern - herited from 960 series - , while in 2004 (pictured right) a grey plastic brick-wall pattern was introduced).
EuroNCAP tested the first generation Volvo S80, running from 1998-2003.
They tested a Left hand drive, 4-door Saloon, registered in 2000, with front seatbelt pretensioners, seatbelt load limiters, and front: side, body and head airbags:
Scores given for the car showed pedestrians' legs facing a very aggressive front end, resulting in only 2 stars of 4 for pedestrian safety.
Despite this EuroNCAP did state "This large Volvo is very safe and gave a good all round performance" due to the good adult protection inside the car in the event of a collision.
On 31 January 2006, Volvo Cars released the first pictures of the second generation S80, and the car was unveiled at the Geneva Motor Show on 28 February, with sales beginning in June 2006.  Generally, all features of the car were upgraded substantially.  The new S80 features a new 3.2&nbsp;litre straight-six engine or 4.4&nbsp;litre V8 engine, in combination with available four-wheel drive.  The second-generation S80 is the first Volvo saloon model to become available with Volvo's compact, transversely fitted V8 with a power output of  and  of torque developed jointly by Volvo Cars engine unit Skovde and Yamaha, but built by Yamaha of Japan.  With four catalytic converters and advanced electronics, this engine, which was first introduced in the Volvo XC90, is one of the cleanest V8s on the market. The exterior was redesigned using improvements on original S80 design that were done for S60 (dimension ratios and overall curvature flow) and an earlier 2004 S40 redesign (front and tail-end design, esp. the lights). The quality of the exterior was also greatly improved with more high strength boron steel in the body for safety.  The interior is seen as one of the most comfortable in the automotive industry.
This second generation S80 is no exception to Volvo's ongoing improvements and inventions of safety.  The second generation S80 has been given the IIHS 2007 Top Safety Pick Award in overall safety protection.  Also again in November the IIHS awarded the 2008 Volvo S80 with Top Safety Award.  This S80 performed above its German and Japanese rivals.  Scores were perfect for frontal, side, and rear impacts.
The new S80 is based on the Ford EUCD platform (called P24 by Volvo), also used for vehicles including Ford's S-MAX, Mondeo and Galaxy large MPVs.  Some of these Ford vehicles, whilst sharing this platform, and some parts, are distincly different from each other as they compete in different auto market segments.  Volvo vehicles on this platform tend to use more high tech parts and more expensive underpinnings.
Volvo's Personal Car Communicator (PCC) remote control will also be an optional feature with the new S80.  This feature is fairly new to the automotive industry.  Before a driver gets to their car, they are able to review the security level and know whether they have set the alarm and if the car is locked.  Additionally, there is a heartbeat sensor that warns if someone is hiding inside the car.
The all new S80 is the first Volvo model to feature Adaptive cruise control (ACC) with Collision Warning and Brake Support (CWBS).  Adaptive cruise control helps ensure comfort and relaxed driving by letting the driver select the desired speed and the minimum time gap to the vehicle in front of them.  When a radar sensor detects a slower vehicle in front of them, Adaptive Cruise Control adapts to that vehicle by applying the brakes as necessary.  As the Collision Warning System senses an impending collision, it alerts with a flashing light on the windshield and an audible alarm.  Meanwhile Brake Support offers additional assistance by preparing the braking system so that the car can begin stopping faster and avoid a potentially dangerous situation before it happens.  Volvo S80 is also available with a new safety innovation called Blind Spot Information System (BLIS, first seen in Volvo S40) which senses when a person enters the driver's blind spot and Active Bi-Xenon Lights (ABL) to illuminate around curves in the dark.  BLIS system has been recently introduced at Mercedes-Benz's higher specification cars, nearly two years after Volvo.  The second generation Volvo S80 is much more luxurious than the previous generation, and it flaunts its "Scandinavian Luxury" design language.  The second generation S80 has already won awards in best mid size luxury saloon interior.
A long-wheelbase version, called the Volvo S80L, has been built by Changan-Volvo in Chongqing, China. The 2011 version has a wheelbase of 2976mm and is powered by a turbo 2.0 or 3.0 engine.
New features include a choice of five-cylinder 2.4&nbsp;litre D5 twin-turbo diesel, 2.4&nbsp;litre diesel, or 1.6&nbsp;litre diesel engine.  Also the 2.5T and 2.5FT were modified to produce more power and have a lower fuel consumption.  The car's exterior was modified to give the S80 a lower, longer and wider stance.  More chrome trim were added to the front, the rear end the doors to look like the S80 Executive.  The 2010 Volvo S80 facelift also comes with a choice between a comfort-enhancing standard chassis, or a sport one that offers better handling dynamics.  The 2010 S80 will be available with a S80 R-design interior package to give the inside a sportier look.  The interior package contains a new sports steering wheel, sports pedals, Dynamic leather seats, sports gearshift knob and a new combi instrument with blue background.
The car was unveiled in 2009 at the Geneva Motor Show.
The S80 is also used as a base for limousines, hearses and ambulances by Nilsson Special Vehicles in Laholm, Sweden. Nilsson have built the official state car for a few heads of state, including one for the King of Sweden. An armoured version is also available from Czech specialists SVOS.