Also, join our mailing list: 
For many years now, the State of Oregon has claimed and exercised copyright protection for many resources produced by public dollars in Oregon. These resources include the organization and supplementary materials for the Oregon law, photos of historical figures, and charts and documents examining public policy. These copyright claims currently inhibit the reproduction and use of these documents by projects like Wikipedia.
This page is for the use of anybody interested in challenging this policy, and opening up public resources to the public.
Works of the United States government and its departments are automatically in the public domain. Florida, and perhaps a handful of other states, have similar laws; but Oregon claims copyright on materials it produces (such as the Oregon Blue Book.)
It's possible that those claims of copyright are simply state offices being overly cautious, and don't carry any legal weight.  from an attorney, on a related subject, gives me hope that there exists some federal or constitutional mandate that makes it impossible for government agencies to copyright materials they produce.
Let's get some clarity on Oregon law, and if necessary, change the law to put Oregon government-produced works into the public domain, or get them licensed under a Creative Commons-style license.
Folks who have helped, or indicated willingness to help. Please add your name! Also, I think an email list might become the most manageable way of staying in touch; please indicate whether that would be OK with you, and  so that I can start building a list. -  19:56, 16 May 2007 (UTC)
Representative (or Senator) __:
I am writing to encourage you to introduce or support legislation that would place works of the government of Oregon (and perhaps of local governments in Oregon) in the public domain.
Works of the Federal government are already in the public domain, and Oregon should adopt a similar policy. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Work_of_the_United_States_Government
In an age when the repackaging of information for varied uses is becoming commonplace - frequently on weblogs, Wikipedia, and other Internet media - the necessity for ordinary citizens to remain attentive to copyright increasingly inhibits their ability to work for the common good.
If I may illustrate the importance of such a change with two examples. The first shows a case where the present law does not pose an impediment, but demonstrates the value of public use of state data. The second shows how copyright protections act as an impediment to voluntary work for the public good. 
Remaining attentive to such copyright issues is time-consuming and difficult for those not trained in copyright law. At times, a Wikipedia article or other public resource would be best-served by copying a government-generated resource wholesale; but as I understand it, that is not currently allowed.
To encourage the use of the commons presented by resources like Wikipedia, please consider making a law that will place state-generated resources in the public domain.
Sincerely,
I am writing to encourage you to introduce or support legislation that would place works of Oregon's government, and of local governments in Oregon, in the public domain. Works of the federal government are already in the public domain (see footnote 1), and Oregon should adopt a similar policy. In an age when the repackaging of information for various uses is commonplace - frequently on Internet media such as the online encyclopedia Wikipedia - the need for ordinary citizens to heed copyright laws inhibits their ability to work for the common good. Oregon's claim of copyright on its works inhibits dissemination of said works, and the copyright benefits no one. I consider it important that the state of Oregon allow individuals take its works and work together to make Oregon-specific information available to and more accessible by the general public.
To name an example of how projects like Wikipedia are inhibited by copyright, the Oregon Blue Book has maps of state legislative districts (such as the Senate district map in footnote 2), and the Oregon State Elections Division has more detailed maps of the same (see footnote 3), but the state of Oregon claims copyright over these and many other works. The state government provides complete information about district boundaries, but this information can be made more accessible and available in various forms.
Many articles on Wikipedia have benefited greatly from works of the United States government being in the public domain. For example, a map of glaciers on Mount Hood (see footnote 4) and a bathymetric map of the bottom of Crater Lake (see footnote 5), both created by the United States Geological Survey, add valuable information to the articles on Mount Hood and Crater Lake, respectively. That information would not be so readily available if the USGS's works were not in the public domain.
Here is another benefit: Because state law has allowed it, Wikipedia editors have created an easy-to-use resource for studying past Oregon ballot measures (see footnote 6) by using data from the Blue Book (see footnote 7), which records all measures and their results ever since the initiative process was established in Oregon in 1902. The Blue Book's database is a valuable resource, but it lacks conveniences such as links to the text of the measures and the ability to sort them by number of votes cast in favor. Wikipedia can provide these conveniences. Its reconstruction of this ballot measure history allows anyone with Internet access to study this history with great ease. Furthermore, Wikipedia's information on Oregon's ballot measures can be instantly expanded and improved by anyone, as can almost everything else on Wikipedia. This feature, among many others, makes Wikipedia one of the greatest projects on the Internet. This project is inhibited by copyright on government works, which is why I ask you to support the release of the state government's works into the public domain.
For some Wikipedia editors who do not know the copyright laws well, it is difficult to keep the laws in mind when editing articles. Often, Wikipedia articles and other public resources would greatly benefit from copying or modifying government works, but this cannot be done with the works of the state of Oregon. To promote the common good, please introduce or support legislation that would place state works in the public domain.
Sincerely, ___
OK, this issue is not dead yet, just taking a little nap. Sorry for slacking. I found a  from a Wikipedian attorney today. She claims that works produced by public agencies, federal or local, are not copyrightable, and are owned by the people, not the government agency. She cites some case law. Looks worthy of some further investigation! -  ( ) 23:06, 11 December 2007 (UTC)
Testimony in support of releasing works of Oregon's government and of local governments in Oregon to the public domain
I write to encourage the Legislative Council Committee to support placing works of Oregon's government, and of local governments in Oregon, in the public domain. 
I have had the opportunity to be a part of the development team for Connec+ipedia (http://connectipedia.org), a free, open source tool publicly launched June 10, 2008.  This tool was designed with those working for the common good in mind   foundations, nonprofits, state agencies, etc.  Pubic, private, and corporate foundations from across the state have been using this tool for 6 months already, and after the public launch on June 10th, members of the nonprofit community have shown a great deal of interest through registration numbers and website activity.  Steve Woodward's enthusiastic review of Connec+ipedia in The Oregonian includes:
It is a place where people can find, share, contribute, vet, and annotate information about people, places and things to help us do our work better.  As a free tool provided to the community, and built in a way that allows the public to easily contribute, it is the first opportunity of its kind: providing a place for people working across geographic boundaries to connect and find best practices, data, research, resources, and contacts, as well as connect foundations with the areas they fund and the nonprofits working in those areas.  Representatives from state departments have already registered.
Works of Oregon's government, including Oregon Revised Statues, explanatory notes, tables, annotations, and so forth being in the public domain will greatly benefit all organizations and participants accessing (reading or editing, etc.) Connec+ipedia; this includes state agencies and nonprofits working on behalf of the state.  Successful collaboration and usefulness of the tool depend on the ability of users to share, cite, copy and access (link to) state works (in parts or whole).  As with Wikipedia, the community expectation and enforcement is to maintain accurate information in its proper light, neutralizing the concern for misuse.
Placing these works in the public domain would allow for more accurate information sharing via Connec+ipedia and other Internet-based collaboration tools, because abbreviations and summaries could be replaced with appropriate documentation from Oregon Revised Statues or Oregon Blue Book, for example.  All those using Connec+ipedia, or other services, (whether as readers or registered users/editors) including staff in state agencies and nonprofits, would have access to information and be free to collaborate effectively about all aspects of programmatic work as it affects or is affected by governmental works like ORS, etc.
For these reasons, and as someone working for the common good, I ask that works by the Oregon government and local governments within the state by released to the public domain.
Respectfully submitted,
Previously: 
Information & Technology Coordinator, Chalkboard Project
Currently: 
Communications & Learning Associate, Meyer Memorial Trust
Local Organizer, NetSquared
Local Organizer, Nonprofit Technology Network (NTEN)