Raggare have existed since the 1950s and have not changed much since then. Cars are an important part of the subculture, especially V8-powered cars and other large cars from the U.S.A..''Automobilities'' by Mike Featherstone, Nigel. Thrift, John Urry. p. 189 Statistically, the most common raggare car (''swe'' raggarbil) is the 1960s Pontiac Bonneville. They are plentiful, classic, relatively cheap, and have a huge backseat so the Raggare can pile in all of their friends. Raggare have been described as closely related to the hot rod culture, but while hotrodders in the USA have to do extensive modifications to their cars to stand out, raggare can use stock US cars and still stand out compared to the more sober Swedish cars. Other used cars are the fintail Mercedes and the Opel Kapitan.
Popular sources of influence are elements from American popular culture of the 1950s, such as the movies ''Rebel Without a Cause'' with James Dean, and ''American Graffiti''.
The clothes and hairstyle are that of 1950s rockabilly. Blue jeans, cowboy boots, white t-shirts, sometimes with print (also used to store a pack of cigarettes by folding the sleeve), leather or denim jacket. The hair is styled using Brylcreem or some other pomade.
The confederate flag (possibly inspired by ''The Dukes of Hazzard'') and peckerwood seem to be popular items in the subculture, but raggare are often oblivious to their meanings and are not necessarily racists, rather they embrace the rebellious message of the flag.
When raggare first appeared, they caused a moral panic with concerns about the use of alcohol, violence, high-speed driving, and having sex in the back seat. Raggare gangs were seen as a serious problem. The film ''Raggare!'' covered the issue in 1959.
Later, raggare often got into fights with hippies and punks, something described in the punk rock song "Raggare Is a Bunch of Motherfuckers" by Rude Kids (and later re-recorded by Turbonegro). When The Sex Pistols played in Sweden on July 28, 1977, a group of raggare waited outside and cornered some young girls who came out from the show. The girls had safety pins through their cheeks, and the raggare ripped them right out their faces. The band was upstairs drinking beer when they heard about it. Sid Vicious wanted to go down and fight, and someone else suggested they should get the limousine and run them over. In the end, the gig promoter called the police.
The Hjo band Reklamation was forced to cancel a gig after threats from raggare. Also Rude Kids was forced to cancel a sold out gig as the police didn't have the manpower to offer protection against raggare. When Rude Kids played in Stockholm the police had to bring in seven police cars to stop the raggare. When The Stranglers played in Sweden they got attacked with molotov cocktails and their crew got beaten up. The police had to escort them to the boat home.
Nowadays the hostility between Raggare and other subcultures is mostly over since most people regard raggare as a comical relief to everyday life. The biggest nuisance with this sub culture is alcohol related.
Still considered a menace to society, but more often seen as an amusing group of outsiders, the raggare subculture lives on in Sweden, but in many ways it is still viewed in a negative light. Because of its mostly rural roots, retro-aesthetics, and unusual (for Swedes) pro-American stance, raggare are often (in urban areas and in pop-culture) seen as uneducated white trash with poor taste and a low-brow attitude towards sex. This is how they are normally depicted on film and television, with the most famous modern example being the cult-characters "Ronny & Ragge", a pair of idiots who cruise around in a beat-up Ford Taunus. There are several gatherings for raggare around Sweden. The Power Big Meet is the most famous, and is also the biggest car show in the world. Today raggare are different in that the early Raggare were mostly workers and looked up to American culture. Today's Raggare are more about partying and driving American cars.
In 1996 the Swedish post office issued a stamp featuring raggare.
Due to the raggare culture there are more restored 1950s cars in Sweden than in the entire USA and although only two 1958 Cadillac convertibles were sold in Sweden there are now 200 of them in Sweden. Between 4000 and 5000 classic US cars are imported to Sweden each year.
A popular hangout for raggare has always been hotdog bars. A chain by the name of Sibylla in Sweden has always made good money on the raggare and has a special raggare meal. It generally consists of two hotdogs without buns, powdered mashed potato, raksallad (mayonnaise, creme fraishe and sour cream with shrimps) and Pucko to drink. Plenty of ketchup is of course added. 
Raggare often drinks heavily in the cars during cruise events, which is fully legit in Sweden (not for the designated driver though). In Sweden raggare and the raggare culture is immortal and something many are proud to count themselves to. In the beginning of the Raggare era, Raggare was in their twenties. Nowadays, the span is roughly 15-60 years of age, and seeing both father and son riding in the same car is quite common.
Blojraggare ("diper raggare"), is a pejorative used by Raggare meaning young men (18-22 years of age), mostly living in the countryside, who wish they could afford an American car but find themselves driving around in different models of Volvo, mostly the Volvo 740/940/960 or the 850/S70/V70 (the time when these young men drove the volvo 240 models are long gone) with Raggare accessories like fireflames. Sometimes they drive an American model that unfortunately to their dismay is not accepted by the Raggare as a real raggare car, for example the Chevrolet Nova. However, the urge for being accepted as a "real" Raggare are probably sometimes exaggerated.