Mitchell was born in Sydney, the son of Dr James Mitchell and his wife Augusta Maria Frederick, ''nee'' Scott. James Mitchell came to Australia in 1821 as an army surgeon, and two years later was appointed assistant surgeon at the military hospital, Macquarie Street, Sydney. James Mitchell afterwards became the owner of 50,000 acres (200 km  ) in the Hunter River valley which included rich coal-bearing land. David Mitchell grew up in  Cumberland Street, Sydney and in October 1852, aged 16, became one of the first undergraduate students in the inaugural year of the University of Sydney. Mitchell won scholarships in mathematics and graduated B.A. in 1856 with honours in classics, and M.A. in 1859.
Mitchell was called to the bar but did not practise, and was said to have declined the position of attorney-general. Mitchell assisted in the management of the Hunter River estates. Mitchell was a good cricketer and dancer, a skilful whist player, and a good amateur actor. Allegedly he broke off a romance with Emily Matilda Manning, daughter of William Montagu Manning. Mitchell was already forming a collection of books. Mitchell's father died in 1869 and there was a lawsuit over the will. Publication of the family affairs was humiliating to a man of Mitchell's sensitive disposition.
Mitchell was affected by the death of his mother greatly and began to withdraw from the world; his health was never robust. The formation of his library became his chief interest. He began to build up a fine library of English literature, specializing in poetry and sixteenth and seventeenth century books. In 1866, perhaps on the encouragement of George Robertson he began to collect early Australian books and manuscripts. Once a week he went the round of the bookshops, by now book-collecting had become all-consuming. Mitchell had a good memory and discrimination, but as time went on he saw that even the most obscure and apparently worthless pamphlet might throw some light on its time. Though withdrawn from society he welcomed genuine students such as Arthur Wilberforce Jose and Bertram Stevens, especially if they were interested in Australian problems. 
Mitchell was anxious that the (then) colony of New South Wales might have the benefit of his collections. Eventually, after a conference with the Sydney public librarian, he informed the trustees on 17 October 1898 that he was willing to bequeath his collection to the library, if a suitable building were provided and if the books would be available to students. The offer was accepted. However there was a long delay in starting a building, and Mitchell suggested that the bequest would be cancelled if the books were not housed a year after the owner's death. In June 1905 the premier, Joseph Carruthers, instructed the government architect to prepare designs for a library, and the work was begun early in 1906. Mitchell died on 24 July 1907 and his entire collection became the property of the state. Additionally a sum of   70,000 was bequeathed, the income from which has been spent in adding to the collection. 
In 1936, the centenary of Mitchell's birth, the trustees of the public library of New South Wales published ''The Mitchell Library, Sydney, Historical and Descriptive Notes''. Written by the librarian Miss Ida Leeson, this publication gives some idea of the wealth of original manuscripts and books that may be found in the library. 
Mitchell's reclusiveness did not allow him to agree to having his portrait painted. The portrait prefixed to the centenary volume was painted from a photograph, after his death. Mitchell was buried in Rookwood Cemetery. Mitchell would never be interviewed and his kindliness was only known to a few students who had the privilege of his association. Mitchell did not marry but was glad to think that the library would be a permanent memorial of his family.