In 2009 the Forbes 400 list of "America's wealthiest" showed her as the 204th richest person in the U.S., estimated net worth of US $1.7 billion.
On November 20, 2008, CNN reported that Pritzker was Barack Obama's top choice for Commerce Secretary, quoting "multiple" unnamed sources. However, it was later reported that because of her involvement in the failure of subprime lender Superior Bank, Pritzker took herself out of the running.
Pritzker is involved in the reform of Chicago   s public education system.  Currently she is chair of the Chicago Public Education Fund, the successor organization to the Chicago Annenberg Challenge.
Since the spring of 2008, Pritzker has served as Barack Obama's National Finance Chair.
She is also a member of the Council on Foreign Relations and President Barack Obama's Economic Recovery Advisory Board.
More than a thousand Superior Bank depositors are still owed money, and industry experts have criticized Pritzker's handling of the situation.  Consumer advocates as well as government investigators have asserted Superior "engaged in unsound financial activities and predatory lending practices."  Responding to questions from the ''Wall Street Journal'', Ms. Pritzker noted she had no ownership in the bank, either direct or indirect, and that the bank's reasons for failure "were complex. They include changes in accounting practices, auditing failures, reversals in regulatory positions and general economic conditions."  She said the bank complied with "fair lending laws" and ethical business practices. Writing about the largest thrift failure in almost a decade, the FDIC in 2002 noted that the bank had paid out $200 million in dividends during a time of seemingly rising profits; in reality, these profits were a product of "flawed" accounting and masked operating losses. Pritzker noted in turn that Superior's financial statements were found to be acceptable by regulators for many years before the failure. A 2001 ''Business Week'' article described the bank's other half-owner, Alvin Dworman, as the more dominant partner in its operation as a result of agreements Jay Pritzker made early on. Quoted in the ''New York Times'' about the failure of the bank, a Pritzker family friend observed Pritzker was trapped in a deal of her uncle's making: "Penny got sucked into this     This was really the legacy of Jay."  Yet Jay Pritzker passed away in 1999 and the bank got in trouble and was shut down in 2001, and Penny Pritzker endorsed the bank's subprime lending practices and badly mishandled the bank's finances as evidenced in a letter written by her just months before the bank's collapse.  In it she wrote she intended to "once again restore Superior's leadership position in subprime lending.".
Accused of looting family trusts, Ms. Pritzker and cousins Tom and Nick were sued by cousin Liesel Pritzker and Matthew Pritzker who claimed fraud and sought damages in excess of $6 billion.  In early 2005, the parties settled the lawsuit which led to the family fortune being split 11 ways, resulting in 10 more Pritzkers joining the Forbes 400; the most members of any family. Under the settlement, Liesel and Matthew each received roughly U.S. $280 million in cash and were given more control over other trusts valued at about U.S. $170 million each.