Hall was assigned to the NSA Field Station Berlin Teufelsberg, one of the premier listening posts of the cold war, between 1982   1985 and he spied for both East Germany and the Soviet Union.  Between 1983 and 1988, Hall betrayed hundreds of military secrets, which includes the Project Trojan, a worldwide electronic network with the ability to pinpoint armored vehicles, missiles and aircraft by recording their signal emissions during wartime.
Hall sometimes spent up to two hours of his workday reproducing classified documents to provide to the Soviets and East Germans. Concerned that he was not putting in his regular duty time, he consistently worked late to complete his regular assignments. 
Using his illegal income, Hall paid cash for a brand new Volvo and a new truck. He also made a large down payment on a home and took flying lessons. He is said to have given his military colleagues at least six conflicting stories to explain his lavish life style.  In 1986, Hall was stationed at Fort Monmouth, New Jersey, and was returning to Germany.  He was also applying for an appointment as a Warrant Officer.  As a part of the routine background investigation associated with the warrant appointment, one of his supervisors, a major (Hall was, at the time, a Staff Sergeant), commented to the investigator that he found it strange that Hall could drive a car, the Volvo, that the major couldn't afford.  The major went on to explain that he had, himself, asked Hall about this apparent dichotomy.  Hall responded that he had a wealthy aunt who died and left him a large trust from which he received $30,000 annually.  The major found the story plausible but reiterated it to the investigators during their visit with him.  The investigators thanked the major for the information and told him they already knew about the "trust."  Hall's co-workers were fully taken in by his duplicity and his unusual activities never drew much attention.  He was the epitome of a hard-working non-commissioned officer. 
After returning from Germany to the U.S., he traveled to Vienna, Austria, to meet with his Soviet handler. His co-workers wondered why he would re-enlist, and become a warrant officer, after several times conveying to them his dissatisfaction with army life. Of course, the Warrant Officer rank allowed him greater access to classified material. 
During his tour at Detachment Schneeberg in the late 1970s thu 1981, an intelligence gathering outpost for the VII Corps' 326th ASA (Army Security Agency) Battalion on what was the West German-Czechoslovakian border during the "Cold War," SSG Hall seemed to have a generally good working relationship with his associates, but would sometimes erupt and become upset over trivial day-to-day problems. For the most part he was social but distant. James met his wife at a local establishment in Bischofsgruen, a popular tourist town where the majority of the Detachment soldiers lived.
Hall was eventually arrested on December 21, 1988, in Savannah, Georgia, after bragging to an undercover FBI agent that over a period of six years he had sold Top Secret intelligence data to East Germany and the Soviet Union. At the time, Hall believed that he was speaking to a Soviet contact. During this conversation he claimed that he had been motivated only by money. He told the FBI agent posing as a Soviet intelligence officer, "I wasn't terribly short of money. I just decided I didn't ever want to worry where my next dollar was coming from. I'm not anti-American. I wave the flag as much as anybody else."
The case against Hall apparently began based on a tip from a Central Intelligence Agency source inside the East German government. Officials said this source defected to the West and is in hiding.
After his arrest, Hall said there were many indicators visible to those around him that he was involved in questionable activity. Hall's activities inflicted grave damage on U.S. signals intelligence and he is considered the "perpetrator of one of the most costly and damaging breaches of security of the long Cold War" 
Hall confessed to giving his handlers information on the U.S. Military Liaison Mission (USMLM)'s tank photography on New Year's Eve in 1984. On March 24, 1985, while on a legal inspection tour of Soviet military facilities in Ludwigslust, German Democratic Republic, US Army Major Arthur D. Nicholson, Jr., an unarmed member of the USMLM, was shot to death by a Soviet sentry. 
Hall believes himself only to be "a treasonous bastard, not a Cold War spy."
The FBI also arrested Huseyin Yildirim, a Turk who served as a conduit between Hall and East German intelligence officers. Hall received over $100,000 in payments.
Other agents in place in the US government or military who worked as a mole for either the KGB or the SVR include: