For a short period during the foundation's 2009 fundraiser, there was a  The banner was soon removed along with other controversial banners. See:   and  .
In a comment dated March 7, 2008 on   Wikipedia co-founder Jimmy Wales has stated 
The issue has been the topic of ongoing discussion. Revenue generated from advertisements could improve the website and help achieve its goals. On the other hand, advertising may be at odds with the mission of a  , non-profit website which aims to educate.
Wikipedia is one of the most visited sites on the web.http://www.alexa.com/siteinfo/wikipedia.org Tens of millions of dollars could be generated if even just a few users allowed ads. With that money, the Wikimedia Foundation could increase server capacity, hire a larger staff, and improve various other Wikimedia projects such as Wiktionary and Wikinews. See: Possible uses for additional income.
There is a long history to this issue. See:  ,  ,  ,  ,  , Enciclopedia Libre,  , and  . See also the archives linked to the right of the table of contents on the talk page:  .   demonstrates some of the history of conversations about advertising on the Wikimedia Foundation's mailing list.
There are currently no plans for advertising on Wikipedia. The current standpoint is that the Wikimedia Foundation should not carry advertisements. On the other hand, there is some interest in that Wikimedia itself will run advertisements, in order to increase traffic to Wikimedia Foundation fundraising and donations pages, under the assumption that increased traffic will lead to increased donations (see   for more info).
A relevant comment from Jimmy Wales on his talk page is dated March 7, 2008, and here is the . It needs to be read in context. The link to the relevant talk section is  
This topic has been raised again in late 2009 strategy discussions. See  .
Maybe it would not be bad to have a few discreet adverts, if it means we could get more servers, programmers, bandwidth, staff... There's a patch of whitespace on the left side of many Wikipedia pages that could be used for ads. 
If text-based and small, ads would put no strain on the servers. The extra money generated by ads would allow the purchase of more servers. 
Ads don't necessarily have to be distracting. Wikipedia could remain non-profit. The number of ads could be limited to current budgetary needs, or more ads could be used for setting aside money for future projects. 
A trial with short contracts would make it easy to just "revert" back to the previous ad-less version. It has been estimated   that such endeavors could potentially raise hundreds of millions of dollars. Wikimedia could even become a charitable organization providing money for all kinds of seed projects, philanthropic causes, etc..
The work of selecting the ads could be handled by an ad serving consolidator such as Google Adsense. 
Another possibility is that all adverts would be screened. If this sounds like too much work for volunteers, extra staff could be hired, using the extra revenue from ads.
Adverts could use the Monobook colours, font and style in order to distract little from Wikipedia. Or they could have a separate background color so that readers would more clearly know that they are ads, and not click them by accident. One option could be that no images, animations, sounds, or anything ''too'' distracting would be allowed. Or readers could choose what they would allow.
Adverts could be placed unobtrusively at the bottom of the left side, just above the "A Wikimedia Project" image. Or the reader could choose to have ads placed anywhere they want. 
Adverts could all have the same width, and be grouped by height, with greater heights costing more (up to a limit). 
Adverts would only be shown on pages with enough whitespace to accommodate the largest category of advert. Or readers could choose to place ads on the side, top, or bottom of the page.
Since Wikipedia has the ability to fund itself independently, is it acceptable to continue taking charitable contributions that could otherwise be going to organizations incapable of funding themselves?
Adverts can actually be useful to users.
Advertising income is arguably more independent than donations from foundations, which can all too easily be withdrawn. 
Advertising income can be used to build a Wikipedia Foundation which can make Wikipedia more independent.
In October 2009 ''Silicon Alley Insider'' said that '''Wikipedia would be "worth $5 billion if it tried to make money."'''
According to the   there were 411 million global unique visitors to all Wikimedia Foundation projects in November 2010. ''The Huffington Post'' with over 25 million monthly unique visitors was sold to AOL for $315 Million in February 2011. Wikimedia has over 16 times the number of monthly unique visitors as the ''Huffington Post''. 16 times $315 Million equals $5.04 billion.
Compare to '''WordPress.com'''. From their stats page in February 2011: "Over 277 million people view more than about 2.3 billion pages each month." '''It doesn't take many ads to make a significant contribution.''' WordPress.com uses '''minimal as-needed ads.''' Most people don't know that the millions of free blogs on the WordPress.com site are funded partially by ads, since only a few ads are used throughout the many blogs. It is unlikely that most readers will ever notice an ad. From their "Features You   ll Love" page.: ''"Advertising. To support the service we may occasionally show Google text ads on your blog, however we do this very '''rarely.''' You can remove ads from your blog for a low yearly fee."'' See also their advertising page.: "''To support the service (and '''keep free features free'''), we also sometimes  run advertisements. If you would like to completely eliminate ads from appearing on your blog, we offer the No-Ads Upgrade.''" 
In November 2010 ''ReadWriteWeb'' wrote: "Wikipedia was the 12th most popular Web property in the U.S. in September, with comScore reporting nearly 80 million unique visitors for the month. By comparison, Google had 180 million, while Facebook had just under 150 million. But Wikipedia's English language content accounts for only a fifth of the collaborative encyclopedia's content. Looking at global traffic to Wikipedia, the site has doubled its monthly unique visitors since 2007, with just under 400 million in September. As opposed to its 12th place ranking in the U.S., these 400 million unique visitors make it the fifth most popular Web property in the world."
Another idea is to put advertising money into an endowment rather than spend it directly. This decouples current-period revenue from any current-period actions, and so might help maintain both the fact and the appearance of impartiality that is so crucial to Wikipedia. For more info see:  
This is about '''user opt-in ads''' and '''user opt-out ads''' for Wikipedia readers. The default setting for logged-in, registered readers would always be no ads. They could individually choose to opt-in to see ads. Depending on the model used there could be various default ad settings for non-registered readers. Wikipedia may want the default setting to be no ads for all users. This way the "look and feel" of Wikipedia is not changed. People choose for themselves. This would be an opt-in model.
People could select which watchlists to unify, and which ones to keep separate. People could have more than one integrated watchlist. Many new English-speaking editors (less than 5 edits a month) quit because there is little room for new interesting articles on English Wikipedia. People can't be bothered to open multiple watchlists, especially new editors who barely understand watchlists, signatures, time stamps, etc.. Other Wikimedia projects have a great need for editors (new and old), and a wide range of topics to cover.
Various Wikimedia projects such as Wikiversity, Wikinews, etc. are stagnating and would be greatly helped by more money.  Making them into semi-for-profit Benefit Corporations under Wikimedia Foundation control would allow these Wikimedia projects to get more money by using ads without fear of advertisers wielding control. See also: Social enterprise. It has info on semi-for-profit organizations like Benefit Corporations, etc..
If there were paid staff just for each of these projects combined with the social enterprise goals, then things like Wikiversity, Wikinews, and Wikibooks could do much more. 
Maybe the Wikimedia Foundation can study the Mozilla Foundation model. The Mozilla Foundation is a non-profit organization that acts as an umbrella for for-profit subsidiaries. 
A Benefit Corporation is a legal designation for socially responsible businesses. Here is some info:
Collaborative knowledge work needs to spread much more widely beyond Wikipedia. There is not much good work elsewhere. Attempts have been made, but 100% for-profit models do not seem to do very high level work (not like the quality of info at Wikipedia), and 100% non-profit models are marginal and frequently disappear to due lack of funding. Hybrid models of organization seem to be working and expanding in areas outside collaborative knowledge work. 
The following is from discussion at   that is archived  . 
Wikiversity is not doing very well. The main problem is the poor funding mechanism, the annual Wikipedia fundraising. Also, there is no  . People are working occasionally on that, but no one seems to be working on the funding. Accepting ads on Wikiversity pages could solve that problem. Wikimedia may never allow that. So the Benefit Corporation model may have to be used for a  . Or for another organization altogether. 
Strictly for-profit sites can be bought and sold, and their initial leadership can change to the point that they start deleting lots of stuff, and completely lose their social enterprise utility. They "sell out", lose their way, or otherwise lose focus. They also do not use a completely free license for info on their sites.
Whether a site has ads or not does not indicate whether the site's info is completely free or not. Wikia is for profit and uses a completely free license, CC-BY-SA. Many for-profit sites use a CC-BY or CC-BY-SA license. The problem is whether one trusts a solely for-profit site to keep that info up on the web without spinning it, or whether they may just decide to go in another direction and delete most of the CC-BY or CC-BY-SA info and focus. Both for-profit and non-profit sites disappear all the time. Semi-for-profit sites may have better longterm survival possibilities, better funding, and a longterm social enterprise focus. 
Public radio is non-profit and has ads. Public radio is not nearly as   as Wikipedia, though. Public radio is too dependent on government money, and spins much of what they do to not offend politicians. Wikipedia shows far more viewpoints on any issue. 
Most of the for-profit sites are tame in their coverage of issues, mostly because they have a fiduciary requirement to make profit above all else. This is another reason semi-for-profit sites are needed using Benefit Corporation incorporation, or similar. They are not ''required'' to make a profit.
See this discussion also: . 
From AdSense#AdSense for search is this: 
A Google search option could be one of several search options in a dropdown search menu that is part of a single-line search form at the top of all Wikipedia pages. The search form could be placed to the left of the user name. With this prominent placement the search form would be used a lot more, and millions of dollars a year could be raised by charging Google, Yahoo, and Microsoft for putting their search engines as options in the dropdown menu. Along with the existing in-house Wikipedia search tool. All these search engines are already listed as options in the dropdown menu for the Wikipedia search form at  . Click the arrow next to "MediaWiki search" to access the dropdown menu.
The '''nonprofit Firefox browser has such a searchbar at the top of its browsers. Firefox received 61.5 million dollars in search royalties in 2006.''' See Mozilla Foundation#Financing. '''Nearly all of the royalty money came from Google.''' 
Many people would choose to do Google-Yahoo-Microsoft-Amazon-Ebay-Flickr-etc searches via a Wikipedia searchbar over using the Firefox search form. This is because many people want some search royalties to go to the Wikimedia Foundation, too.
In the Firefox browser, one can add even more dropdown menu options. For example; options to use the search tools at Technorati, IMDb, Live Search, del.icio.us, Merriam-Webster dictionary, Yahoo Answers, Creative Commons, Answers.com, etc.. Any or all of the search engines can be removed by the user. It is all done via "Manage Search Engines" in the dropdown menu. People love good searchbars. 
If there were more search options in the Wikipedia searchbar, then the open-source search tool would be improved by the competition. Especially if a "search wikipedia" option button were added next to the searchbar. Then for searches of Wikipedia the Google and Yahoo search tools would compete directly with the existing open-source tool. 
Many people currently search Wikipedia by using the "Search only on the current Web site" button on the secondary Google Toolbar installed on their browsers. Or they use this search bookmark below, and then add search terms:
The  template (and its variants, such as ), provide a functionally similar  to a cleaner search form; growing numbers of Wikipedia users are adding such links to their user pages, or setting up custom Google searches on subpage trees within Wikipedia (such as a ).
In the Firefox browser a shortcut keyword such as "w" can be set up for the URL below. Then type "w " in the address bar of Firefox to search Wikipedia for information. 
In 2006 the Mozilla Foundation received US$66.8 million in revenues, of which 61.5 million is attributed to "search royalties". . December 31, 2006 and 2005. Mozilla Foundation and Subsidiary.
The Mozilla foundation has an ongoing deal with Google to make Google search the default in the Firefox browser searchbar. A Firefox-themed Google search site has also been made the default home page of Firefox. A footnote in Mozilla's 2006 financial report states "Mozilla has a contract with a search engine provider for royalties. The contract originally expired in November 2006 but was renewed for two years and expires in November 2008. Approximately 85% of Mozilla   s revenue for 2006 was derived from this contract." This equates to approximately US$56.8 million.
There are many existing projects, and many proposed projects, that need money, servers, and staff. See:   and  .
There is a basic need to pay more developers to fix the 4000+ bugs listed in the . This is an example of a basic need. Secondary goals may be unrealistic until basic needs are met. Such as expanding bandwidth, users, servers, and maintenance staff worldwide. Donations may never be enough to cover these currently unmet basic needs. Many users want faster access, and more servers in their countries, or closer to their countries. 
The additional income could be used for countless things to grow the project and spread knowledge. Wikipedia is one of  on the web. Tens of millions of dollars could be generated from search tool revenues, or from even a few users allowing ads. Hundreds of millions of dollars, even billions of dollars yearly, could be raised if many users allowed ads. 
With that money, the Wikimedia Foundation could increase site speed, lessen downtime, increase server capacity, hire a larger staff, and improve various other Wikimedia projects such as Wiktionary and Wikinews. Additional money and registered users would help in more rapidly ramping up additional projects.
There are   for those users who support/oppose the use of advertisements on Wikipedia:
The number of users transcluding any of the user boxes is not an accurate representation of the viewpoints of current Wikipedia users and readers. There has been very little discussion of optional ads or search income in the wider Wikipedia community. There was a very loud community-wide discussion concerning mandatory ads back around 2001. No community-wide discussion or representative poll has ever been taken concerning optional ads or search income.