The college, located on the former site of the Charlestown State Prison,Barbo, Theresa Mitchell. ''The Cape Cod Murder of 1899: Edwin Ray Snow's Punishment and Redemption''. The History Press, 2007. . Retrieved from ''Google Books'' on May 23, 2010. ISBN 159629227X, 9781596292277. opened in 1973 in vicinity of Bunker Hill   site of the Battle of Bunker Hill during the siege of Boston in the Revolutionary War.
In recent years, the institution has rapidly gained recognition in the city, the state and beyond due to its graduates successfully transferring into prestigious programs elsewhere, as well as hailed for its innovative distance learning methods and workforce education.  The college was awarded nearly $2 million in federal funds from the U.S. Department of Education to boost graduation rates among first-time, full-time students. BHCC was also recently awarded an Achieving the Dream grant from the Lumina Foundation which will dedicate up to $450,000 toward supporting student success at the college.
The college was featured in the movie ''Good Will Hunting'', as the location where Robin Williams' character teaches. BHCC behavioral science chairperson, John P. Reeves, served as a model for Williams    character.
Bunker Hill Community College (BHCC) is a multi-campus urban institution, its main campus situated in the historic Charlestown neighborhood of Boston, Massachusetts. A second campus is located in nearby Chelsea, Massachusetts; five satellites are located in the local communities of Cambridge, East Boston, Malden, Revere, Somerville and Boston   s South End.
Founded in 1973 by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, BHCC enrolls more than 13,000 students in day, evening, weekend, web-based and distance learning courses and programs. The College offers more than 68 associate degree and certificate programs that prepare students for successful employment and transfer to four-year universities. Internationally recognized for development of individualized and alternative methods of instruction, BHCC is a leader in distance learning technologies that enhance and strengthen the learning environment. The College also has expansive course offerings in English as a Second Language and Adult Basic Education.
One of the largest colleges in the state   s community college system, BHCC incorporates multi-cultural and international perspectives in its courses, programs and institutional climate. With students from over 103 countries, and students of color comprising more than half of the student   s population, BHCC is one of the most diverse and cosmopolitan colleges in New England. The average age of students is 28, nearly two-thirds are women and the majority of all students work while attending college. An expansive array of student services support the varied needs of the BHCC students.
A leader in workforce education, the College   s academic and technical programs offered at two campuses, five satellites and through distance learning models reflect the workforce of the local and regional economy. The additional resources of the Workforce Development Center and ACT Center further support the Greater Boston communities    employment training needs.
Bunker Hill Community College (BHCC) offers numerous programs of study. They include Associate in Arts (A.A.) degrees, Associate in Science (A.S.) degrees and certificate programs.
Associate in Arts concentrations are designed to permit the student to transfer smoothly to four-year colleges and universities. Although extreme care has been taken by fashioning these transfer-focused degrees, the student is advised to consult the institution to which he/she wishes to transfer to make the wisest choice of courses at BHCC. These students should also work with the BHCC transfer counselor and academic advisors in planning both the curriculum at BHCC and the transfer process.
Associate in Science programs are designed to develop the knowledge and skills required for employment at the conclusion of the associate degree. In addition to employment preparation, many Associate in Science programs have transfer options. To assure smooth transfer to four-year programs, students are advised to consult the institution to which they wish to transfer.
A wide variety of certificate programs provide skills training and job upgrade opportunities for students who successfully complete these programs.
Bunker Hill also offers  athletic facilities.
The sports coordinated through the Student Activities and Athletics Office provide students with the opportunity to make a difference in campus life at the college.
There are 6 athletic teams at Bunker Hill Community College, offering both Men   s and Women   s Soccer, Basketball, and Baseball/Softball, as well as intramural/recreational programs and leisure-time activities.
The softball field at BHCC is often used by Boston area recreational softball leagues such as EMAAC. Legend has it that the field was built on an ancient Native-American burial ground. This caused the field to be cursed and athletes playing on the field often end up being taken away in ambulances.
The Office of Student Activities and Athletics serves as the central clearinghouse for all student activities and provides administrative support for teams, councils, clubs and organizations.