Building on Openwave's HDML, Nokia's "Tagged Text Markup Language" (TTML) and Ericsson's proprietary markup language for mobile content, the WAP Forum created the WML 1.1 standard in 1998. WML 2.0 was specified in 2001, but has not been widely adopted. It was an attempt at bridging WML and XHTML Basic before the WAP 2.0 spec was finalized. In the end, XHTML Mobile Profile became the markup language used in WAP 2.0. The newest WML version in active use is 1.3.
WML documents are XML documents that validate against the WML DTD (Document Type Definition)
For example, the following WML page could be saved as "example.wml":
A WML document is known as a    deck   .  Data in the deck is structured into one or more    cards    (pages) &ndash; each of which represents a single interaction with the user. The introduction of the terms "deck" and "card" into the internet and mobile phone communities was a result of the user interface software and its interaction with wireless communications services having to comply with the requirements of the laws of two or more nations.
WML decks are stored on an ordinary web server configured to serve the text/vnd.wap.wml MIME type in addition to plain HTML and variants. The WML cards when requested by a device are accessed by a bridge WAP gateway, which sits between mobile devices and the World Wide Web, passing pages from one to the other much like a proxy. The gateways send the WML pages on in a form suitable for mobile device reception (WAP Binary XML).  This process is hidden from the phone, so it may access the page in the same way as a browser accesses HTML, using a URL (for example,  http://example.com/foo.wml). (Provided the mobile phone operator has not specifically locked the phone to prevent access of user-specified URLs.)
WML has a scaled down set of procedural elements which can be used by the author to control navigation to other cards.
Consider a service that lets you enter a zip code, and obtain a list of clickable phone numbers of pizza parlors and taxicabs in your immediate location:
Mobile devices are moving towards support for greater amounts of XHTML and even standard HTML as processing power in handsets increases. These standards are concerned with formatting and presentation.  They do not however address cell-phone or mobile device hardware interfacing in the same way as WML.
Opera supports WML natively. Mozilla based browsers (Mozilla Firefox, SeaMonkey, MicroB) can interpret WML by  addon.
See: Criticism of WAP.