The article ''Warriors (book series) herbs'' has been unfairly deleted. That article was very helpful and interesting. It told all the herbs and medicinal substances in the Warriors books and the uses for them. It was deleted due to it being "not encyclopedic" and because "most of these uses aren't specific to Warriors." Well, I can see where the person was coming from, but it was nice to have the information compiled in one area about the herbs used in Warriors. It was also very interesting to just look at the list. I am an avid reader of Warriors and I was highly disappointed when I discovered that this article had been deleted. I definitely think you should undelete it. Please consider my reasoning and undelete this interesting and useful article. Thank you.  --  00:02, 13 March 2007 (UTC)
I suppose I just don't get why the sudden rampage to delete the pages for American Idol contestants. Considering how many thousands try out for the show and the incredibly high ratings, anyone who actually makes it to the final 12 is a recognizable figure to many and has accomplished something few others have. Plus, I anticipate others just recreating these pages eventually anyway. Finally, because of American Idol video games that include videos of contestants and programs like American Idol Rewind that re-air footage from past seasons with new interviews, the publicity of these individuals has been augmented all the more. --  23:06, 12 March 2007 (UTC)
Regards, --  07:33, 13 March 2007 (UTC)
This category was CFDed and closed as "no consensus." This was one of 15 similar categories nominated   and this was the only one not deleted. I renominated it and was advised to bring it here instead. So, since I think this was an aberration in the face of the other 14 deletions the CFD should be reopened/relisted for further comment to generate a fuller consensus.   20:18, 12 March 2007 (UTC)
Almost every player who has appeared on GSN's High Stakes Poker has an article written about him or her.  Sometimes, as in the case of Dr. Amir Nasseri and Fred Chamanara, this is all the article states.  Brian Townsend appeared in several episodes of the 3rd season of this show.  On top of this, he plays poker at the highest stakes online, and is successful.  No one questions the notability of a poker player who wins a big tournament.  But there are some players who choose not to participate in these tournaments but opt instead to play high stakes cash games online or in a casino.  They are no less successful or notable than the tournament winners.   22:08, 12 March 2007 (UTC)bunzobunzo