A '''cadet''' is a trainee to become an officer in the military, often a person who is a junior trainee. The term comes from the term "cadet" for younger sons of a noble family.
In Commonwealth countries, including United Kingdom, a ''cadet'' is a member of one of the cadet forces. In the United Kingdom these are the Combined Cadet Force, the Sea/Royal Marine Cadets, Army Cadets and the Air Training Corps. Military officers in training are called ''officer cadets''.
In Canada, the term "cadet" refers to an officer in training, with the official rank names as Officer Cadet for the Air Force and Army and Naval Cadet for the Navy. It also refers to any member of the Royal Canadian Army Cadets, Royal Canadian Air Cadets or Royal Canadian Sea Cadets. These three organizations are volunteer youth groups administered by the Department of National Defence. 
In Germany, the rank ''Cadet'' () only exists in the German Navy for officers in training. In the Army and the Luftwaffe, officers in training usually have the rank of a ''Fahnenjunker'' or Ensign (German: ''Fahnrich'') before they are promoted into the rank of a Lieutenant.
In the Philippines, the term cadet is used in mostly military attached organizations, but it is more distinctive in the service academies of the Philippines, such as these are the Philippine Military Academy(PMA), the Philippine National Police Academy(PNPA), and Philippine Merchant Marine Academy(PMMA). Graduates of these service academies, are automatically given officer commission in the Armed Forces of the Philippines, the Philippine National Police, Philippine Coast Guard, the Bureau of Fire Protection and Bureau Of Jail Management and Penology. Graduates of PMMA are given reserve officer status in the Philippine Navy and mostly go the private shipping firms. The term cadet is also applicable to the enrolles of Citizen's Army Training (for high school) and Reserve Officer Training Corps (for college). Service academy cadets are thought to be between the NCO and Officers ranks, and NCO consider cadets as rank higher to them.
In Ireland, ''Cadet'' is a pupil of the Military College, which carries out officer training for the Air Corps, Army and Naval Service. Training takes two years and the Cadets are split into Senior and Junior Grades and Classes.
In Norway, a "cadet" is a pupil of either of the three the ''Krigsskolen'' ("war schools"), which educate commanding officers for either the Army, the Navy or to the Air Force.
In the United States, ''cadet'' is refers to a full time college student who is concurrently in training to become a commissioned officer of the armed forces.  Legally, cadets rank above all other enlisted grades but below all officer grades.  Students at the United States Military Academy, the United States Air Force Academy, and the United States Coast Guard Academy respectively hold the rank of Cadet, United States Army, Cadet, United States Air Force, and Cadet, United States Coast Guard, while students in the (Army's) Reserve Officer Training Corps (ROTC) and the Air Force Reserve Officer Training Corps (AFROTC) respectively hold the rank of Cadet, United States Army Reserve, and Cadet, United States Air Force Reserve.  Students at the United States Merchant Marine Academy and the preponderance of students at the Maine Maritime Academy, the Massachusetts Maritime Academy,the  California Maritime Academy and the State University of New York Maritime College, though called cadets at their respective institutions, actually hold the rank of Midshipman, United States Merchant Marine Reserve, United States Naval Reserve.  Some state-sponsored military colleges, including The Citadel, Virginia Military Institute (VMI) and private military college, Norwich University (NU), refer to their students as cadets, but this status is not necessarily official unless the students are also members of the ROTC or AFROTC unit at the respective institution.  The Department of Defense Inspector General in accordance with the Office of General Counsel has determined that contracted ROTC cadets and not military members and are not covered under 10 USC 1034 for Reprisal/Retaliation.
In Australia Cadet also refers to an officer in training. The official rank is Officer Cadet (OCDT for members of the Australian Regular Army and OFFCDT for members of the Royal Australian Air Force) however OCDT's in the Royal Military College - Duntroon are referred to as Staff Cadet (Scdt) for historical reasons.
In the British and Commonwealth (formerly Empire) as well as Russian service, these groups of boys or youths are organized, armed and trained on volunteer military lines.
The Antigua and Barbuda Cadet Corps consists of students between the ages of 12 and 19. The Antigua & Barbuda Cadet Core (ABCC) is a youth program which helps to discipline children, and is a part of the Antigua and Barbuda Defense Force (ABDF). There are two categories in the Cadet Core: Sea Cadets and Infantry Cadets. Ranks start from Recruit - WNCO.
In Australia, a "Cadet" is a person aged between 13 and 20 who is a member of the Australian Defence Force Cadets (ADFC).  The ADFC comprises the Australian Army Cadets (AAC), Australian Navy Cadets (ANC), Australian Air Force Cadets (AAFC), which are funded by the Australian Government via the Department of Defence. Other cadet movements include the St John Ambulance Cadets (First Aid Services), and the South Australian Country Fire Service Cadets. The longest running cadet corps in Australia is the Newington College Cadet Unit
In Bangladesh the students of Cadet colleges are called Cadet. The recruits of army, navy and airforce are also called Gentleman Cadet(GC).There are 12 cadet colleges in Bangladesh, 9 for men and 3 for women. Faujdarhat Cadet College is the first cadet college of the country, established in 1958.
The Canadian Cadet Organizations comprise of the Royal Canadian Sea Cadets, the Royal Canadian Air Cadets and the Royal Canadian Army Cadets.
The program is sponsored by the Canadian Forces and funded through the Department of National Defence (DND) in partnership with the Army Cadet, Air Cadet, and Navy Leagues of Canada. 
The term Cadet Movement applies when speaking of everyone associated with the program including the CF, DND, Leagues, Community Sponsors, Cadets, and parents and guardians of cadets.
The Royal Canadian Mounted Police used to maintain police cadet partnership with Scouts Canada called the RCMP Rovers and Ventures; however, it has been re-constituted into the RCMP Stetsons and Spurs and is run by various RCMP detachments.
St. John Ambulance in Canada supports a youth division that includes "cadets".
Although cadets in other countries may have to take part in the military in their country, cadets in Canada are not and do not have to join the Canadian Armed Forces once they reach 18 years of age. The Canadian cadet organization is the largest youth organization in Canada and the largest Cadet group in the world. Its core aims include. 
Each branch of the Cadet organization ( army, air and sea) share some of the same training, but they also complete specialized training that corresponds with that element. For example,Air cadets complete training includes planes, V.O.R's, and gliding. Army cadets complete training including abseiling, hiking, biking, knots, map and compass and many others. This program provides youth between the ages of 12   18 opportunities including friendship, important life skills, and a chance to travel throughout Canada and the world. The cadet program is free.
Three cadet corps are linked to Hong Kong colonial past:
They are now funded by the Hong Kong government and has no ties to either the British Forces or the PLA.
In India, the National Cadet Corps is a voluntary cadet organization for motivating college students to pursue a career in the Indian Armed Forces. It aims to develop qualities of character, discipline, team work, leadership and adventure in the students. The corps organizes outdoor activities, such as camping, trekking, mountain climbing, etc besides providing small arms training to cadets. Cadets have no commitment for serving in the armed forces, but are given a preference by the Services Selection Board when applying for officer commissions in the military services.
In Ireland a cadet is a young member of the Order of Malta Ambulance Corps or the St. John Ambulance Brigade of Ireland and trainee army officers are cadets from DFTC.
In New Zealand, the cadet forces are the Air Training Corps (ATC), the New Zealand Cadet Corps (NZCC) and the Sea Cadet Corps (SCC).  All of these organisations are part of the umbrella organisation of the New Zealand Cadet Forces
Russian cadet corps have existed since 1732 and despite being banned by the Soviet government for their support of the White movement, were reintroduced after the fall of the USSR.
In Singapore, three national cadet forces exist: the National Cadet Corps, National Police Cadet Corps and the National Civil Defence Cadet Corps. These cadet organisations have a uniform and rank structure which closely mirrors that of their parent body.
In addition there are other non-national cadet organisations, namely the The Boys' Brigade in Singapore, Girls' Brigade, The Singapore Scout Association, Girl Guides Singapore, St. John Ambulance in Singapore and Red Cross Youth.
In Sri Lanka, there is one primary cadet force which is the National Cadet Corps (NCC). In recent years Air Force Cadet platoons have been established, however its unknown if these units come under the NCC or the Sri Lanka Air Force. St Peters College and Royal College inaugurated the air force cadet platoons in year 2007
Cadets also represent St. John Ambulance in the line of public duties and first aid. 
There are many competitions for cadets within the UK, for example the "Swift and Bold Competition", held at "The London Oratory School", whose CCF still holds the name Royal Green Jackets long after the regular army and territorial army regiments have been amalgamated into The Rifles.
The United States also has several youth cadet organizations. The Junior Reserve Officers' Training Corps is a youth citizenship program with units administered by either the Army, Air Force, Navy, Marine Corps, or Coast Guard in American high schools. One of the primary functions of the Civil Air Patrol is to administer a similar cadet program training in elements of leadership, aerospace studies, and emergency services. There are other programs including the United States Naval Sea Cadet Corps and the Young Marines. The oldest cadet program in the United States is the United States Army Cadet Corps which was created in 1909.
For those who choose to enter a formal program to become an officer, cadet is the rank bestowed on those in the United States Air Force Academy, West Point, the Coast Guard Academy and ROTC. Members of these programs will be commissioned in the military, with a term of commitment afterwards.
In addition, students at a senior military college such as The Citadel (military college), Norwich University, the Virginia Military Institute, the Texas A&M University Corps of Cadets, and the Virginia Tech Corps of Cadets or U.S. Merchant Marine officer license candidates at any one of the six Maritime Colleges are referred to as cadets - although they may or may not be enrolled in a formal officer commissioning program.
In early colonial history of Hong Kong, ''cadet'' was a system for training young Englishmen to be officials for Hong Kong, where they had to learn Chinese culture and sometimes Cantonese language and written Chinese in Hong Kong.  Some cadets became major officials and even Hong Kong Governors.  Later ''cadets'' were young policemen under training in the Royal Hong Kong Police Force.
In Switzerland, ''cadet'' () refers to a participant of the programs of a corps of cadets (), which are maintained by public schools or private associations. From the late 18th century to the mid-20th century, the Kadettenkorps used to prepare highschool students for service in the Swiss army. Influenced by the "Turnerbewegung" ('Gym movement'), the Kadettenkorps started in the early 20th century to shift their programme towards sports. Nowadays, the Swiss Cadets Association () includes Kadettenkorps offering the following programmes: general sports (including the national league handball club ''Kadetten Schaffhausen''), trecking (like scouting), march music bands () and traffic regulation (). Kadettenkorps offering traffic regulation only, are represented by the Swiss Verkehrskadetten Association ().
In the United Kingdom, a similar usage exists for personnel in training to become Firefighters, Police officers, Ambulance Technicians or  Paramedics. Also the term is used for youth members of military organisations such as St. John Ambulance, Army Cadet Force, Sea Cadets Corp etc.
In the United States, ''cadet'' refers to an officer in training for the police, firefighter and EMT services. Some police and sheriff's departments employ cadets as non-sworn law enforcement officers, either before or after entering a training academy, to allow them to gain experience in law enforcement without becoming a fully-sworn officer. They conduct various duties, similar to the UK's PCSOs, ranging from office work to parking and traffic enforcement. An example is the NYC police cadet corps, which is similar to an internship.
In the Merchant Navy, a Cadet is an officer under training in much the same way as the military context. Cadets choose either one of two branches for professional development. Deck Cadets train in the fields of Navigation, Shiphandling and Cargo Handling as well as Maritime Law. They will also receive training in firefighting, first aid and survival techniques. Engineering Cadets train to become Marine Engineers, and as such their fields encompass a range of theoretical and practical engineering subjects, including mechanical physics, thermodynamics, control engineering, applied mathematics, welding and fabrication. Engineering practice is mostly learned during the Cadet's assignment to a ship. Engineering Cadets also train in firefighting, survival and first aid. The cadet training scheme differs from country to country, but the learning objectives are always the same. In the UK for example, Cadets undergo training in a block-release format, spending a shorter time in college before going to sea for a short assignment after which the cadet returns to college. Other countries allow the cadet to finish his/her degree before going to sea, but most countries seem to prefer a system where a cadet completes all of his/her sea time before returning to college for the final year of their degree.
Some sports teams also refer to players that are in the process of being built up to play for the team at a later date as cadets. Such players often play for a lesser team in the same club. This is done quite commonly in the National Rugby League (NRL). The Serie B, the second most important football league in Italy, is nicknamed ''campionato cadetto'', meaning ''championship of the cadets''.
Cadet is also used in short track auto racing for the name of a category of cars.   This division is usually an intermediate division that allows drivers to gain experience for faster classes in the future.  This name has been used at race tracks in the Western PA/WV/Southwestern NY area and the GA/AL/SC area.
In Australia, the term is also used to describe a person pursuing a career as a Chartered Accountant under the "Cadetship" program, designed to accelerate career progression for motivated students. The programs are offered to students finishing high school or currently undertaking tertiary studies in relevant courses by several Accounting firms such as the Big 4 accountancy firms (Deloitte, KPMG, PricewaterhouseCoopers and Ernst & Young), and mid-tier firms such as BDO and Grant Thornton.
To refer to someone as a ''space cadet'' is to imply that they are "on another planet", i.e. foolish or unaware of their surroundings, for example, "That guy is a total space cadet."  The phrase was inspired by science fiction author Robert A. Heinlein's juvenile novel ''Space Cadet.''
In The Bahamas, it is not uncommon to refer to upper primary or high school students job shadowing various professionals as cadets. E.g. teacher cadet, library cadet, police cadet, nurse cadet and technical cadets.