In 2000 and 2001, Wang, who was an engineer by profession, posted electronic journals in a Yahoo! group calling for democratic reform and an end to single-party rule. He was arrested in September 2002, after Yahoo! assisted Chinese authorities by providing information used to identify him. In September 2003, Wang was convicted of charges of "subversion" and sentenced to ten years in prison.
On April 18, 2007, Xiaoning's wife Yu Ling sued Yahoo! under human rights laws, specifically the Alien Torts Statute (28 U.S.C.    1350) and Torture Victim Protection Act of 1991 (TVPA), 106 Stat. 73 (1992) in federal court in San Francisco, California, United States.  Wang Xiaoning was named as a plaintiff in the Yahoo suit, as was Shi Tao, a Chinese journalist detained and convicted for emailing a description of Chinese   s government   s instructions to journalists for the upcoming anniversary of the 1989 Tiananmen Square Massacre.  Both men were punished for exercising their freedom of speech because Yahoo!   s Chinese subsidiary provided their identifying information to the Chinese government.http://www.humanrightsusa.org/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=15&Itemid=35
The lawsuit was filed by the World Organization for Human Rights USA. "Yahoo is guilty of 'an act of corporate irresponsibility,' said Morton Sklar, then the Executive Director of the group. 'Yahoo had reason to know that if they provided China with identification information that those individuals would be arrested."
In 2006, Yahoo! executives had testified before the House Committee on Foreign Affairs that the company was unaware of the nature of the charges against Shi Tao when it gave his personal information to the Chinese government.  However, in the course of the litigation, new evidence came to light that Yahoo! knew what the charges against Shi Tao were and disclosed his identity anyway.
In November 2007, Yahoo! was called back to Congress to testify about its actions in China before the bi-partisan House Committee on Foreign Affairs.  The plaintiffs    families traveled from China to bear witness as the Committee questioned Yahoo!   s executives. Referencing the discrepancy between Yahoo!   s leaders    testimony in 2006 and the new evidence, the Committee Chair, Representative Tom Lantos, said Yahoo!   s failure to correct the record was inexcusably negligent behavior at best and deliberately deceptive behavior at worst. 
Rep. Lantos then told CEO Jerry Yang and General Counsel Michael Callahan to beg forgiveness from the families of the detainees. Both men turned and bowed to the women, and publicly apologized.  One week later, Yahoo! and the family settled the lawsuit.
Shi Tao and Wang Xiaoning remain in prison.
On September 7, 2005 another dissident, Shi Tao, was arrested due to Yahoo! supplied information. Yahoo! stated it was simply complying with Chinese law. Other related cases are those of Jiang Lijun  and Li Zhi.