Joni Mitchell, who said she was retiring from music several years ago, signed a two-album contract with Starbucks' Hear Music that began with the release of ''Shine''. The 10-track CD "feels like the return of Joni the storyteller," said Ken Lombard, the president of Starbucks Entertainment who also oversees Hear Music.
In the United States, the album sold about 40,000 copies in its first week, debuting at number 14 on the Billboard 200 chart; this was Mitchell's best peak position in America since 1976's ''Hejira''. ''Shine'' also peaked at #36 in the UK charts, making it Mitchell's first Top 40 album in the UK since 1991. In its first week on sale, ''Shine'' sold around 60,000 copies worldwide and , it has sold over 170,000 copies in the U.S.A.
In 2002, Joni Mitchell famously left the music business.  The public first learned that she had returned to writing and recording in October 2006, when she spoke to ''The Ottawa Citizen''.  In an interview with the newspaper, Mitchell "revealed she's recording her first collection of new songs in nearly a decade" but gave few other details. 
Four months later, in an interview with ''The New York Times'', Mitchell said that the album was inspired by the war in Iraq and "something her grandson had said while listening to family fighting: 'Bad dreams are good--in the great plan.'"  Though in ''The New York Times'' Mitchell said the album's title would either be ''Strange Birds of Appetite'' or ''If'', the title ''Shine'' was confirmed by her official website on March 15.
It is only Mitchell's second album not to have been distributed by Warner Music Group at any point in time, the first being ''Night Ride Home'', which was released by ex-WEA affiliate Geffen Records a year after being sold to MCA Inc., which later became Universal Music Group.
The album was played live with accompanying choreographed ballet dance done by the Alberta Ballet, filmed and shown before an audience on September 25 at the Sunshine Theater on Houston Street, NYC. The backdrop of the ballet featured photographs by Joni Mitchell, taken using a camera pointed at a Sony TV screen, whose image was inverted, producing a green and white image. The photographs were exhibited at the Violet Ray Gallery on the same night as the showing of the film. The cover of ''Shine'' features a still image of the dancers in the ballet.