Along with Peter Walker, Warren   s films are sometimes dubbed    New Wave    British horror, on account that they upped the ante in terms of explicitness, were set in modern day 1970s Britain and centered around 20 to 30 year old protagonists, which differed them from the period piece horrors of Hammer Films that had gone before.
An avid film fan from childhood, Warren entered the film industry as a runner on ''The Millionairess'' and as an assistant director (''The Dock Brief'', 1962) before directing the short film ''Fragment'' in 1965. Calcutta-born Bachoo Sen (1934   2002), owner of the Astral cinema in Brewer Street who had an interest in film production, saw ''Fragment'' and subsequently hired Warren to direct two feature length sex films, ''Her Private Hell'' and ''Loving Feeling''. Both were huge successes, but Warren saw little of the profits.
Not wanting to be typecast as a sex film director, Warren turned down a third directing offer from Sen (which would have been 1969   s ''Love Is a Splendid Illusion'') and had to wait several years before being able to raise the capital to make ''Satan   s Slave'', the first of a series of horror films that Warren would direct.  Warren   s final two films, ''Bloody New Year'' and ''Gunpowder'' (both 1987), were hampered by severe low budgets imposed by producer Maxine Julius.
Although Warren has not directed a feature film since, he continues to work directing music videos and educational shorts including ''Person to Person'', a BBC film designed for English language students, and his horror films have developed a cult following resulting in ''Evil Heritage'', a documentary about Warren made in 1999 and a DVD box set of his films being released in 2004.
In 2007 Warren worked on the supplementary features for the Region 1 DVD releases of ''First Man into Space'', ''Corridors of Blood'' and ''The Haunted Strangler''. A regular guest at Manchester's Festival of Fantastic Films, Warren suffered from polio as a child and as a result only has one functioning arm. 
Two of Warren   s actresses would later become the subjects of high profile separation/divorce cases. Glory Annen Clibbery,  who appeared in Warren   s ''Prey'' (1978) and ''Outer Touch'' (1979) was involved in the landmark Family Law case    Allan v. Clibbery   , while Tricia Walsh (aka Tricia Walsh-Smith) who appeared in ''Terror'' (1979), recently became an internet star on account of her Youtube videos attacking her estranged husband. A framed still of her bloody demise in Terror can be seen hanging on her office wall in one of her Youtube videos.