The company was sold to Nottingham City Transport in 1991.
Christopher Thomas Dabell used a 20-seat Guy BB to operate the first South Notts service, between Gotham and Nottingham, in March 1926. Barton already provided a bus service on this route but Mr. Dabell gained enough local customers to make his service successful. In 1929, an agreement was made with Barton which involved Barton acquiring a 50% share of South Notts whilst withdrawing from the South Notts route. The South Notts service was extended to Loughborough, and this continued to be the company's main route until its takeover. (Indeed Nottingham City Transport continue to use the South Notts fleetname on this route.)
Single-deck buses, mainly Guys, joined the fleet until 1932, when Leylands started to arrive, followed by Gilfords, Bedfords and Dennises. The first double-decker did not arrive until 1951, when an ex-Hants and Dorset Leyland was acquired. This proved useful on services to the new Clifton Estate, which were provided jointly with Nottingham City Transport and West Bridgford UDC. More followed, with the fleet size increasing rapidly to meet the new demand, and it was not long before the fleet became predominantly double-deck. However, a small coach fleet was also maintained, for which Bedfords were the preferred vehicles until the mid-1980s when the Bedfords were supplanted by secondhand Leyland Leopards.
The double-deck fleet was of lowbridge or lowheight types, due to the height of the bridge where the Great Central Railway crossed Wilford Lane. These were either sunken gangway Leyland PD3s, with Metro-Cammell or Northern Counties bodies, later Albion Lowlanders again with Northern Counties bodies, which negated the sunken gangway requirement. after the Lowlander ceased production, Leyland Atlantean PDR1/3s with Northern Counties bodies were purchased. However, when this bridge was removed, South Notts continued to buy lowheight Leyland Atlantean PDR1/3s and Daimler Fleetlines with either Northern Counties or Eastern Coachworks bodies. 
Amongst these were two last of build vehicles, the last Albion Lowlander, 89 and the last Daimler Fleetline, 117. Both were earmarked for preservation, but no work had been carried out prior to them being destroyed by fire in February 2007 in mysterious circumstances.
Following the takeover by Nottingham City Transport (which took place exactly 65 years to the day after the first service ran), Leyland and Volvo Olympians with East Lancs bodywork were added to the fleet to oust the remaining Atlanteans and Fleetlines. Newer Olympians did operate the main service, now numbered 1. Since 21st September 2009 the route has been branded as South Notts "The One".
Scania OmniDekkas cascaded from Clifton service 48, have been re-liveried for service on 'The One', ousting out the last Volvo Olympians, making NCT's fleet fully low floor, eight years before the government deadline. Nottingham City Transport have also transferred the operation of other routes, not traditionally associated with South Notts, to Gotham garage. A number of Scania single-deckers, articulated buses, and double-deckers are allocated to the depot to operate such services.
The original livery was dark blue and cream; maroon was later added. For much of the company's existence, the livery for double-deckers was dark blue with a cream relief band and a maroon roof, whilst coaches had a slightly different livery of two-tone blue and cream. To celebrate the 60th anniversary of the company in 1986, Leyland Fleetline 117 was repainted with a cream roof, as the original livery, as well as receiving special branding, and later the rest of the fleet also saw the maroon replaced with cream.
Following takeover, the blue and cream livery was retained, with the area of cream expanded, and variants were created for minibuses and single-deckers, the latter involving two shades of blue.
Current livery is NCT's two-tone green "Network" livery, with navy blue around the upper deck windscreen and front and rear sections of the roof. The "South Notts" fleetname is still used. One Olympian has been repainted into traditional blue, cream and maroon livery to celebrate the 80th anniversary of South Notts. This bus is now withdrawn.
6 Scania OmniDekka 710-715
South Notts' depot has been at Leake Road, Gotham since its inception.