In the United States and Canada, mobile number portability is referred to simply as WNP or . In Japan, India and Pakistan it is referred to as mobile number portability, (MNP).
Some cellular telephone companies will charge for this conversion as a regulatory cost recovery fee.
Though it was introduced as a tool to promote competition in the heavily monopolized wireline telecommunications industry (see ), number portability became popular with the advent of mobile telephones, since in most countries different mobile operators are provided with different area codes and, without portability, changing one's operator would require changing one's number. Some operators, especially incumbent operators with large existing subscriber bases, have argued against portability on the grounds that providing this service incurs considerable overhead, while others argue that it prevents vendor lock-in and allows them to compete fairly on price and service. Due to this conflict of interest, number portability is usually mandated for all operators by telecommunications regulatory authorities. In the US, LNP was mandated by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) in 1996 with the .  The mandate required all carriers in the top 100 MSAs (metropolitan statistical areas) to be "LNP-capable" and port numbers to any carriers sending a BFR (bona fide request).  The ability to keep a number while switching providers is thought to be attractive to consumers.  It was also a major point made by CLECs (Competitive Local Exchange Carriers) preventing customers from leaving ILECs (Incumbent Line Exchange Carriers), thus hindering competition.  Details regarding the reasons for LNP and how it is to be implemented can be found in the First Report and Order referenced above.
In the U.S., the FCC has  d this in order to increase competition among providers.  As of late November 2003, LNP was required for all landline and wireless common carriers, so long as the number is being ported to the same geographical area or telephone exchange.  This latest mandate included carriers outside the top 100 MSAs that theretofore enjoyed a rural carrier exemption.
There are four main methods to route a number whose operator has changed
The operator that originates the call always check a centralized database and obtains the route to the call.
The operator that originates the call first checks with the operator to which the number initially belonged, the donor operator. The donor operator verifies the call and informs that it no longer possesses the number. The operator that originates the call then checks the centralized database, as is done with ACQ.
Also known as Return to Pivot (RoP). The operator that originates the call first checks with the donor operator. The donor operator checks its own database and provides a new route. The operator that originates the call then uses this route to forward the call. No central database is consulted.
The operator that originates the call checks with the donor operator. The donor operator checks its own database and obtains a new route. The operator to which the number was designated routes itself the call to the new operator. This model is called indirect routing.
Complexity for number portability can come from many sources. Historically, numbers were assigned to various operators in blocks. The operators, who were often also service providers, then provided these numbers to the subscribers of telephone services. Numbers were also recycled in blocks. With number portability, it is envisioned that the size of these blocks may grow smaller or even to single numbers. Once this occurs the granularity of such operations will represent a greater workload for the telecommunications provider.
With phone numbers assigned to various operators in blocks, the system worked quite well in a fixed line environment since everyone was attached to the same infrastructure. The situation becomes somewhat more complex in a wireless environment such as that created by cellular communications.
In number portability the    donor network    provides the number and the    recipient network    accepts the number. The operation of donating a number requires that a number is    snapped out    from a network and    snapped into    the receiving network. If the subscriber ceases to need the number then it is normal that the original donor receives the number back and    snaps back    the number to its network. The situation is slightly more complex if the user leaves the first operator for a second and then subsequently elects to use a third operator. In this case the second operator will return the number to the first and then it is assigned to the third.
In cellular communications the concept of a location registry exists to tie a    mobile station    (such as a cellular phone) to the number. If a number is dialed it is necessary to be able to determine where in the network the mobile station exists. Some mechanism for such forwarding must exist.  (For an example of such a system, see the article on the GSM network.)
In the US, there are standards for portability defined by the '''FCC''' and the LNPA, as well as  and the  which are agreed upon by all member providers to help make LNP as cost-efficient and expedient as possible while still retaining a healthy level security for all providers and in respect of the highest level of customer service.  These rules, first defined in the 1st, 2nd and 3rd Reports and Orders by the FCC (publicly available at fcc.gov), are further detailed by the LNPA in order to ensure any provider can successfully port numbers to any other provider.  NeuStar provides a national database called the  (National Portability Administration Center) which contains the correct routing information for all ported and pooled numbers in the US and Canada.  The  maintains detailed  of the procedure common among US carriers to port numbers as described here.
Providers use SS7 to route calls throughout the US/Canada network.  SS7 accesses databases for various services such as CNAM, LIDB, CLASS and, of course, '''LNP'''.  Calls to ported numbers are completed when a customer who calls a ported number sends the dialed number to a provider's SSP (Service Switch Point), where it is identified either as a local call or not.  If the call is local, the switch has the '''NPA-NXX''' in its routing table as portable, so it sends a routing request to the STP (Signal Transfer Point) which accesses a local database that is updated by an LSMS (Local Service Management System) which holds all routing for all ported numbers to which the carrier is responsible for completing calls.  If routing information is found, a response is sent to the "query" containing the information necessary to properly route the call.  If it is not a local number, the call is passed on to the STP and routed until it gets to a local carrier who will perform the "query" mentioned earlier and route the call accordingly.
The routing information necessary to complete these calls is known as an '''LRN''' (Local Routing Number).  The LRN is no more than a simple 10-digit telephone number that resides in the switch of the service provider currently providing service for the ported telephone number.
When a provider receives a request to port a telephone number from a new customer, that provider sends an industry-standard '''LSR''' (Local Service Request) to the existing (or "old") provider.  When the Old Provider receives this request, it sends back ''FOC'' (Firm Order Confirmation) and the process of porting the number(s) begins.  Either provider can initiate the port using a '''SOA''' or '''LSOA''' (Service Order Activator) which directly edits the '''NPAC''' database mentioned before.  Providers can also make these requests within the NPAC database directly.  If the new provider initiates the port, it is called a "pull," and if the old provider initiates, it is a "push."  Once the number is pulled or pushed, the providers must concur the request and the new provider must "activate" the number using the LRN of the switch serving the customer on the agreed due date.  At the point this is completed, the number is ported.
Much of this process is duplicated in intermodal portability (porting between wireline and wireless providers).  There are a few technical differences, however, in WLNP   Especially with concern to the time intervals allowed.
The Communications Commission of Kenya announced in 2004 that mobile number portability would be available as of July 1, 2005 and fixed-line number portability as of July 1, 2006.
In Canada, wireline/competitive local exchange carriers must provide portability.  As of March 14, 2007, wireless carriers must provide portability in most of Canada.
In the United States, the FCC first mandated LNP among wireline carriers in 1997, as well.  LNP was first implemented in the U.S. upon the establishment of the original Number Portability Administration Center (''NPAC'') in Chicago, Illinois in 1998. This service covered select rate centers in the Ameritech region.  Thereafter, as switches and telephone networks were upgraded with Local Routing Number (''LRN'') capability, LNP was deployed sequentially to the remaining RBOC areas. The U.S. FCC since has mandated ''Wireless Local Number Portability'' starting November 24, 2003 (in metropolitan areas), and allowed operators to charge an additional monthly ''Long-Term Telephone Number Portability End-Use Charge'' as compensation. On November 10, 2003, the FCC additionally ruled that number portability applies to landline numbers moving to mobile telephones and, on October 31, 2007, the FCC made clear that the obligation to provide LNP extends to VoIP providers.
Mexico is the first Latin American country to have number portability in both mobile and local telephony. The Federal Commission of Telecommunications (COFETEL) applied this law, in defense and regulation of the great monopoly that Telmex has. It was also one condition for Telmex, if the Mexican company wanted to enter to the video market Triple play (telecommunications). The number portability is available since July 5 of 2008. The handling of the service is handled by Telcordia Technologies.
In the Dominican Republic, number portability in both mobile and local telephony was launched September 30, 2009. In March, 2009, the Dominican Telecommunications Institute (INDOTEL) selected Informatica El Corte Ingles to administer the number portability.
In Brazil, number portability (both fixed and mobile) is available nationwide since March, 2009. However, it's not possible to port a fixed line number to a mobile line number and vice-versa
In Ecuador, Mobile Number Portability has been available since 12. October 2009. A neutral third party, the "Concorcio   " has implemented and is operating the ASCP (Administrador del Sistema Central de Portabilidad).
In Hong Kong, fixed line number portability is available since July 1, 1995, the same day of fixed line telephone market liberalization (i.e. reversal of franchised monopoly), which was a requirement from the government. Mobile number portability is available since March 1, 1999.
Mobile number portability www.mnp-india.com launched in India in Haryana state on 25 November 2010. It was finally launched all over India on 20 January 2011.
However this has been stiffly opposed by many private cellular operators who claim that it will prevent growth.
TRAI rules an understanding that the application submitted by a mobile user to change his operator should be entertained by the new operator within a period of 4 days.
The states in India such as Jammu and Kashmir, Assam and other few East Indian states are proposed to entertain and activate the new operator by a time period of 12 days. 
TRAI has yet to propose a statement on what the next actions would be if any operator rejects an application of the subscriber. 
MNP in India however looks like a never happening instance as TRAI fails in implementing MNP with the continuous postponement of its own deadlines of MNP implementation.
In Japan, fixed line portability began in March, 2001.   (bango portability seido - commonly referred to as portability or MNP) began on October 24, 2006.
The Japanese Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications (MIC) spent three years to put mobile number portability into practice, since its initial workgroup started in November, 2003. As a result, NTT DoCoMo, KDDI and Softbank accelerated the price battle, but it was of little effect due to already competitive price plans and customer loyalty. Overall, mobile number portability in Japan was not very successful, because of high transition costs for the customer due to SIM lock, the long time it took to establish mobile number portability, allowing operators to fence in subscribers with price plans, and the significance of mobile Internet mail.
In Malaysia, mobile number portability plan to start by mid 2008, according to an article on the National News Agency 
In Saudi Arabia, MNP was launched in 8 July 2006, to be the first country to launch this service in the ME region. A centralized number portability clearinghouse (NPC) solution was implemented by (the telecom regulation authority) and the two mobile phone operators were obliged to implement the MNP solution in their networks and to interface with the NPC. the service was provided to the mobile subscribers for free.
In Oman, Mobile Number Portability was mandated on the Public Mobile Operators, Nawras and Oman Mobile, via the licenses issued to them by the Telecommunications Regulatory Authority (TRA). Mobile number portability was launched on 26 August 2006. Users are able to change cellular phone carriers without changing their number for a nominal fee of 3 OMR.
In Pakistan,  the PTA mandated mobile number portability on March 23, 2007. Users are able to change their cellular phone service for a free. They just have to pay the charges of new sim cards depending upon the provider they are migrating 
Singapore was one of the first countries to introduce number portability for mobile telephones in 1997. This is currently implemented through voice call & SMS forwarding. True number portability will be realized from 13 June 2008, with the implementation of a Centralised Number Portability Database Solution, as proposed by the Infocomm Development Authority (IDA) of Singapore.
In South Korea, mobile number portability service started from January 1, 2004. One thing different from 
The Sri Lankan government made a policy decision in August 2007 to introduce number portability for cellular phones in Sri Lanka. This is supported by Sri Lanka Telecom owned Mobitel Lanka and other cellular operators.
In the European Union, all telephone providers are required to provide number portability under the ''Universal Services Directive (2002/22/EU)''.
In Austria, number portability was implemented in Oct 2004.
In Belgium, number portability was implemented in Oct 2002.
In Cyprus, geographic, non-geographic and mobile number portability is required as of July 12, 2004.
In Denmark, portability of fixed line numbers and ISDN was implemented on January 1, 2001. Mobile number portability was implemented on July 1, 2001.
In Estonia, number portability is required from fixed operators since January 1, 2004 and should be required from mobile operators as from January 1, 2005.
In Finland, mobile number portability was implemented on July 25, 2003.
In France, geographic number portability has been available since January 1, 1998. As of January 1, 2001, it became possible to change geographic location or operator while keeping the same number.
In Germany, fixed number portability was introduced on January 1, 1998, for geographic numbers and numbers for non-geographic services. Mobile number portability was implemented on November 1, 2002.
In Greece, fixed number portability is available since January 1, 2003. Mobile number portability was implemented on March 1, 2004.
In Hungary, portability exists for geographic numbers since January 1, 2004. Portability for non-geographic numbers (including mobile numbers) is available since May 1, 2004.
In Ireland, number portability was implemented in Jul 2003.
In Italy, mobile number portability is available since April 30, 2002.
MNP was introduced in Luxembourg in June 2004. The Mobile Number Portability Central (MNPC) managed by the  operator group and developed, installed and operated by  of Norway, was put into commercial operations from February 2005.
Fixed number portability was introduced in Norway in 2000, one year before the introduction of mobile number portability. The administrative solution for fixed and mobile number portability in Norway, the National Reference Database (NRDB), was put into service in 2000. The NRDB is owned and managed by the 8 largest network operators in Norway through the company NRDB AS. The reference database was developed, installed and is presently operated by .
In Portugal, fixed number portability was implemented on June 30, 2001. Mobile number portability has been available since January 1, 2002.
The administrative Reference Entity (Entidade de Referencia (ER)) interconnecting all network operators and service providers is operated by a local third party, , a joint venture between the internationally well known companies  and .
In Slovakia, number portability was implemented in May 2004.
In Spain, number portability among cell phone carriers is available since October 1, 2000, without any cost to the end user. The technical details for the process are regulated by the CMT ''(Comision del Mercado de las Telecomunicaciones'' or Telecoms Market Commission) and all carriers are obliged to comply with their requirements. As of August 2007, cell number portability must complete in 5 business days (i.e. excluding weekends) from the moment the request is confirmed by the customer, with the actual switch occurring late at night to avoid missing any calls. The user wakes up using a new SIM-card from the new cell provider while keeping the number.
), portability has been widely used by the competing carriers as a way to steal each other's customers, usually offering them free handsets or extra credit. From June 2006 to June 2007 alone, 3,957,556 cell phone lines switched carriers via this proceeding, about 10% of all cellular lines in use. Spain is the one country in the European Union where more customers have switched cell phone providers, with more than 9 million carrier switches completed as of April 2007. 
As for the fixed line market, number portability is also available since year 2000, but weaker competition meant that actual adoption of the fixed number portability process was quite sluggish. As of August 2004, 1,041,246 fixed line switches were completed.
Fixed line market is peculiar in Spain, since only two local loop providers can operate at each particular region (or ''demarcacion'' as regulated by the CMT): a cable carrier (such as Ono, R and many others) and the former State monopoly (Telefonica). The sole of them operating statewide   Telefonica   is obliged to provide other firms with access to their exchange facilities or rental/transfer of their copper last-mile loops, at fees regulated by the CMT (practice known as local loop unbundling). As cable providers do not have a statewide footprint, many users have no actual chance of applying for "true" fixed number portability, that is, giving up Telefonica's service altogether. Some of them can however get their service from a third company who will bill the service and then pay Telefonica for the copper pair rental and maintenance fees, with the customer receiving a single bill. In the end, as Telefonica set up a reselling program for their fixed lines and DSL internet access, the former monopoly is still much in control of the fixed line market, including profitable broadband access. In fact, Telefonica was fined in excess of    152 million by the European Commission on July 4, 2007 on ground of "impeding competition on the Spanish broadband internet access market for more than five years, and so depriving consumers and business of a choice of broadband suppliers". 
Due to the billing scheme used in the Spanish phone call market, where the calling party assumes the full cost of the call, and calling a cellphone is usually more expensive than calling a fixed line, a distinction must be made between cellphone numbers (beginning with 6) and fixed numbers (usually beginning with 9 or 8). Full number portability in which a customer transfers a cell to a fixed number or vice versa is thus not possible. See Telephone numbering in Spain for more information.
In Sweden, fixed line portability was implemented in 1999 and mobile number portability was implemented on September 1, 2001. At the introduction of mobile number portability the Swedish operators joined forces and procured a central solution, SNPAC CRDB, which is a central reference database now containing both the fixed and mobile portings.
In Turkey, mobile number portability was implemented in Nov 2008.  Fixed number portability was initially planned to take place exactly 6 months following the mobile number portability, on 9 May 2009.  However, it was not until 9 September 2009 that the regulator approved the procedure for fixed number portability.  Since then, fixed and mobile operators, and the incumbent, are working to get the process going and performing interoperability tests.  However, there is still progress to be made and the progress for fixed number portability has not proved to be going ahead as in-time as the mobile number portability.
In the United Kingdom, Ofcom directs fixed-line telephone network providers, mobile phone providers and broadband service providers to provide number portability under the Porting Authorisation Code rules and Migration Authorisation Code code of practice respectively. As the UK is an EU member country, the Ofcom direction is intended to reflect the requirements of EU Directive 2002/22/EU.
In Australia, local telephone numbers have been portable since 1999. The porting process is based on a peer to peer file exchange between fixed line operators.
For service providers who require knowledge of porting activity to enable them to deliver voice calls directly to the current "network owner", they can either form agreements with all of the fixed line operators, or use a third party LNP provider such as .
According to ACMA, local number portability came into full effect at the start of 2000. Mobile number portability has been available as of September 25, 2001.
In New Zealand, local and mobile number portability began on 1 April 2007.