A '''glioma''' is a type of tumor that starts in the brain or spine. It is called a glioma because it arises from glial cells.  The most common site of gliomas is the brain.
Gliomas are classified by cell type, by grade, and by location.
Gliomas are named according to the specific type of cell they share histological features with, but not necessarily originate from. The main types of gliomas are:
Gliomas are further categorized according to their grade, which is determined by pathologic evaluation of the tumor.
Of numerous grading systems in use, the most common is the World Health Organization (WHO) grading system for astrocytoma, under which tumors are graded from I (least advanced disease     best prognosis) to IV (most advanced disease     worst prognosis).
Gliomas can be classified according to whether they are above or below a membrane in the brain called the tentorium. The tentorium separates the cerebrum (above) from the cerebellum (below).
Symptoms of gliomas depend on which part of the central nervous system is affected.  A brain glioma can cause headaches, nausea and vomiting, seizures, and cranial nerve disorders as a result of increased intracranial pressure. A glioma of the optic nerve can cause visual loss.  Spinal cord gliomas can cause pain, weakness, or numbness in the extremities.  Gliomas do not metastasize by the bloodstream, but they can spread via the cerebrospinal fluid and cause "drop metastases" to the spinal cord.
A child who has a subacute disorder of the central nervous system that produces cranial nerve abnormalities (especially of cranial nerve VII and the lower bulbar nerves), long-tract signs, unsteady gait secondary to spasticity, and some behavioral changes is most
The exact causes of gliomas are not known.  Hereditary genetic disorders such as neurofibromatoses (type 1 and type 2) and tuberous sclerosis complex are known to predispose to their development.
Gliomas have been correlated to the electromagnetic radiation from cell phones, and a link between the cancer and cell phone usage is considered plausible, though there is no conclusive evidence. Most glioblastomas are infected with cytomegalovirus however the significance of this is not known.
High-grade gliomas are highly-vascular tumors and have a tendency to infiltrate.  They have extensive areas of necrosis and hypoxia.  Often tumor growth causes a breakdown of the blood-brain barrier in the vicinity of the tumor.  As a rule, high-grade gliomas almost always grow back even after complete surgical excision, so commonly called recurrent cancer of brain.
On the other hand, low-grade gliomas grow slowly, often over many years, and can be followed without treatment unless they grow and cause symptoms.
Gliomas are rarely curable.  The prognosis for patients with high-grade gliomas is generally poor, and is especially so for older patients.  Of 10,000 Americans diagnosed each year with malignant gliomas, about half are alive 1 year after diagnosis, and 25% after two years. Those with anaplastic astrocytoma survive about three years. Glioblastoma multiforme has a worse prognosis with less than a 12-month average survival after diagnosis, though this has extended to 14 months with more recent treatments .
For low-grade tumors, the prognosis is somewhat more optimistic.  One study reported that low-grade oligodendroglioma patients have a median survival of 11.6 years; another reported a median survival of 16.7 years.
Treatment for brain gliomas depends on the location, the cell type and the grade of malignancy. Often, treatment is a combined approach, using surgery, radiation therapy, and chemotherapy.  The radiation therapy is in the form of external beam radiation or the stereotactic approach using radiosurgery. Spinal cord tumors can be treated by surgery and radiation. Temozolomide is a chemotherapeutic drug that is able to cross the blood-brain barrier effectively and is being used in therapy.
For recurrent high-grade glioblastoma, recent studies have taken advantage of angiogenic blockers such as bevacizumab in combination with conventional chemotherapy, with encouraging results.
A 2007 meta-analysis compared surgical resection and biopsy as the initial surgical management option.  Results show that there is insufficient evidence to make a reliable decision.
For high-grade gliomas, a 2003 meta-analysis compared radiotherapy with radiotherapy and chemotherapy.  It showed a small but clear improvement from using chemotherapy with radiotherapy.
The use of oncolytic viruses or gene therapy using prodrug converting retroviruses and adenoviruses is being studied for the treatment of gliomas.
Cannabinoids "may represent a new class of anticancer drugs that retard cancer growth, inhibit angiogenesis and the metastic spreading of cancer cells."
The European orphan status vaccine and Russian approved vaccine/drug Oncophage, now renamed "vitespen", is currently used at the Brain Tumor Research Center at the University of California, San Francisco, which has begun enrolling patients into a Phase 2 clinical trials in combination with the standard of care     radiation therapy plus temozolomide     for newly diagnosed glioma patients. The overall goals of the investigator-sponsored study are to evaluate median overall survival, progression-free survival and immunologic response to vaccine treatment. The FDA has now set a provision allowing patients to receive such care using experimental drugs such as Oncophage to those in need with no other resource for care in the United States.
The autologous tumour derived heat shock protein   peptide complex 96 (HSPPC-96) vaccine called "vitespen" has shown a promising safety profile in trials to date. Inphase III clinical trials against melanoma and kidney cancer it was shown to have very low toxicity.
A 2005, review found Ukrain may have the potential to be a cancer treatment however the research is preliminary.
5-aminolevulinic acid, a drug that makes certain cells, including gliomas, fluorescent, has been used to make surgical removal of gliomas more effective by making it easier to identify and remove them during surgery.