Sean Anstee was born at Trafford General Hospital on 6th July 1987 and has an identical twin brother called Stephen.  And two other younger brothers, Christopher and Jamie.
After leaving education Sean joined Barclays    School Leaver programme working in local branches. After swift progression up the ranks of Barclays Retail Banking and is currently managing Knutsford and Sandbach Barclays branches respectively.
Sean joined the Conservative Party in 2001 and attended party conference in 2003.  Following a change to legislation in age restrictions, Sean is standing for election to Trafford Council in May 2007 in Priory Ward.
Sean is presently a Governor at Highfield Primary School in Trafford and Chairman of the Board of Trustees at Salford Brook, a leading charity providing free sexual heath advice and contraception to young people under the age of 25, and working with Brook on their 2020 Vision Planning which is looking at a long term strategy for the charity in the future.
Sean first started working with The Children   s Society in 2000, a charity very close to Sean's heart, and played a key role in developing their participation strategy to ensure everybody involved with the organisation plays an important part where views and contributions are actively sought, especially from children and young people themselves.  Sean has recently been appointed to the Secretariet advising The Good Childhood Inquiry, currently being lead by TCS.  Working along side a number of leading academics and public influencers including Shami Chakrabarti (Director of Liberty), Professor Sir  Al Aynsley-Green (Children   s Commissioner of England), Doctor Muhammad Abdul Bari (Secretary General of the Muslim Council of Britain) and Professor Judith Dunn (Professor of Developmental Psychology Institute of Psychiatry, Kings College London)
Boston Globe, http://www.boston.com/news/globe/living/articles/2007/03/12/the_click_five_and_dill_part_ways/
The Official Website of Eric Dill, http://www.EricDill.com
Postcard from Hollywood on MySpace, http://www.myspace.com/ericdill
Bronte Ammundsen is an amazing person. She is commonl known as 'Silver', short for 'Silverwings'. Bronte discovered a diamond mine at age 7. This was the first significant thing she did. She, and fellow friends Samantha M. and Jordan P., got all of the diamonds out, and donated all $369 898 387 they found. More than 300 million dollars. This was, of course, Bronte's idea. At age 8, brotne did yet another significant thing. She produced and dirceted an animatd movie, using the voices of her fellow friends. The movie was open for the public, by the name of 'Barry Trotter'. 
Bronte was born on the 29th of February, 1863. Bronte has made this world a better place, planting trees for oxygen, discovering new theories of photosynthesis, and  proved many of Isaac Newton's laws of relativety.
As a child, Oldfield suffered from low self-esteem and engaged in disruptive behaviour. Subsequently, she was expelled from two private schools. However, she went to graduate from high school with a HSC result of 98.65 and completed a Bachelor of Business at the University of Technology, Sydney.
Oldfield went on to found and expand ''Billback Systems'' a niche company specialising in job and cost management solutions. The company was sold to ASX listed company ''Espreon'' for $AUD43million. 
In 2002, Oldfield was diagnosed with facial skin cancer. This led to a year long battle with depression. She credits her husband for saving her. She has been in remission for the past five years.
Until June 2007, Oldfield was one of four co-hosts of Channel Nine's daytime chat show ''The Catch-Up''. The show was axed due to poor ratings, however Oldfield was widely considered by viewers and the media as the stand-out talent on the program for her candid comments, zany sense of humour and honesty. Oldfield is rumoured to be appearing as a contestant on series 7 of Channel Seven's ''Dancing With The Stars'' due to start in September 2007.
Lisa remains the Sales Director for ''Billback Systems''. 
1. Melissa Hoyer ('''March 11, 2007''') '''Oldfield's drug-crazed life'''. www.news.com.au. Retrieved on 2007-03-22.
Martynas Pocius is a Lithuanian guard currently on the Duke Blue Devils basketball team. He is currently in his sophmore year and does not receive frequent playing time. He is regarded as a talented scorer whose defensive shortcomings hurt his chances at earning playing time.
D.Z.K. is a white American Independent Rapper from Washington D.C. metro area.  His rap songs are mostly original but a few are make heavy use of other popular songs for remixes much like Weird Al Y.  D.Z.K.'s best-known song is "Haley" from his first album.  It is a parody of "What's My Age Again" by punk band Blink-182.  The song has used in the creation of several YTMNDs.  The moniker D.Z.K. is believed to be the artist's initials but no formal explanation of this title has ever been given.
Despite great lyrical talent, the provocative and controversial content of his music makes him an unlikely candidate for a record deal in the near future.
Goldberg, Max. "YTMND.com". LXG. 3/18/2007 .
These words are now popular to speakers all over minnesota.
Matt Valenti is an amatuer wrestler from the University of Pennsylvania.  Born in Williamsburg, Virginia, Valenti grew up in Stillwater, NJ.  He holds the career record for wins at Penn and is a 3-time All American.  He is also a two time national champion, winning titles in his junior and senior season.  He attended Kittatiny Regional High School in Newton, NJ, where he was a 2-time State Champion.  His younger brother, Andrew, also wrestles at the University of Pennsylvania and was a state placewinner at Kittatiny Regional High School.  His youngest brother, Derrick, is a two time state placewinner for Kittatiny after his junior season.   
The legendary photographer Mark W. Slade is a prolific advertising and fashion photographer, who spent the major part of his career working in New York City.
His photographic work covers a broad range of subject matter including people, nautical, fashion, entertainment, business and industry, travel and leisure, lifestyle, nature and classic vintage.
Mark Slade's extraordinary career has pioneered many photographic milestones, being the first photographer to cover open heart surgeries.
He was a star running back at Bethlehem Catholic High School.  He was a high school teammate of John Spagnola, who was also went on to be a professional football player with the Philadelphia Eagles, Green Bay Packers, and Seattle Seahawks.
Guman went on to be a college football star at Penn State University.  He is best known to college football fans for being on the recieving end of a goal line hit by University of Alabama linebacker Barry Krauss, in the Sugar Bowl on January 1, 1979, to determine the NCAA national football champion.  A photo of this hit became the cover of Sports Illustrated the follwing week.   Some fans still send this magazine or print of the photo to Guman for his autograph.  The other player in this photo, Barry Krauss, uses this photo on his official website, and on the cover of his book, "Ain't Nothin' But A Winner".
Guman was drafted by the defending NFC Champions Los Angeles Ramsin the 6th round (154th overall) in the 1980 NFL draft, on April 30, 1980.  His best season was 1981, where he rushed for 433 yards and 4 touchdowns, and had 18 catches for 130 yards.   He was used mostly as a blocking fullback after the Rams drafted Eric Dickerson in 1983, a position he held for the rest of his career with the team.
He retired from football after the 1988 season.   He currently resides in Allentown, Pennsylvania with his wife, Karen.  They have five children, 3 of which also attended Penn State.  His son, Andrew, played football at Penn State, under the same coach, Joe Paterno.
He is currently a Vice-President for Oppenheimer Funds.  He still lends his name and image to local restaurants and non-profit groups in the Lehigh Valley area of Pennsylvania.
Ante Razov - TYU	9	14	8
Dwayne  Rosario - WOS	5	11	5
Taylor Twellman - RST	5	11	4
Kenny Cooper - NOS	5       10      3
Brian RITS- HOU	5	11	7       3
Oregon Chai is a hot, tea based beverage prepared with steamed milk, vanilla, a sweetner (usually sugar, or honey) and other spices. It is distinct from Chais deriving directly from the Indian subcontinent because the dominance of spices like cardamon, pepper, and nutmeg, are muted. Some confusion exists, because Oregon Chai is also a brand name, but the term has become to suggest any Westernized version of the Chai. Nearly any "Chai Latte" ordered at a coffee chain is probably more kin to the sweeter Oregon then true spicy Indian Chai. 
The Global Hockey League was a proposed hockey league in 1990. It was to compete with the NHL much like the original WHA did. There was planned franchises for Birmingham, Los Angeles, Miami, Cleveland, Albany and Providence. Canada was to have franchises in Saskatoon and Hamilton. There were also plans for European teams located in London, Lyons, Milan, Rotterdam, Prague and Berlin.
The biggest win ever recorded during an international mens football game, was when Australia won 31-0 against American Samoa on April 11th, 2001 during a World Cup Qualifying match at Coffs Harbour.
Archie Thompson scored 13 goals in that game, also a record on the international stage.
Michael Petkovic, Kevin Muscat, Craig Moore, Tony Popovic (46' Faustio de Amicis),
Tony Vidmar (46' Scott Miller), Simon Colosimo, Aurelio Vidmar, Steve Horvat,
Con Boutsianis, Archie Thompson, David Zdrilic
Nicky Salapu, Mexico Lisi Leututu (50' Richard D.Mariko), Soe Falimaua,
Levaula Fatu, Sulifou Faaloua, Travis Pita Sinapati, Baby Mulipola, Pat Feagiai,
Ben Falaniko (84' Darrell Ione), Tiaoli'l Savea, Young Im Min
Con Boutsianis 10',50',84',
Archie Thompson 12',23',27',29',32',37',42',45',56',60',65',85',88'.
David Zrdilic 13',21',25',33',58',66',78',89'.
Aurelio Vidmar 14',80'.
Tony Popovic 17',19'.
Simon Colosimo 51',81'.
Fausto de Amicis 55'.
Att: 2.500.
Kam is a U.S hardcore socio-political rapper hailing from Watts, California. He first appeared with a single from the 'Boyz N the Hood' soundtrack and subsequently released three albums, two on a major label and the other on an indy label. His first album, 'Neva Again' considered a classic, was released in 1993 and executive produced by Ice Cube. This was followed by 'Made in America' in 1995 and 'Kamnesia' in 2001. He has worked with many artists, most recently appearing on the Public Enemy / Paris project 'Rebirth of a Nation'. He is currently recording material for a new album titled 'The Self' to be released in 2007.
Title:
The H-Block Song 
Lyrics by:
Francie Brolly 
Recorded by:
Adelante,
Eire Shaor,
Podgie
Shebeen 
Category:
Internment and Prison Protest
The Troubles 
This material might be copyrighted.
We do not claim copyrights to any lyrics. All song rights and copyrights belong to respective authors. Inform if us if your rights are violated.
Copyright Statement 
I am a proud young Irishman.
In Ulster's hills my life began;
A happy boy through green fields ran;
I kept God's and man's laws.
But when my age was barely ten
My country's wrongs were told again.
By tens of thousands marching men
And my heart stirred to the cause.
So I'll wear no convict's uniform
Nor meekly serve my time
That Britain might brand lreland's fight
Eight hundred years of crime.
I learned of centuries of strife,
Of cruel laws, injustice rife;
I saw now in my own young life
The fruits of foreign sway:
Protestors threatened, tortured, maimed,
Divisions nurtured, passions flamed,
Outrage provoked, right's cause defamed;
That is the conqueror's way.
Descended from proud Connacht clan,
Concannon served cruel Britain's plan;
Man' s inhumanity to man
Had spawned a trusty slave.
No strangers are these bolts and locks,
No new design these dark H-Blocks,
Black Cromwell lives while Mason stalks;
The bully taunts the brave.
Does Britain need a thousand years
Of protest, riot, death and tears,
Or will this past decade of fears
Of eighty decades spell
An end to Ireland's agony,
New hope for human dignity;
And will the last obscenity
Be this grim H-Block cell?
Follow these three steps to fill out this form:                         -->
Seminole State College is a 2 years college located in Seminole, Oklahoma.
Seminole    Junior    College was first established as the 13th and 14th grades of Seminole High School in 1931, under state laws which permitted such community junior colleges.  The late Dr. John G. Mitchell organized the college when he came to Seminole to serve as superintendent of the public school system. 
The new community junior college opened in September, 1931 under Mitchell   s leadership.  Seminole High School principal Dr. O.D. Johns served as the first Dean.  The college reached its peak enrollment of that decade in the 1938-39 academic year with 150 students.
Seminole Junior College continued to operate as an extension of the local high school, with classes being held on the third floor of the high school building, through the 1960s.  Seminole High School superintendents served as presidents, principals as deans, and the school board acted as the governing board.  In 1969, the Oklahoma State Regents for Higher Education recommended the development of a state-supported junior college which would be separate from the local high school.
Responding to the challenge, Seminole citizens worked with state and local leaders to develop Seminole Junior College.  Dr. Elmer Tanner was employed as the    new    college   s first president.
During the 1969-70 academic year, classes met in the First Presbyterian Church of Seminole while the first classroom building was being constructed on a new campus on the northwest side of town.
The community continued its support for the new college by approving a $250,000 bond issue by an 8 to 1 margin to help finance the facility.  In addition, a one-cent city sales tax was also approved to help support the college until 1975, when SJC became a fully state-supported institution.  At the time, Seminole was the only community in the state of Oklahoma to ever impose a sales tax on itself for the support of a college. 
The city purchased a 40-acre tract of land located on the northwest corner of town, at the intersection of State Highway 9 and State Highway 270, and donated it to the college.
Seventy-five years later, Seminole State College stands as a tribute to the vision of these early educators and to the tenacity of community and state leaders who fought to keep and build a community college in Seminole.
Now standing on an 82-acre campus, the college is composed of 12 buildings, has an annual fall enrollment of over 2,200 students, employs 125 individuals full-time, and operates on an annual budget of over $15 million.
Mauro Moriconi was born in Ponte a Moriano, Lucca, on december, the 3rd, 1980.
He has been keen on art and cinema since he was a young boy.
He attended Lucca   s high school specializing in artistic studies, and while he took part in several local and national exhibitions with his works, portraits and sculptures.
In 2000 he moved to Florence and joined the Academy of Art, painting section.
In 2003 he met the Master Mimmo Rotella, who taught  him the particolar technique called decollage.
In 2004 he moved to Lisbon, where he lived and worked for one year, perfecting the decollage technique, and creating oil portraits of celebrities on advertising posters.
Since January 2005 he has cooperated with Florence   s contemporary art galleries Ken   s and Filippo Pananti.
In 2006, according to the results of his artistic research,  he left the technique learned from the Master Rotella to go deeper into his own peculiar style: he mixes traditional materials and the use of the computer, with new intuitions and experiments, to play with images and create something new and surprising.
Originating From Laos. Many well-known people also hold this as part of their name. This includes John Khamtanh and Khamtanh Phousy. Khamtanh Phousy was a army captain that was accused of irresponsibility. He converted to Christian and started working with Amnesty International
Michael W. Cruz is the current Lieutenant Governor of Guam, having been sworn-in on January 1, 2007. He received his B.S. from Walla Walla College and his M.D. from the Loma Linda University School of Medicine. He serves as Commander of the Guam Army National Guard Medical Command. He served as Senator in the Twenty-Eighth Guam Legislature and was chairman of the Committee on Health and Human Services. As Lieutenant Governor he oversees health-related and military-related issues, as well as the Guam State Clearinghouse and the Islandwide Beautification Task Force.
He likes soccer just like he's characters in both Den basta sommaren and Hem ljuva hem. 
Anastasios was nominated as Best Actor at Guldbagge Awards 2007 for his part as Jonas in Underbara alskade.
Fabrizio Guidi (13 april 1972) is an italian cyclist. In 2007 season he rodes for english team Barloworld.
2006 &ndash; Phonak Hearing Systems
2005 &ndash; Phonak Hearing Systems
2004 &ndash; CSC
2003 team Bianchi
2002 team Coast
Theo A. DeWinter is a professor of manufacturing engineering at Boston University.  He is a former candidate for the U.S. Senate, having lost 2 elections as the Republican candidate from New hampshire.
DeWinter was born in Nazi-occupied Holland and immigrated to the United States with his parents shortly after World War II.  He founded a company and served as CEO for several decades before being ousted by the Board of Directors.  Since leaving that company, he has been teaching at Boston University.  His reserch areas of interest there include "superconductivity, cryogenics, heat transfer, product design, magnetic systems application."  DeWinter's wife, Stormy Attaway, is also a professor of manufacturing engineering at Boston University.
Hugh Harris is an American musician most known for his song "Rhythm Of Life" for the American movie Uncle Buck. The song is from his 1989 album, Words For Our Years.
Melvins Crusade(2001-2006) was a post/hardore, screamo, progressive rock band from Simpsonville, South Carolina. They were well known and fans came from all around to see their entergetic live shows. These shows usally consited of about 500-700 people which was impressive for a local band. The band released two eps. ''Live At The Y!"''Italic text''(2004) and ''The Demo Ep".''Italic text''(2005) The band was in talk with record lables, and were rumored from many sources to be in talk with a deal with Geffen records, but the band unfortunatley broke up due to indiffrences within the band. The group consited of Ray Huges (Vocals), Scott Shrader (Bass/Vocals), Bill Mitchell (Lead Guitar), Zach Kitterma (Rythm Guitar), and Cory Granner (Drums). Members of the band have stated that many newspapers, record executives, and many bands said they were suppose to be the next big thing.
Founded in 1901, Delta Omicron Tau sought to establish a society for women in which social functions were predominant. While still largely a social organization, Delta has incorporated scholarship, community service and diversity as goals. With approximately 40 members, Deltas do not participate in only the Greek system, but in nearly every other part of the campus community from Residence Life and Intercollegiate Athletics to Glee Club and ASOC Senate. Delta houses 11 members and serves as a meeting place and location for events. Generous and helpful alumni add a supportive element to Delta. Beyond the activities and goals are the members themselves sharing friendship and laughter that define Delta Omicron Tau.
The rule of survival one must quickly learn in the harsh Antarctic and Arctic climates is the 30-30-30 law.  This law simply states, "At 30 below zero, with 30 mph wind speeds, human flesh freezes solid in 30 seconds."  The law originated by the Royal Canadian Police.
Weinbaum Yeshiva High School, commonly referred to as WYHS, is a religious Jewish high school yeshiva high schools that caters to both male and female students in grades 9-12.
The school is located in Boca Raton, Florida, and students from as far as Miami and Hollywood often take the bus or carpool to school each morning.
The school year is separated into three trimesters. It boasts a dual curriculum, including both single-gender Judaic Studies classes in the morning and co-ed General Studies classes in the afternoon, separated by level, including accelerated and honors, among others. The Judaic Studies classes include Chumash (Bible), Navi (Prophets), Torah She Ba'al Peh (Oral Law), and Hebrew Language, amongst others. The General Studies classes include English, Science, Math, and History, with electives, like Spanish, Art, Graphic Design, or Jewish Philosophy, taking place tri-weekly.
The school hosts a range of athletics separated by gender, including basketball, soccer, softball, tennis, and volleyball. The sports division is referred to as Storm, and it's supporters are called Storm Chasers.
The school's drama program produces one girls' musical and one co-ed comedy each year. Past musicals include The Fantasticks and Best of Broadway, and past comedies include Woody Allen's Don't Drink the Water. The upcoming comedy is a production of Neil Simon's Rumors.
Students must complete 10 hours of community service each trimester, totalling 30 hours by the end of the school year.
The school year begins late August and runs through early to mid June, with breaks for Jewish and national holidays.
The school publishes a weekly newsletter called Yeshiva Highlites, detailing recent school events, that is emailed to subscribers. The school newspaper, written and headed by students is called The Brainstorm and is published about once a month. The Hebrew language newspaper is called Yeshivon and is contributed to by students.
Re:Arrange is a Comic/Script like comic made by, Nicholas Scarola. It is about 3 students attending a school for the possibility of an attack from the neighboring rival country's attack. The main character's name is, Rael Naori, Chory Arcor, and Reka (last name has been undisclosed for now).
The name, Re:Arrange derives from, Re: meaning, in an email when u have sent your message to someone and send it back you receive a RE: in the subject of the message. The comic is supposably to have 3 different view points. Each with a new name to go along Re:Arrange is the first of the three and supposably the longest running. Re:Arrange has been running for 1 year now.
Taemon is one of 1,050 pokemon, but more to see to be a pokemon master is my destiny. Taemon takes the form of a solid, liquid, and gas which makes this pokemon hard to defeat. When taking the form of a liquid it evolves to Diamon. When in gas form it is referred to as Fartamon. Creating this pocket monster is very easy. Each pokemon can create its very own Taemon. Taemon comes from the Philippines root word TAE. 
Taemon has very strong attack moves like the Gag Reflex and the Stink Bomb. When the Stick Bomb is used the trainer may use the Gag Reflex which causes the pokemon to faint instantly. Taemon has no weakness because of its ability to become a solid, liquid, and a gas. It's weight varies as well as its hight. 
It is rumored that Taemon will be in the upcoming game, Pokemon Coal, which is predicted to be released early December 2007 B.C.
Bryer Duncan was born on June 27, 1990 in the city of Waxahachie, Texas.  He was born to Donna and Dirk Duncan the youngest child in his family.  His birth was preceeded by that of his brother Shane.  Bryer attended Dunaway Elementry for first through fith grade.  He then attende turner middle school were he began to find himself.  His next two years were spent at the Waxahachie Jr. High.  Were he began to play football.  This quickly became his new passion.  After passing the eigth grade he attended the Waxahachie ninth grade acadamy.  He continued his football career.  His grandpa and best friend, Dennis Duncan, passed away.  He was devistated and began to take all of his anger out on the football feild.  This greatly improved his performance.  He advanced to Waxahachie High School and continued to play football.  By a stroke of luck the center Chase Woodhouse quit the team to play soccer and this put Byrer in a position to grab a starting spot.  
The Waxahachie High School year book
WWW.waxahachieindians.com   
Rabindra Tiwary * &  Anand  Suman**
DNA testing is a powerful technology that has revolutionized our traditional criminal judicature. It has a great contribution for crime detection and investigation and its application in our criminal judicature is indispensable in view of the rising crime in the new millennium. The technique covers all basic methodology, which is made applicable for the detection of crime by analysis and comparison of a wide variety of physical clues associated with a suspected event. It is in some ways a boon because it permitted almost every person on this planet to be identified uniquely since no two individuals can have an identical DNA pattern except identical twins. It is this difference that DNA testing relies on to distinguish one individual from another.
There are three main types at DNA testing i.e. Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism Testing (RFLPT) Which is best used on large, unadulterated or untarnished samples, Polymerise Chain Reaction Testing- Nuclear DNA is used on smaller and less prestine samples and Polymerase chain Reaction Testing- Mitochondrial DNA is used to link a sample to a particular family since mitochondria is passed from a mother to his offspring. This type of testing can be used on extremely old or damaged samples.
The DNA testing technology has got a plethora of application in many fields including legal fields. It can act as an important investigative tool in criminal cases in confirming the guilt or innocence of suspects of crime. A variety of offences such as murder, rape, exchange of baby, cases related to maintenance u/s 125 Cr.P.C., armed robbery, extortion and drug trafficking yield themselves to the application of DNA collection and testing.
Evidentiary value of DNA testing
DNA technology has provided great support to the legal community by giving a hand to resolve the criminal cases besides civil disputes, such as, paternity disputes. The various
Section 53 of the Code of Criminal Procedure enables a police officer to compel an arrested person to undergo a medical examination with a view to facilitate investigation.
Through Cr.P.C. (Amendment) Act, 2005 explanation in section-53 was inserted which provides that "examination" shall include the examination of blood.... by the use of modern and scientific techniques including DNA profiling....
But, here question arises whether to compel an accused person in custody U/S-53 of Cr. P.C. to submit himself for medical examination is violation of Art -20(3) of the Indian constitution. In a very landmark judgment of State of Bombay Vs Kathi kalu1, The supreme court has concluded that to be a witness against himself i.e. Art. 20(3), only applies to cases wherein the accused is compelled to give information against him based on his personal knowledge. If this is criterion is applied it would not be difficult to take DNA testing as admissible evidence in court. The law commission after considering the aforesaid decision has also expressed the view that the decision has the effect of confining the privilege under Art-20(3) to only testimony written or oral.
Section 293(1) of the cr.p.c. also makes the provision that reports of certain government scientific experts upon any matter  or thing submitted to him for examination or analysis may be used as evidence in any inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this code.  Section- 45 of Indian Evidence Act, 1872 recognizes the DNA testing technology in a view that the opinion of persons specially skilled in some science, art, foreign law, identity of handwriting and finger impressions is relevant.
Other   reasons for reliability on DNA testing
In addition to the various provisions stipulated in the constitution of India, the Indian Evidence Act and the Code of Criminal Procedure, the under mentioned reasons also make the DNA test reliable in the eyes of Indian criminal judicature
DNA testing, if properly performed is beyond any doubt which is there on the conduct of Indian police and prosecutors because of their history of fabricating and padding evidence. Therefore it is in favour of the judiciary to rely on DNA testing technology if 
The court on its own would be unable to form proper opinions if cases are related to science and technology and an expert helps in approaching to the conclusion. An expert witness is one who is skilled or has acquired special experience in any particular art, trade or profession by making a special study of the subject. But the court does not form an opinion only to see laboratory reports made by the expert. The examination of experts in the court is must and without giving opinion in the court, the evidentiary value of that laboratory report is a bib zero except in certain circumstances.
Moreover, the experts have also gone through cross-examination, which gives a strong support in finding true conclusion. Thus by conducting examination and cross-examination in the court, the judiciary can rely on DNA testing technology.
Challenges
Apart from the various reasons for reliability of DNA evidence, this evidence is facing certain problems also.
Firstly, of the 3.3 billion base pairs that make up a human blueprint, approximately 3 million differ between any two individuals. It simply means that for purposes of forensic DNA testing, scientists do not read all letter sequences and therefore a question of uncertainity always comes into picture.	 
Secondly, the laboratory environment and its procedures are not foolproof. A constant danger in any laboratory is cross-examination between probe DNA and sample DNA or between two samples of DNAs. Contamination is the rule rather than the exception in forensic samples, a factor that simply is not tolerated in the normal laboratory environment.
Thirdly, Collection of samples at a scene of crime requires some skill and observance of basic rules. Now a days when criminals are much more alert, there is always a possibility that an intelligent and expert investigating officer inadvertently commit mistake. Moreover there is always a chance of lackness in colleting materials from the crime scene. There is also a distinct possibility that several persons having left their DNA behind in a scene of crime. The need, therefore, is to identity all visitors and collecting their samples also (apart from those of the victim/suspect). Thus this becomes a doubtful process and challenges the adaptation of DNA testing as evidence.
Fourthly, Another problem is degradation of the sample from which DNA is to be extracted. Moisture along with high temperature can greatly damage DNA structure; DNA in a wet blood stains starts degrading within two days and a semen stain starts degrading within a week.
The other problem area is that there is always a possibility to change in chemical reaction of DNA samples. For instance, the forensic sample could have been removed from carpeting or clothing previously cleaned with detergents. The chemicals in the detergents can cause the restriction enzymes to cut the DNA at the wrong place, causing fragments to be different lengths than they would normally be thus, contamination can create misleading results contrary to the off-stated claims of the test's proponents that only a smear would result from the presence of contamination.
Sixthly, foundation of forensic science based on the premise "material objects will not lie" becomes meaningless because material objects are made to lie by certain men. The manipulation may be done in the laboratory findings under the pressure of highly influential members of the society. Again, in criminal investigations, the police collect biological evidence left at a crime scene to identify the perpetrator. There is always ample chance of destruction or manipulation of that evidences by police in collusion with criminals. Now, question arises up to what extent it has got the recognition in the courtroom. To answer this question we have to rely on judicial decisions.
In the first wave of cases, judiciary is very hesitating to accept the DNA testing in view of the well-established principles of law. The landmark case in this regard, which really paved a way for judiciary to think on this burning issue, is the case of Gautam Kundu Vs. State of West Bengal2 where the wife and minor daughter filed a petition for maintenance against the appellant under section125 of the Cr.P.C. The marriage between the parties was not denied, however, the paternity of the child was denied. Consequently, the liability to pay maintenance to the child was also denied. At that stage, the husband filed a petition for blood test of the minor and of himself as to prove that he was not the father of the child.
The moot question that crops up for determination was whether the court could direct the respondent to submit himself to the DNA test. The apex court, while reviewing the law prevailing in various foreign countries and the law prevailing in the country, ultimately deduced that where purpose of the application was nothing more than to avoid payment of maintenance, without making out any ground whatever to have recourse to the test, the application for blood test could not be accepted. It was also held that no adverse inference could be drawn against the person for refusal of giving blood sample for analysis.
Going on the some track, the Hon    ble Bombay High court in the care of Sadashiv Malikarjun Kheradkar Vs. Smt. Nandini Sadashiv Kheradkar3 also held that the court has power to direct blood examination but it should not be done as a matter of course or to have a roving inquiry.
In the second ware of cases, expert testimony for the prosecution was rarely countered, and courts readily admitted DNA testing. In this series, the case of Sajeera Vs P.K. Salim4 can be taken into consideration for our purpose where the Hon'ble Kerala High court held that blood test is an important piece of evidence to determine the paternity of the child. Though by a blood test it cannot positively establish the paternity of the child, it can certainly exclude certain individual as the father of the child. Therefore, while the negative finding in a blood test is definite, the positive finding only indicates a possibility. However, the court relying on the judgment of Gautam Kunda Vs. state of West Bengal5 also said that without the consent of the person blood test couldn   t be conducted and there is no law in India enabling the court to compel any person to undergo blood test as available in England. 
3.1995, cri. L.J. 4090
4.2000 cri.L.J. 1208
5. supra note 2
In Syed Mohd. Ghouse Vs Noorunnisa Begum6 again the similar case of maintenance under section 125 of the code of criminal procedure was in question. Here the Hon'ble Andhra Pradesh High court (per T.C. Surya Rao, J.), rejected the impugned order of the lower court directing the respondent to submit himself to DNA test and expressed its faith on the judgment of Gautam Kundu case but went a step further that DNA test is not a developed test, which inclusively determines, with relevance to the gene characteristics, the paternity of a child. Court further held that if concerned person refuses to give blood sample without any valid reason the court is at liberty to draw the inference as a necessary corollary in sequel thereof.
However, a full bench of the Hon'ble sc, in the case of Sharda Vs Dharmpal7 deduced some very comprehensive measures with regard to the collection of DNA from suspects in criminal cases. Speaking for the court Sinha, J. emphasized that DNA evidence should not be collected from suspects as a matter of routine unless the information is relevant to a specific crime in question.
For example, it would be appropriate to obtain a DNA sample from a suspect where DNA evidence is left at the scene of the crime and the suspect's DNA is needed to prove the suspect's involvement. DNA should also not be collected from a suspect if investigators have no DNA evidence with which to compare the suspect's sample.
When we take a turn from the old cases to recent cases, it appears that the judiciary is in favor of accepting DNA evidences. The case related to the Post- Godhra riots8 where DNA test nailed four killers. In this case the deceased Solanki was forcibly taken away by a group of people from near his residence in Vaghri- was on March 30, 2002, at around 10 pm.  His body was found in a pit near Vankarvas on April 12, 2002. His body was cut into more than 30 pieces after which acid and salt were dumped on it. Police, along with a magistrate and other witnesses, dug up the place to recover the remains and called in forensic experts to check whether it was Solanki's body. The weapons used by the accused to kill Solanki were also found by the police from Venkarvas where they had been hidden. They include a butcher's knife (used by Mirza), a wooden stick (Ansari), a
6. 2001 Cri.L.J. 2028
Another glaring example is Priyadarshani Matto Murder case9 decided by the Delhi High Court on 17 October 2006. In this case, the Delhi High Court disagreed with the trial court's findings on the DNA report and went on to saying that there was no evidence of tampering with blood samples or proof that the procedure adopted for conducting the test at a laboratory in Hyderabad was erroneous and convicted the accused.
Conclusion
Keeping in mind all the facts stated above with regard to the evidentiary value of DNA testing, it would not be inadequate to say at this juncture that DNA testing has been acknowledged as the greatest breakthrough in existing justice delivery system because of the sheer magnitude of its impact on legal field. It is the most effective tool in the search for justice. It provides the prosecution with a way to finger suspects with a high degree of certainty and can exonerate others without the expense and suffering caused by trial. Due to this reason judiciary is in great favor of DNA testing technology which is very much evident from recent judicial trends. However, judiciary is prompted to accept this new technology not as a conclusive proof but as a supplemental tool to nail the culprit. In nutshell we can say that a DNA test is a compelling bit of evidence but not the final word in a criminal case.
Completed an MA in Public Administration at the National Institute of Public Administration and took Management and General Staff courses at the Escuela Superior de Guerra (Advanced School of War) where he obtained a BA in Military Administration and an MA in National Planning and Security at the Center for Advanced Naval Studies in 1994.  
He obtained the rank of Cavalry Lieutenant Colonel with a General Staff Diplomate in 1986 and Cavalry Colonel General Staff Diplomate in 1994.  He was Assistant Under-Secretary of National Defense in 1980, Administrative Coordinator of the Presidential Staff in 1988 and Head of the Second Section of the Presidential Staff in 2000.  In 2006, he obtained the rank of Brigadier General Staff Diplomate and was Section and Party Commander.  He was appointed Security Director of Felipe Calderon, Mexican President Elect, from July to November 2006. Hes has two sons.
Matt Ohm was born on March 25th, 1983 in Edmonton, Alberta. He has risen through the ranks to become the single greatest leader in sports history. He also runs Game On Sports and made Ryan Kolba his slave through shady gambling. He is beloved by all and has a small entourage including: P Chan, Stanislav, Dub, Kevo and JRock.
He will one day change the world with his omnipotence. Until then, stay tuned.
Completed an MA in Public Administration at the National Institute of Public Administration and took Management and General Staff courses at the Escuela Superior de Guerra (Advanced School of War) where he obtained a BA in Military Administration and an MA in National Planning and Security at the Center for Advanced Naval Studies in 1994.  
He obtained the rank of Cavalry Lieutenant Colonel with a General Staff Diplomate in 1986 and Cavalry Colonel General Staff Diplomate in 1994.  He was Assistant Under-Secretary of National Defense in 1980, Administrative Coordinator of the Presidential Staff in 1988 and Head of the Second Section of the Presidential Staff in 2000.  In 2006, he obtained the rank of Brigadier General Staff Diplomate and was Section and Party Commander.  He was appointed Security Director of Felipe Calderon, Mexican President Elect, from July to November 2006. He has two sons.
Brett Girard, was born and raised in marquette michigan. He has appeared in many tennis matches throughout his life, posting a 231-0 record. Brett doesnt lose. He opted out of turning pro to persue a college education at Michigan Tech. 
Brett likes to eat left over food that his mother brings up to school for him every 2 weeks. Sloppy joes, the wisconsin badgers, jeopardy for ps2, full house and nerf wars appear to be his life.
John bowe is a renownd Australian TOuring car driver and was champion in 1995. He won the Bathurst 1000 in both 1989 and 1994 with Dick Johnson driving a Ford Siera and Ford Falcon respectively. 
Bowe drove with DJR from 1986-1998 with much success. Winning multiple championship races and was champion in 1995. He was also a double Bathurst 1000 winner with dick Johnson in 1989 and 1994. 
Common usage:  The pirates divvied up thier loot.
The Pool Staff is a indie rock-funk band from Winnipeg, Manitoba. They consist of Alexander Howard-Scott on lead vocals and lead guitar, Mischa Decter playing bass and Hiatt Abendschoen on drums. They have performed many times at the prestigious West End Cultural Center gaining many rave reviews. They have currently released one cd titled "The Adventures Of Jim" and are scheduled to release a new album in late 2007.
Alexander Howard-Scott also ha a side prject named Satanic Velocity which is currently working on they're first album.
I am a student of Neuropsychology and recently came across an intriguing concept on mobility written by Shannon M. Hollsten, Ph.D. "The mobility instinct", as explained by Dr. Hollsten, describes how individuals have "instinctively pre-programmed circuitry for movement". The fascinating aspect of this innocuous white paper is the link between physical movement and cognitive evolution. It describes movement as an instinct, a "preconceived idea" or cognitive "reaction" rather than a physical response to external sensory input. 
Dr. Hollsten is the President of a wheelchair company called SuperQuad. Her account of movement is as old as the lever, which probably accounts for her lever driven wheelchair! Obviously, she is interested in more than self-directed neuroplasticity, her company sells self-directed mobility as well. Both concepts (mobility and neuroplasticity) are subjects that deserve more attention. With the growth of the Baby Boomer population, she might sell a lot of those wheelchairs to people to value their independence and with a President like that, who wouldn't buy one!
Also, it appears as if Dr. Hollsten applied for a grant on a related subject under Steppingstones of Technology Innovation for Children with Disabilities. "The purpose of the grant is to build a self-initiated mobility device that increases the growth and maturation rate of both physical and cognitive development in disabled children". I sincerely hope someone is paying attention to this company and its President as the proposed outcomes of her study would be cutting edge in disability with support from strides in brain research, which is primarily fixated on adult disabilities rather than those of children. 