How difficult would it be to create a mechanical or chemical process to take CO2 out of the exhaled breath and reuse it to make soda water?    The preceding   comment was added by   ( ) 02:35, 19 March 2007 (UTC).
If a spacecraft where built and had the capabilities to travel at half the speed of light how much shieling would it need? For example in the Project Daedalus article there is a link that describes how Daedalus would need an erosion shield for travelling at twelve to sixteen percent the speed of light, they go further to say it would probably be made out of Berillium. So to restate the question how thick would a berillium shield have to be for a craft traveling at 50 percent the speed of Light?    The preceding   comment was added by   ( ) 04:18, 19 March 2007 (UTC).  04:19, 19 March 2007 (UTC)
Granting Nimur's comments as true for actually building such a craft, it can still be fun and informative to do back-of-the-envelope calculations for this kind of thing.  For example, you could take the density of matter in the interstellar medium, and calculate the explosive power of each of those atoms hitting your craft at at 1/2 c and see how far you can get with a given shield.  --  13:12, 19 March 2007 (UTC)
Thank You all for the answers you have given me but I think it is sad to say that Daedalus is out of our time reach. I look at the rapid progress of technology and doubt almost nothing as far as how far technology can progress.  03:04, 20 March 2007 (UTC)
What is the convention for the direction of rotation for an internal combustion engine?
And is it only the direction of rotation of the starting (electric starter motor, pull start or other) that determines this?
Thanks
I recently reported that I received an electric shock while simultaneously touching my PSU and a radiator, even though the PC was off. Today, I touched a PSU from a completely different (and two week old) computer and another radiator in the same house, and while the PSU was unplugged from the mains no less, I received a similar shock (although slighltly lesser in intensity), to that which I received a few weeks ago. What is going on? --  ''' ''' 06:05, 19 March 2007 (UTC)
This is a very large field, so I will welcome any guidance that can be offered.
Peter Gans
Retired lecturer, Leeds University, UK
Many drinks on the internet are posted in CL and I was wondering what that is converted into on 1 OZ ? It certainly cannot be 1-1 can it or maybe it is?    The preceding   comment was added by   ( ) 16:06, 19 March 2007 (UTC).
While in the gym yesterday, I spent a half hour on a treadmill and it very apparent that the effort (which equates, I guess, to "work done" or calories burned) running X miles on a treadmill appears to be much less than for an equal distance running on a pavement. Discounting variation in terrain on road running, what I would like to know is, what is the major contributing reason for comparative ease of running on a treadmill? I can think of four significant possibilities:
I would guess that these are listed in order of least to most influential, but would welcome any pointers to expert analysis, particulary regarding the actual difference in leg energy expended in running on the spot compared with running forwards. Finally, is there any data available on the total amount of calories I would burn per mile of treadmill running v road running. Thanks.  e  19:16, 19 March 2007 (UTC)
Scientifically, the main reason may be the treadmill base acting as a linear spring.  There has been tons of studies looking at how to make springy running shoes, but they all flopped... --  20:13, 19 March 2007 (UTC)
Incidentally, the energy usage of a treadmill can be increased by using an inclined treadmill, or by just increasing the pace.   13:09, 20 March 2007 (UTC)
This weekend I helped my friend set up a home theatre system.  The reciever is a Yamaha RX-V2500 like .  We hooked up seven Definitive Technology speakers for the main room, no problem.  On the "B speaker" connections, we rigged up a pair of Infinity outrigger speakers like  out in the back-yard.  They also work fine, except that they don't provide enough coverage for the whole back-yard.  We would like to add a second pair of speakers to the back-yard.
The question is, can we hook up a second set of these outdoor speakers in series to the first set?  Thanks for your help.  \  19:55, 19 March 2007 (UTC)
I'm an eco-conscious individual who rents his appartment (in Boston, MA) and whose wallet isn't too fat. I'm thinking of sticking a small solar panel on my roof to generate electricity, probably to sell it back to the grid. Is this feasable nowadays? And how much initial investment would such a thing (both the panel and hooking up to the grid, however you do that) cost?
Thanks, Mike, 19:58, 19 March 2007 (UTC)
Electronics Express and walmart have the lowest prices on solar panels. walmart sells a panel that generates 12 volts for 9.99 and electronic express sells a 2X2 grid for 150.00 think that grid generates 240 volts. just rechecked *its been a while since i checked the site* no more 2x2 grids but they got a 18 volt panel for 16.00. however none of that wont do you any good if you got not light =P here is the link to the prices  and the link to the site hope this helps you out with what your looking for  15:24, 20 March 2007 (UTC)
I can find Cr (Chromium) and Mo (Molybdenum). These are used in selling knives as the materials the knife is made of.
Thanks,
Chris
Was wondering what may cause feet to be facing to the sides with respect to the movement of the person and what effects may this bring
Some martial arts and yoga often have you place your feet parallel rather than like the illustration. This always seemed unnatural to me. Any thoughts on this?      13:28, 23 March 2007 (UTC)
What is the chemical symbol for sodium chloride and what is its compound's molecular weight?  23:20, 19 March 2007 (UTC)
What is the point on Earth's surface directly above the focus of an earthquake?