In 2001, the Portuguese government launched a new energy policy instrument     the E4 Programme (Energy Efficiency and Endogenous Energies), consisting of a set of multiple, diversified measures aimed at promoting a consistent, integrated approach to energy supply and demand. By promoting energy efficiency and the use of renewable energy (endogenous) sources, the programme seeks to upgrade the competitiveness of the Portuguese economy and to modernize the country   s social fabric, while preserving the environment by reducing gas emissions, especially the carbon dioxide responsible for climate change.
While in the past 5 years the main priorities were focused on the introduction of natural gas (aiming at progressively replacing oil and coal in the energy balance) and liberalization of the energy market (by opening this former state-owned sector to competition and private investment), the emphasis for the next 8-10 years will be put on energy efficiency (supply and demand sides) and use of endogenous (renewable) energy. 
The largest hydroelectric power station is at the Alto Lindoso dam, with a capacity of 630 MW. Portugal has about 100 small hydro systems, with a capacity of 256 MW, which produce 815 GWh/year.
In March 2007, there was 1,874 MW of wind power generating capacity installed in Portugal, with another 908 MW under construction.  The major wind turbine manufacturers in the Portuguese market are Enercon, Vestas and Gamesa.
The 240 MW Alto Minho Wind Farm in the Viana do Castelo district became fully operational in November, 2008.
Other major wind farms which are operating, or under construction, include: Arada-Montemuro Wind Farm (112 MW), Gardunha Wind Farm (106 MW),  Pinhal Interior Wind Farm (144 MW), Ventominho Wind Farm (240 MW).
A large photovoltaic power project, the Serpa solar power plant, has been completed in Portugal, in one of Europe's sunniest areas. The 11 megawatt plant covers  and has 52,000 PV panels.  The panels are raised 2 metres off the ground and the area will remain productive grazing land.  The plant provides enough energy for 8,000 homes and will save an estimated 30,000 tonnes of carbon dioxide emissions per year.
Not far from there, Moura photovoltaic power station is under construction. With more than 376,000 solar modules, it will have an installed capacity of 62MWp when it is finished in 2010. The first stage of construction is scheduled for completion in 2008. A solar panel factory is also being built in the city of Moura, where there are plans to build a research lab.
Portugal's main investment for the use of this type of energy is in the Azores. There has been a small scale use of this energy source since the 80s in Chaves and S. Pedro do Sul, Continental Portugal providing 3 MWt.
In the Azores the use of Geothermal energy is widespread, with investments in 8 of the 9 Islands, collectively producing some 235.5 MWt. In 2003, 25% of the electricity consumed in Sao Miguel was produced by geothermal energy.