Today, Mackenzie offers a wide variety of programs, clubs, teams, and courses to meet a number of student needs, and is known for its high standards of academic excellence.  The school offers the Gifted Program, along with the , a Math, Science, Computer, and English enrichment program. Mackenzie is also known for its competitive sports teams, including Rugby, Boys and Girls Volleyball, and Girls Soccer.
Mackenzie is known for the high academic standards of its students. Over 95% of its graduating students are accepted into a post-secondary institutions. Additionally, 50% of graduating students earn an 80% average in all of their subjects (down from 66% in 2006, when the average was based on the top three subjects), qualifying them to become Ontario Scholars.
Students often perform well in academic competitions, such as the Leonardo da Vinci competition and the International Chemistry Olympiad. Spencer Cohen for example has won these competitions 4 straight years. In 2006 contestant Dimitry Pichugin won a bronze medal at the International Chemistry Olympiad.
The school is also well known for the student-run organization, SWITCH (Solar and Wind Initiatives Towards CHange). Founded in 2006, SWITCH's goal is to make Canada more environmentally friendly through various environmental initiatives   the most prominent of which is the installation of solar panels and wind turbines on school grounds.  Through this organization, Mackenzie has gained national media attention due to events featuring David Suzuki, Steven Page of the Barenaked Ladies, MuchMusic and members of Sum 41.
William Lyon Mackenzie offers a variety of distinct programs for its student population.
The MaCS Program commenced in 1985 and offers enchanced Mathematics, Science and Computers courses for advanced students. Students applying for the MaCS Program must undertake an entrance test. The MaCS Program begins at Grade Nine and runs until Grade Eleven. A quantifiable segment of the William Lyon Mackenzie's student population are part of the MaCS Program.  While the MaCS Program is a good program it is unable to compete with George Harvey Collegiate Institute's E3 Program which offers a much more enriched learning experience in Mathematics and Science.
The Gifted Program is an enriched program available to gifted students. The program begins at Grade Nine and runs until Grade Eleven. Five to Ten Percent of William Lyon Mackenzie's student population are part of the Gifted Program.