The company's founder Norman Frost bought a Crossley lorry from the War Department in 1921. A second Crossley with charabanc bodywork was purchased the following year. A Dickens bus body was fitted to the chassis of the original vehicle in 1924. Felix settled down to operate the Derby to Ilkeston via Chaddesden, Stanley and West Hallam route which remains their core service to this day. At about this time, Mr. Frost was asked to name one of his vehicles. He made his choice using a popular song of the day, "Felix Kept On Walking" as inspiration.
The vehicles were originally based on New Street in Stanley, where Mr. Frost's parents lived. In 1937, a house and garage were built on Station Road, and are still the base of the firm today.
Norman Frost owned the company until his death in 1975. It then passed to his nephew, Geoffrey Middup.
In early 2009, "Felix the Cat Creations Inc.", a large United States company, approached Felix and claimed it owned copyright for images of cats used next to the Felix name. While it provided no evidence, Felix decided they couldn't afford to fight any court case, so as a result all cat images were removed from every aspect of the company.
Between 1926 and 1940 Dennis chassis were purchased, many having bodywork by Willowbrook of Loughborough. 
After experience of utility Bedford OWB buses during the Second World War, Felix standardised on Bedford chassis from the 1950s to the 1980s. The fleet was 100% Bedford between 1968 and 1985. During this period the fleet size remained fairly constant at around seven or eight vehicles. Plaxton bodywork was favoured, and most vehicles were coaches along with a few vehicles to dual-purpose specification.
After bus deregulation in 1986, the fleet increased gradually to around twice its previous size, peaking at 17 vehicles in 2002, reducing to 16 in 2005, and effectively being 15 from February 2007 due to an engine problem with a 1988 Leyland Lynx. The cessation of service 59 (see below) saw further fleet reductions, and by mid 2008, the fleet numbered 13. The diversity of the fleet also increased with new and secondhand Leylands, Dennises and Volvos, and more recently still, Scania L94s, Optare Solos and VDL SB200s joining the fleet. The emphasis has also switched from coaches to service buses. The fleet contains 3 coaches, two Irisbus and a Volvo, and 90% of the service buses are low-floor, easy access types.
The main service is now operated jointly with Trent Barton as "The Black Cat" having previously been numbered 12. The Ilkeston terminus of the service was the market place; however, in 1986, this was pedestrianised, so the service was extended to the Shipley View estate, and a year later to the Ilkeston community hospital.
Also operated jointly with Trent Barton is an express service between Derby and Ilkeston via Kirk Hallam and Spondon named "The Ilkeston Flyer".
A third service between Derby and Ilkeston, via Breadsall and Stanley Common, was operated on behalf of Derbyshire County Council, numbered 59, but the retendering process operated by the council saw the contract awarded to K & H Doyle of Alfreton; the last day of Felix 59 operation was 27 October 2007.
The company operates school services from surrounding villages into Kirk Hallam and, on weekdays, a single morning service from the Rose and Crown in Smalley to Ilkeston via Mapperley which is referred to on some timetables as route number 13 and others as 007.
A football special is also run from Ilkeston to the Pride Park Stadium on match days. Felix have been transporting supporters to Derby County home games almost as long as they have operated buses; an early vehicle order form showed three lines on the destination blind, "Derby", "Ilkeston" and "Baseball Ground", the latter being the old home of Derby County.
Day excursions have been run for many years, and the company operates two programmes, one picking up along the Black Cat route but also including Stanley Common and one starting at Shipley (between Ilkeston and Heanor) and then picking up between Langley Mill and Ripley. 
In the 1980s, Felix started to operate holiday tours, both in the UK and abroad. Due to falling numbers of passengers, the holiday tours were to be stopped, but popular demand saw a limited number operate in 2008.
Initially, vehicles were painted chocolate brown and cream. By 1950, the livery was red and maroon with gold fleetnames and black "Felix" cartoon cat emblems. In the mid 1990s, in common with many operators, Felix coaches (not buses) appeared in white with vinyl relief patterns. The final vehicle to carry the red and maroon livery, Leyland Lynx J564 URW, suffered engine failure in February 2010 and was withdrawn.
Service buses are now painted red and white and coaches red. Some buses carry branded livery for the "Black Cat" and one carries a blue livery for the "Ilkeston Flyer" service; this vehicle also carries a Trent Barton bow logo.
As mentioned above, the threat of legal action from an American company - which was claiming ownership of copyright for cat images - caused the company to remove the cat image from all of the fleet.