As of 2010, solar photovoltaics generates electricity in more than 100 countries and, while yet comprising a tiny fraction of the 4.8&nbsp;TW total global power-generating capacity from all sources, is the fastest growing power-generation technology in the world. Between 2004 and 2009, grid-connected PV capacity increased at an annual average rate of 60 percent, to some 21&nbsp;GW.REN21.  p. 19. Such installations may be ground-mounted (and sometimes integrated with farming and grazing) or built into the roof or walls of a building, known as Building Integrated Photovoltaics or BIPV for short, while BAPV is Building Applied PV -    it   s a retrofit added to the building long after construction. Off-grid PV accounts for an additional 3   4&nbsp;GW.
Driven by advances in technology and increases in manufacturing scale and sophistication, the cost of photovoltaics has declined steadily since the first solar cells were manufactured.  Net metering and financial incentives, such as preferential feed-in tariffs for solar-generated electricity, have supported solar PV installations in many countries.
The photovoltaic effect is the creation of a voltage (or a corresponding electric current) in a material upon exposure to light. Though the photovoltaic effect is directly related to the photoelectric effect, the two processes are different and should be distinguished. In the photoelectric effect, electrons are ejected from a material's surface upon exposure to radiation of sufficient energy. The photovoltaic effect is different in that the generated electrons are transferred between different bands (i.e., from the valence to conduction bands) within the material, resulting in the buildup of a voltage between two electrodes.
In most photovoltaic applications the radiation is sunlight and for this reason the devices are known as solar cells. In the case of a p-n junction solar cell, illuminating the material creates an electric current as excited electrons and the remaining holes are swept in different directions by the built-in electric field of the depletion region.
The photovoltaic effect was first observed by Alexandre-Edmond Becquerel in 1839.
Photovoltaics are best known as a method for generating electric power by using solar cells to convert energy from the sun into a flow of electrons. The photovoltaic effect refers to photons of light exciting electrons into a higher state of energy, allowing them to act as charge carriers for an electric current. The term photovoltaic denotes the unbiased operating mode of a photodiode in which current through the device is entirely due to the transduced light energy. Virtually all photovoltaic devices are some type of photodiode.
Solar cells produce direct current electricity from sun light, which can be used to power equipment or to recharge a battery. The first practical application of photovoltaics was to power orbiting satellites and other spacecraft, but today the majority of photovoltaic modules are used for grid connected power generation. In this case an inverter is required to convert the DC to AC. There is a smaller market for off-grid power for remote dwellings, boats, recreational vehicles, electric cars, roadside emergency telephones, remote sensing, and cathodic protection of pipelines.
Cells require protection from the environment and are usually packaged tightly behind a glass sheet. When more power is required than a single cell can deliver, cells are electrically connected together to form photovoltaic modules, or solar panels. A single module is enough to power an emergency telephone, but for a house or a power plant the modules must be arranged in multiples as arrays. Although the selling price of modules is still too high to compete with grid electricity in most places, significant financial incentives in Japan and then Germany, Italy, Greece and France triggered a huge growth in demand, followed quickly by production. In 2008, Spain installed 45% of all photovoltaics, but a change in law limiting the feed-in tariff is expected to cause a precipitous drop in the rate of new installations there, from an extra 2.5&nbsp;GW in 2008, to an expected additional 375&nbsp;MW in 2009.
A significant market has emerged in off-grid locations for solar-power-charged storage-battery based solutions. These often provide the only electricity available. The first commercial installation of this kind was in 1966 on Ogami Island in Japan to transition Ogami Lighthouse from gas torch to fully self-sufficient electrical power.
Due to the growing demand for renewable energy sources, the manufacture of solar cells and photovoltaic arrays has advanced dramatically in recent years.
Photovoltaic production has been increasing by an average of more than 20 percent each year since 2002, making it the world   s fastest-growing energy technology. At the end of 2009, the cumulative global PV installations surpassed 21&nbsp;GW.James Russell.  ''Vital Signs'', June 03, 2010. Roughly 90% of this generating capacity consists of grid-tied electrical systems. Such installations may be ground-mounted (and sometimes integrated with farming and grazing)  or built into the roof or walls of a building, known as Building Integrated Photovoltaics or BIPV for short, while BAPV is Building Applied PV -    it   s a retrofit added to the building long after construction. Solar PV power stations today have capacities ranging from 10   60 MW although proposed solar PV power stations will have a capacity of 150 MW or more.Mark Z. Jacobson (2009).  p. 4.
 The three leading countries (Germany, Japan and the US) represent nearly 89% of the total worldwide PV installed capacity.
Germany installed a record 3.8&nbsp;GW of solar PV in 2009;. Renewableenergyworld.com. Retrieved on 2010-12-12. in contrast, the US installed about 500&nbsp;MW in 2009. The previous record, 2.6&nbsp;GW, was set by Spain in 2008. Germany was also the fastest growing major PV market in the world from 2006 to 2007 industry observers speculate that Germany could install more than 4.5&nbsp;GW in 2010. In fact Germany installed 7,25 GW in 2010  The German PV industry generates over 10,000 jobs in production, distribution and installation. By the end of 2006, nearly 88% of all solar PV installations in the EU were in grid-tied applications in Germany.
Photovoltaic power capacity is measured as maximum power output under standardized test conditions (STC) in "Wp" (Watts peak). The actual power output at a particular point in time may be less than or greater than this standardized, or "rated," value, depending on geographical location, time of day, weather conditions, and other factors. Solar photovoltaic array capacity factors are typically under 25%, which is lower than many other industrial sources of electricity. Therefore the 2008 installed base peak output would have provided an average output of 3.04&nbsp;GW (assuming 20%    15.2&nbsp;GWp). This represented 0.15 percent of global demand at the time.
The  EPIA/Greenpeace Advanced Scenario shows that by the year 2030, PV systems could be generating approximately 1.8&nbsp;TW of electricity around the world. This means that, assuming a serious commitment is made to energy efficiency, enough solar power would be produced globally in twenty-five years    time to satisfy the electricity needs of almost 14% of the world   s population.
Photovoltaic panels based on crystalline silicon modules are being partially replaced in the market by panels that employ thin-film solar cells (CdTe CIGS, amorphous Si, microcrystalline Si), which are rapidly growing and are expected to account for 31 percent of the global installed power by 2013.
In 2006 investors began offering free solar panel installation in return for a 25 year contract, or Power Purchase Agreement, to purchase electricity at a fixed price, normally set at or below current electric rates. It is expected that by 2009 over 90% of commercial photovoltaics installed in the United States will be installed using a power purchase agreement. An innovative financing arrangement in Berkeley, California, funded by grants from the United States Environmental Protection Agency and the Bay Area Air Quality Management District, lends money to a homeowner for solar system, to be repaid via an additional tax assessment on the property which remains in place for 20 years.  This allows installation of the solar system at "relatively little up-front cost to the property owner."
A San Jose based company, Sunpower, produces cells that have an energy conversion ratio of 19.5%, well above the market average of 12   18%. The most efficient solar cell so far is a multi-junction concentrator solar cell with an efficiency of 43.5% produced by NREL in April 2011. The highest efficiencies achieved without concentration include Sharp Corporation at 35.8% using a proprietary triple-junction manufacturing technology in 2009, and Boeing Spectrolab (40.7% also using a triple layer design). A March 2010 experimental demonstration of a design by a Caltech group led by Harry Atwater which has an absorption efficiency of 85% in sunlight and 95% at certain wavelengths is claimed to have near perfect quantum efficiency.  However, absorption efficiency should not be confused with the sunlight-to-electricity conversion efficiency.
The new European Photovoltaic Industry Association (EPIA) report predicts a promising future for photovoltaics. "The future of the PV market remains bright in the EU and the rest of the world," the report said. "Uncertain times are causing governments everywhere to rethink the future of their energy mix, creating new opportunities for a competitive, safe and reliable electricity source such as PV." By 2015, between 131 and 196 gigawatts (GW) of photovoltaic systems could be installed around the globe. (''Until now, only 40 GW have been installed.'')
 As of December 2010, the largest photovoltaic (PV) power plants in the world are the Sarnia Photovoltaic Power Plant (Canada, 97 MW), Montalto di Castro Photovoltaic Power Station (Italy, 84.2 MW), Finsterwalde Solar Park (Germany, 80.7 MW), Rovigo Photovoltaic Power Plant (Italy, 70 MW), Olmedilla Photovoltaic Park (Spain, 60&nbsp;MW), the Strasskirchen Solar Park (Germany, 54&nbsp;MW), and the Lieberose Photovoltaic Park (Germany, 53&nbsp;MW). Larger power stations are under construction, some proposed will have a capacity of 150&nbsp;MW or more. A planned installation in China will produce 2000 megawatts at peak. 
Many of these plants are integrated with agriculture and some use innovative tracking systems that follow the sun's daily path across the sky to generate more electricity than conventional fixed-mounted systems. There are no fuel costs or emissions during operation of the power stations.
Photovoltaic arrays are often associated with buildings: either integrated into them, mounted on them or mounted nearby on the ground.
Arrays are most often retrofitted into existing buildings, usually mounted on top of the existing roof structure or on the existing walls. Alternatively, an array can be located separately from the building but connected by cable to supply power for the building. In 2010, more than four-fifths of the 9,000 MW of solar PV operating in Germany was installed on rooftops.
Building-integrated photovoltaics (BIPV) are increasingly incorporated into new domestic and industrial buildings as a principal or ancillary source of electrical power. Typically, an array is incorporated into the roof or walls of a building. Roof tiles with integrated PV cells are also common.
The power output of photovoltaic systems for installation in buildings is usually described in kilowatt-peak units (kWp).
PV has traditionally been used for electric power in space. PV is rarely used to provide motive power in transport applications, but is being used increasingly to provide auxiliary power in boats and cars. A self-contained solar vehicle would have limited power and low utility, but a solar-charged vehicle  would allow use of solar power for transportation. Solar-powered cars have been demonstrated.
Until a decade or so ago, PV was used frequently to power calculators and novelty devices. Improvements in integrated circuits and low power liquid crystal displays make it possible to power such devices for several years between battery changes, making PV use less common. In contrast, solar powered remote fixed devices have seen increasing use recently in locations where significant connection cost makes grid power prohibitively expensive. Such applications include water pumps,
Developing countries where many villages are often more than five kilometers away from grid power have begun using photovoltaics. In remote locations in India a rural lighting program has been providing solar powered LED lighting to replace kerosene lamps. The solar powered lamps were sold at about the cost of a few months' supply of kerosene. Cuba is working to provide solar power for areas that are off grid. These are areas where the social costs and benefits offer an excellent case for going solar though the lack of profitability could relegate such endeavors to humanitarian goals.
In December 2008, the Oregon Department of Transportation placed in service the nation   s first solar photovoltaic system in a U.S. highway right-of-way.  The 104-kilowatt (kW) array produces enough electricity to offset approximately one-third of the electricity needed to light the Interstate highway interchange where it is located. 
A  section of roadway in Idaho is being used to test the possibility of installing solar panels into the road surface, as roads are generally unobstructed to the sun and represent about the percentage of land area needed to replace other energy sources with solar power.
Design studies of large solar power collection satellites have been conducted for decades. The idea was first proposed by Peter Glaser, then of Arthur D. Little Inc; NASA conducted a long series of engineering and economic feasibility studies in the 1970s, and interest has revived in first years of the 21st century.
From a practical economic viewpoint, dozens of issues would have to be solved before space-based solar power will be a feasible alternative.  A key issue for such satellites appears to be the launch cost, which so far makes space-based solar power at least 100 times more expensive than terrestrial solar power. Additional considerations will include controlling and pointing enormous flexible arrays in space, beaming the energy to large terrestrial receivers so as not to fry all living things in the path of the beam, and launching the thousands of heavy-lift vehicles per year it would take to build a significant energy capacity in space.  Challenges such as developing space-based assembly techniques for the flexible arrays that would cover thousands of hectares make the construction of the International Space Station seem like child's play, but they seem to be less a hurdle than the capital cost. Reductions in photovoltaic cell costs or efficiency increases will not help, as the same improvements make terrestrial-based solar power more economical as well.
Generally, temperatures above room temperature reduce the performance of photovoltaics.
For best performance, terrestrial PV systems aim to maximize the time they face the sun. Solar trackers aim to achieve this by moving PV panels to follow the sun. The increase can be by as much as 20% in winter and by as much as 50% in summer. Static mounted systems can be optimized by analysis of the Sun path. Panels are often set to latitude tilt, an angle equal to the latitude, but performance can be improved by adjusting the angle for summer or winter.
The 89,000 TW of sunlight reaching the Earth's surface is plentiful     almost 6,000 times more than the 15&nbsp;TW equivalent of average power consumed by humans. Additionally, solar electric generation has the highest power density (global mean of 170 W/m  ) among renewable energies.
Solar power is pollution-free during use. Production end-wastes and emissions are manageable using existing pollution controls. End-of-use recycling technologies are under development  and policies are being produced that encourage recycling from producers.
PV installations can operate for many years with little maintenance or intervention after their initial set-up, so after the initial capital cost of building any solar power plant, operating costs are extremely low compared to existing power technologies.
Solar electric generation is economically superior where grid connection or fuel transport is difficult, costly or impossible. Long-standing examples include satellites, island communities, remote locations and ocean vessels.
When grid-connected, solar electric generation replaces some or all of the highest-cost electricity used during times of peak demand (in most climatic regions). This can reduce grid loading, and can eliminate the need for local battery power to provide for use in times of darkness. These features are enabled by net metering. Time-of-use net metering can be highly favorable, but requires newer electronic metering, which may still be impractical for some users.
Grid-connected solar electricity can be used locally thus reducing transmission/distribution losses (transmission losses in the US were approximately 7.2% in 1995).
Compared to fossil and nuclear energy sources, very little research money has been invested in the development of solar cells, so there is considerable room for improvement. Nevertheless, experimental high efficiency solar cells already have efficiencies of over 40% in case of concentrating photovoltaic cells  and efficiencies are rapidly rising while mass-production costs are rapidly falling.
Solar electricity is more expensive than most other forms of small-scale alternative energy production. Without governments mandating "feed-in tariffs"Feed-in-tarrifs (See: 
Solar electricity is not produced at night and is greatly reduced in cloudy conditions. Therefore, a storage or complementary power system is required.Many buildings with photovoltaic arrays are tied into the power grid; the grid absorbs excess electricity generated throughout the day, and provides electricity in the evening.
 and on average lower in Europe.
Solar cells produce DC which must be converted to AC (using a grid tie inverter) when used in existing distribution grids. This incurs an energy loss of 4   12%.
Much of the investment in a home-mounted system may be lost if the home-owner moves and the buyer puts less value on the system than the seller.The city of Berkeley has come up with an innovative financing method to remove this limitation, by adding a tax assessment that is transferred with the home to pay for the solar panels. (See: 