This is a great place to go when studying at Canterbury.  This is true unless you live on Mabel Hendrie - MUPPETS.  This is the term used for the absolute idiots that live there.  The worst one there would be chad. He is the defonition od stupidity, he has a hydration shell of stupidity that goes through to the other rooms that surround him. MUPPETS!!!!
These comments are primary references from those who attended Bish at one point or another
All churchs in goa offer grand mass on easter sunday. People exchange easter eggs which makes Easter family affair. The Christian festival of Easter celebrates the resurrection of Jesus Christ. The spring festival has its roots in the Jewish Passover, which commemorates Israel's deliverance from the bondage of Egypt, and in the Christian reinterpretation of its meaning after the crucifixion of Jesus during the Passover of AD c.30 and the proclamation of his resurrection three days later.
Easter Day is currently determined as the first Sunday after the full moon on or after March 21. The Eastern Orthodox churches, however, follow the Julian rather than the Gregorian calendar, so their celebration usually falls several weeks later than the Western Easter. Easter is preceded by the period of preparation called Lent.
Biography
Kai Wong, also credited as Kai Christophe Wong is a Hollywood Actor and Producer. Wong is of paternal Chinese descent but has possible but understated European ancestry due to trading and colonial relationships between Imperial China, South-east Asia and Italy, France, England, Portugal, and to a lesser extent, Germany.
He was discovered in Manhattan by legendary American talent manager, Jadin Wong, wife of the late Edward Dowling, heir of the Theatre chains in New York City. She signed him up immediately following an audition as Marius from the Victor Hugo adapted musical, "Les Miserables", otherwise known as "Les Miz" in Broadway. As her protege, his career was launched. He is most known for his role as a Vietcong, singing about the misery of war in Mimi Rogers' "War & Pieces" in New York, 2003. This piece became an important piece for the Village Voice because it was the first anti-war piece performed just before the onset of the Iraq War. It was performed in the bohemian part of New York City, in East Village at St. Mark's danspace, at the site of American dramatist's Richard Foreman's Ontological-Hysteric Theater. It received rave reviews the week after. Subsequently, Kai Wong appeared in cameos in Spike Lee's "She Hate Me" as well as in pilots and television series. He was also instrumental in the production of several late works under the late Oscar-winning Hollywood Producer Ismail Merchant by the Oscar-winning team Merchant-Ivory Productions in Le Divorce, starring Kate Hudson, Naomi Watts, Glenn Close and The White Countess starring Ralph Fiennes.
Background
His grandfather is a veteran of the Northern Expedition led by Sun Yat-sen. This expedition was a Resistance campaign which fought off foreign colonization and invaders from Canton to Peking. Its ideal was to establish democracy in a China governed by the people, free from intervention from marauding tribes, such as the Mongol and Manchu dynasties of Yuan, Ching. Most importantly, it was to protect China from foreign colonization and potential civilian victimization such as the Chinese Holocaust - known as the Nanjing massacre.
He is speculated to be one of the direct descendants of Huangdi, the mythical Yellow Emperor who founded China and reigned from 2698 BC to 2598 BC. In addition, he is widely believed to continue the lineage of  Qinshihuang, the Chinese Emperor who built the Great Wall. Whether by accident or genealogical generation name poems typical of Asian name conventions, many has remarked upon the fact that his personal name, in Han Chinese logograph, is a first repetition of the Emperor's personal name within the clan after more than four thousand years.
Education
Kai Wong is a dropout of Stanford University. He then graduated from Dartmouth College in the class years as Natalie Portman and Meryl Streep's son. Natalie Portman was one of the audience members at a graduating Shakespearean performance.
He trained and performed at the National Conservatory in Paris. CNSAD is a monumental institution in Europe famous for its Dramatic Art, graduating the who's who in European cinema such as Jean-Paul Belmondo, Juliette Binoche, Vincent Perez and Isabelle Huppert. He also attended the Sorbonne studying Latin, French, Russian Literature and Linguistics.
Trivia
He speaks fluent French and retroactively learned fluent Mandarin, Cantonese despite being raised as an English speaker. His photographs are often confused with those of Yoko Ono's son, Julian Lennon, in New York because both sported long hair, had porcelain Asian complexion and were sporting the geek chic black-rimmed bespectacled look around Chelsea circa 2003.
Citations:
The Chutzpah Factory College of Entrpreneurship is a non-profit registered training organisation that provides accredited youth-entrepreneurship training throughout Australia.
The organisation was founded in 2002 by Louise Earnshaw after she had completed her PhD, researching the psychology of maverick youth and entrepreneurs. The research had found similarities between entrepreneurs and marginalised youth, prompting Earnshaw to create the training organisation to put youths' skills to good use, teaching them how to start their own business.
Earnshaw herself had run away from home at the age of 16, and knew first hand what it was like to live on the streets.
Sigourney Berndt;
Wilcox, Jhon L.''Myth And Cosmos''.  New York:Becket, 1992 
Horsforth Fairweather started out in the 1970s playing friendlies against other teams in the North Leeds area. Their name derives from one game where it was called off prior to kick off due to rain and were nicknamed 'fairweather footballers'. The name stuck.
During the 1980s the team started playing in more organised leagues, starting in the Leeds SUnday League before moving to the Combination League. In 1999 the team joined the Wharfdale Triangle league where they continue to reside, playing teams from North-West Leeds, and over towards North-East Bradford.
Home games are played at the Bedquilts ground off Adel Lane, home to Leeds Met University on Sunday mornings. Train takes place at Horsforth School, Tuesday nights at 8pm.
The team is manager by Martin Woods, a mad Leeds Rhino's fan and holder of the record of being the only player to score a hat-trick of penalties in one game. Unfortunately he is now resigned to managing and regularly throwing his toys out of the pram when things go wrong! Steve Burns is the long-suffering secretary of the club and also kit manager.
Simon Parker is their overall leading goalscorer having bagged over 200 goals for the club at nearly a goal every other game, although perhaps their greatest player was one Richard Yarnold who played only for a season and a half before being cruelly cut down in his prime due to a serious knee injury. Yarny as he was known to the rest of the team was an integral part of the 2004/5 campaign, weighing in with a number of important and spectacular goals, the most notable being an audations 45 yard drive into the far top corner that won him goal of the season. Still loved by all at the club, Richie is fondly remembered as the most skillful forward Fairweather have ever had the fortune to have. Simon Parker undoubtedly scores in volume but Yarney delivered the quality. 
REEMI TOMI is a singer who made her debut in Laljose's Meesa madhavan in Malayalam.Her first Song was Chingamasam VannuChernnal. She was a Degree 1st year student when she debuted in Malayalam cinema. After her debut film which won her critical acclaim and various honours, this young singer has created a name for herself in Malayalam cinema industry. This Plai girl is the daughter of old soldier, Tomi. Her mother is Ranitomi brother Rinku and sister Reenu. 
She sang in:
Meesamadhavan. Valathott Thirinjal Nalamathe Veed. Freedom. Chathikkatha Chandu. Kalyana Kurimanam. Pattanathil Sundharan. Udhayananu Tharam. Bus conductor. Balram V/s Tharadas.
Miss. Reemitomi
Singer
Mullakalhouse, 
B.T Road,
Palai P.O 
Kottayam.
Pursuant to a law approved in 1903, An Act for the Approval and Conservation of Certain Historical Data of Puerto Rico", the Puerto Rico Legislature created the Office of the Official Historian of Puerto Rico.  The historians who held the position during the early decades of the 20th century included Francisco Mariano Quinones, Salvador Brau y Asencio, Dr. Cayetano Toll y Toste, Mariano Abril and Adolfo De Hostos.  The office remained vacant until 1993, when then Sen. Kenneth McClintock authored a measure to reestablish the office.  Upon its approval, Senate President Roberto Rexach Benitez and House Speaker Zaida Hernandez Torres appointed Dr. Pilar Barbosa as the first Official Historian in the office's "modern era".  The first female to hold the job, she held it until her death in 1997.  At that time, Senate President Charlie Rodriguez and House Speaker Edison Misla Aldarondo appointed Dr. Luis Gonzalez Vale, the current incumbent.
Under Dr. Gonzalez Vale's leadership, the office has collaborated in multiple publications, including the letters of Resident Commissioner Felix Cordova Davila, and several works regarding Puerto Rico's military history.  In 2005, in collaboration with Puerto Rico's Endowment for the Humanities and the National Endowment for the Humanities, his office published an eight-book "We, the People" Puerto Rican Series of books regarding the history of Puerto Rico during the first 30 years of US sovereignty.
Dr. Gonzalez Vale was invited to testify as a non-partisan witness at hearings held by the U.S. House of Representatives Subcommittee on Insular Affairs on legislation regarding Puerto Rico's future political relationship with the United States.
Coleccion "We the People" Puertyo Rican series, 2005, Ediciones Puerto, POBox 9066272 San Juan PR 00906-6072, www.filpuertorico.org ISBN: 1-933352-05-1
Peter Wein (September 6, 1960-) is an ObGyn doctor, currently holding the position of Medical Director of Birth Suites at the Royal Womens Hospital, Melbourne, Australia.
Peter attended Mount Scopus Collegem graduating in 1977, as one of the top pupils in his class. He has since then been working ObGyn for over 20 years. He graduated with a post-graduate degree in medicine from Melbourne University. 
But, more importantly than that, he is a great dad.
Garry Robison was born in Yorkshire and joined the Royal Marines in September 1976.  As a junior officer he held a variety of command appointments in 45 Commando Group, Comacchio Company, CTCRM, and the Royal Marines Air Defence Troop, and qualified as a Physical Training and Sports Officer serving at the Britannia Royal Naval College Dartmouth.  He undertook operational Emergency Tours in Northern Ireland in 1977 and 1978, and conducted environmental training in Norway, Western Europe and the Mediterranean.  He commanded a Rifle Company in 40 Commando Royal Marines before attending the Army Command and Staff College at Camberley in 1990.  Staff appointments have included Adjutant of Royal Marines Poole, Chief of Staff of the Logistic Support Group within the United Kingdom Mobile Force, as an MOD staff officer in both DOR(Sea) and DMO.  He was the  Royal Marines member of the Directing Staff at both the Army Staff College, Camberley, and the Joint Services Command and Staff College, Bracknell on its formation in 1997.
He read for an MPhil in International Relations at the University of Cambridge in 1998/9 before assuming command of 45 Commando Royal Marines in July 1999.  During command, the Unit undertook environmental training in Belize and an operational tour as the Pristina Battlegroup in Kosovo in 2000.  Following a further tour in MOD as an Assistant Director within the Equipment Capability area, he attended HCSC in 2003 and then deployed to Iraq for 6 months as the Deputy Commander of the Iraq Survey Group.  In April 2004 he was appointed Commandant of the Commando Training Centre Royal Marines.  Promoted to Major General in June 2006 he then assumed his current appointment as COMUKAMPHIBFOR and Commandant General Royal Marines.
He is married to Bridget and they have three grown up children (a son and two daughters).  He has represented the Royal Navy and Royal Marines at cricket, remains a keen footballer, and is President of both Royal Navy and Royal Marines Cricket, President of Royal Marines Football and Vice President of Royal Navy Football. 
Rick Warren's Ministry Podcast is a weekly digest for training pastors and church leaders.
When Rick Warren began his ministry to other pastors it was called "Pastor's Lunch" and it was a bunch of guys visiting Rick and buying their own lunches. Rick would talk with the guys and they would all share insights, ideas and wisdom together. As this group grew, it became clear that what was being shared should become a seminar, then it became a series of seminars, then eventually conferences like those found at Purpose Driven.
Today there are tens of thousands of pastors and church leaders who interact with Purpose Driven on a regular basis. Using the internet to extend his ministry to these pastors and church leaders further. Time will tell if this will be a significant tool such as The Purpose Driven Life
Nicholas Coombs (born 23 august 1993 in Milton Keynes). In 1996, Nicholas and his family left England for france and have lived there since. Nicholas plays the guitar and plays for France under-15 national cricket team. Something that he is proud of.
Justin is a name deriving from Old Latin. It's literal meaning is "Ugly Girl" 
W. Taylor Reveley, III, is Dean of the Marshall-Wythe School of Law at the College of William & Mary and holds the John Stewart Bryan Professorship of Jurisprudence. Before joining the faculty in 1998, he practiced law at Hunton & Williams LLP for 28 years, serving as Managing Partner for nine years and head of its Energy and Telecommunications team. Mr. Reveley clerked for Justice William J. Brennan, Jr. of the U.S. Supreme Court from 1969 to 1970 and studied the war powers as a Fellow of the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars and an International Affairs Fellow of the Council on Foreign Relations. He is a trustee emeritus of Princeton University and a current trustee of the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation and the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. Mr. Reveley earned his bachelor   s degree from Princeton University and his law degree from the University of Virginia School of Law.
WBCO Radio, Bucyrus, Ohio, is the flagship station of Franklin Broadcasting.  The station currently features a format of adult standards with a mix of religious talk and grunge rock.  Several notable radio personalities worked at the station at one time or another, including Mancow, Jackie "The Joke Man" Martling, Beetlejuice, Howie Mandel, Dr. Demento's wife, and Davey Jones and Gene Luidhardt.  Bucyrus Chamber of Commerce chief Deb Pinion sold advertising at one time, as did Charlie Brown (not the comic strip guy).
The station was founded by Orville Sather, who is rumored to still be alive and sharing a home with Elvis Presley in the Florida Keys.  Upon Orville's reported death, ownership of the station was assumed by Tom (he of lone blue suit) and LaVonne Moore.  
At one time, the station featured the personalities who went on to create the Doink & Zippy show, a short but critically acclaimed comedy team on America OnLine.
As of 2007, the station still boasted the talents of Jim Radke in mornings, whose claim to fame is the uncanny ability to interrupt a song in play with the announcement, "We have a winner.  The trivia question has been answered, please hold your calls."  The station also features the bible teachings of that preacher guy with the missing hand.  Ruben somebody.
Each year, station staff man a booth at the world-famous Bucyrus Bratwurst Festival, where they proudly proclaim they have served e-coli free bratwursts for 3 of the last 5 years.
Shelko Consulting LLC, a New Jersey, New York Metro Area based software consulting company, emerged in 1993 as a single source sales and support provider of dominant ERP, CRM and accounting software in the region. Shelko Consulting deals primarily in the sales, consulting and implementation of business management software solutions, nationally, and provides premium comprehensive training and support services.
Founded in 1993, by CEO Aric Shelko, Shelko Consulting implements and customizes
Shelko Consulting was listed in INC. 500 as one of its 500 Fastest Growing Companies
The company   s growth over the past ten years has expanded the list of software
Historical Dictionary of the Music and Musicians of Finland (Hardcover) 
Finland - Culture Smart!: a quick guide to customs and etiquette (Culture Smart!) (Paperback) 
Shelko Consulting LLC, a New Jersey, New York Metro Area based software consulting company, emerged in 1993 as a single source sales and support provider of dominant ERP, CRM and accounting software in the region. Shelko Consulting deals primarily in the sales, consulting and implementation of business management software solutions, nationally, and provides premium comprehensive training and support services.
Founded in 1993, by CEO Aric Shelko, Shelko Consulting implements and customizes
Shelko Consulting was listed in INC. 500 as one of its 500 Fastest Growing Companies
The company   s growth over the past ten years has expanded the list of software
An implementation of VTEC-E and standard VTEC, the 3-Stage VTEC is present in the D15B engine. The engine is notable for its excellent economy alongwith good power output.
The technology is named so because of its 3 'stages' of VTEC implementation, explained below.
An implementation of VTEC for economy, it turns off one intake valve per cylinder in the 16valve engine, and attains Lean Burn mode. The lean burn mode gets the Air to Fuel ratio above the 12.4 Stichiometric ratio and thus enables extra fuel saving. This can lead to km/l averages of 30 if driven at a constant speed of 60km/h.
The VTEC-E mode engages in the D15B from 0-3000RPM.
From 3000-6000rpm, the VTEC-E mode turns off and all of the engines intake valves are used. The engine is now like any other normal VTEC engine when the VTEC isnt 'on'.
From 6000+rpm (till rev limit) the engines VTEC wild cam is engaged increasing performance and giving 130hp @ 7000rpm in the D15B
PlateWire is a public repository and electronic forum of drivers by drivers. Using a drivers license plate, commuters can communicate their thoughts and feelings in regards to driving on today's roadways. 
PlateWire allows users to send messages or "wires" to other members using their license plate as an identifier.
Founded in May of 2006 by Mark Buckman, PlateWire has grown rapidly, with over 75,000 members worldwide.
Matthew McGeary, born 24/08/86 at St Marys Hospital, Jesmond, Newcastle-Upon-Tyne. 
Son of Malcolm McGeary and Pip McGeary.
Matthew is best known for his property development. Primarily in the North East of England, but by the age of 18 was developing worldwide. 
He is currently in talks with managing the redevelopment of St James Park, worth an estimated   300million GBP. 
Matthew current resides in his mansion in Northumberland, but is believed to have a house in Chelsea and a sea side property - built by himself - in Monaco overlooking the famous grand prix. 
Guilty Simpson is a an american rapper from Detroit, Michigan. He is currently signed to Stones Throw Records and is expected to put out his debut album in 2007. The album is expected to be entirely produced by D-12 member Mr. Porter. Although he has yet to put out his first first full-length album, he has created a buzz in the american hip-hop underground and has established a solid and growing fanbase, which can be compared to the one of Stones Throw.
He was a close affiliate of late MC / Producer J Dilla, who was said to have Simpson as one of his favourite rappers. Dilla also advised Stones Throw CEO Peanut Butter Wolf to sign Simpson to his label, and Wolf felt he had no choice, but to follow the advice from the highly respected producer, who also had his headquarters in Detroit, Michigan
Guilty Simpson has been featured on different releases, mainly from artists involved with the Stones Throw label or musicians from Detroit.
Stef Forster, unfortunatly born in Sunderland has become a social icon within the north east of england.
She moved to Gosforth asap after birth to stop perminant pollutionof a soon to be perfect human. From a young age stef was a gorgous ( slightly rotund figure) but was loved by many. 
From her troubled times she has blossomed into the most beautiful.. the most perfect girl in the whole world.Stef always puts others first, manages to make her boyfriend smile constantly and has the most amazing body you will ever see. 
All her friends love her dearly, and her boyfriend adores her. 
This year she is planning trips to Turkey and Australia. 
The Cut and Run is an annual trail race event hosted by AmeriCorps Cape Cod . It is a two-day event that includes both the race itself  (a distance of 5-kilometers around Long Pond in Falmouth), along with an additional 'pre-race clean-up' event. Each year, the Cut and Run pre-race clean-up recruits and engages countless volunteers in environmental stewardship activities on local conservation lands. It is important to note that not only is the race not-for-profit, but that in fact all financing is provided by independent donors. This is significant because it means that contributions from entrants (in the form of race fees) are dedicated entirely toward the the cause itself (e.g. the Cape Cod Pathways Project ), allowing the participants to feel a genuine sense of economic investment in the cause.