The '''Helio Ocean''' is a dual slider Internet-enabled multimedia wireless mobile device sold by  mobile virtual network operator (MVNO) wireless carrier Helio, and manufactured by Pantech Curitel. A distinctive design feature of the Ocean is its dual sliding mechanism&nbsp;    when slid down in the vertical position, it reveals a telephone keypad. When slid down in the horizontal position, it reveals a full 35-key QWERTY keyboard.
Since their acquisition by Sprint Nextel, Virgin Mobile USA terminated the wireless voice and data services of those customers who had a Helio Ocean or other Helio branded devices on May 25, 2010. Customers had until this date to port out their wireless phone number to another wireless carrier without a loss of service. A deactivated Helio Ocean still is able to be used as a digital camera allowing images and video files to be downloaded via the included USB interface cable directly to a computer.
The device became first known to the public on November 24, 2006 from a FCC filing. Photos released on December 9, 2006 showed the Ocean in test apparatus documentation,
When publicly released on Friday, May 11, 2007, the Ocean was billed as "the ultimate messaging and talking machine" and "the definitive mobile social networking experience." The Ocean is seen as a breakthrough device for Helio, appealing to a more mainstream audience and not just the "ultra-cool hipsters" the company had previously targeted. Dr. Wonhee Sull, President & COO of Helio, said that work on the Ocean device started "before Helio was officially a company."
The Ocean is a prime example of a converged device. In addition, to telephony functions, the Ocean's functions include those of a camera phone and a portable media player. The Ocean device has several advanced features such as stereo bluetooth, a 2 megapixel camera with flash, a MPEG-4 video camera, 3G speed EV-DO network support, built-in GPS, MMS support, and a removable battery.
The Helio Ocean has a considerable amount of features at the time of its release. Standard programs include an internet browser, a calculator, an alarm clock and a calendar. For communication, the device includes caller ID (with support for photo caller ID), a speaker phone, a voice memo recorder, address book (with multiple online syncing abilities), T9 Text, and Korean character set support.
The device is location aware with its internal GPS. The Ocean is loaded with a version of Google Maps, which displays turn-by-turn directions; however, the application warns users that it should not be used while driving. Additionally, the  application allows friends with Buddy Beacon-enabled phones (as of Dec 2008, only Helio phones) to broadcast their current location to each other, visible via MapQuest.
The integrated music and video player supports multiple file formats (including MP3, MPEG-4, H.264, AAC, and WMA) and allows for over-the-air (OTA) downloads. The music player runs on a separate microprocessor, an efficiency that allows for an estimate 15 hours of music listening on a single battery charge. On November 29, 2007 Helio released a file viewer program for Ocean users, allowing the device to be able to read a variety of popular file formats (among them DOC, XLS, PPT, PDF, HTML, TXT) as well as several image types in both landscape and portrait modes.
The Helio Ocean also includes several choices of E-mail communication with support for Helio Mail, Yahoo! Mail, Windows Live Hotmail, AOL Mail, Gmail, EarthLink, and two additional user-defined POP or IMAP accounts. Helio began adding support for push e-mail to the Helio Ocean in July 2007 with Push support for Yahoo! Mail, Windows Live Hotmail, and AOL Mail. On April 23, 2008 push support was added for Gmail, along with automatic notifications for POP/IMAP accounts. For a nominal fee per month, connectivity to Microsoft Exchange has been available on the Ocean since July 25, 2007. There is also instant messaging support for AOL Instant Messenger, Yahoo! Messenger, and Windows Live Messenger.
 Several months later, on March 19, 2008, the Ocean got ''official'' software support for the Opera Mini browser when Helio became the first U.S carrier to sign a deal with Opera. It was speculated that Helio had followed the "incredible community response to Opera Mini."
MySpace Mobile is available for the Helio Ocean, leading some to refer to the Ocean as a "MySpace phone." Helio was the first cellular provider to take the MySpace experience mobile. On July 19, 2007 Helio announced the launch of an improved version of Myspace Mobile that operates nearly five times faster than Helio's original self-developed application.
On December 12, 2007 Helio announced a more enriched YouTube experience, at the time the "most complete" on a mobile device. The Ocean is able to do video capture and upload to YouTube as well as GPS tagging of videos. Users can fully log in to personalize, rate videos and use other community features.