Author : Saalaar_P@Yahoo.com
The Pie Mafia is a professional wrestling stable. Clad in trenchcoats and sunglasses, they are best well known for attacking other wrestlers following their matches, and hitting them with a pie in the face, better known as the "Drive Pie Shooting."
No wrestler is immune from attacks by the Pie Mafia, regardless of their status as a babyface or heel. On several occassions, the Pie Mafia have been hired for "contract hits."
Heritage Christian School (HCS) is a small Christian-based school in Anchorage, Alaska. It is located on the corner of Lake Otis Pkwy. and Abbott Rd. However, for one year, the secondary was in another building that was never officially the property of the school. This was kept solely to the administration and not the staff or faculty for some time, until near-bankruptcy made things change. The elementary never moved. The building that HCS works is the property of Abbott Loop Community Church. The school educated approximately 170 students at this time. HCS is a member of ASAA (Alaska School Activities Association) and ACSI (Association of Christian Schools International). As of now, their financial situation is a little bit more stable, though not entirely, as they are still in debt. They educate all grades from Pre-Kindergarten to 12th grade.
Heritage is located at 9251 Lake Otis Pkwy. Anchorage, Alaska 99507. Their phone number is (907) 349-8032. Their fax is (907) 349-8257.
Calvin Normore is a philosopher at The University of California, Los Angeles. He is currently the president of the pacific division of The American Philosophical Association.
Julie Staley is an award winning television news anchor.  She was the first woman to anchor two evening newscasts on competing stations in Illinois.  As the 5pm anchor for WICS-TV, the ABC affiliate in Springfield, Illinois, Julie also is the main anchor for the FOX affiliate in Springfield, WRSP, and in Champaign, WCCU.   She was the first anchor for their start-up newscast in the market, which debuted on September 11, 2006.  
Julie has worked at several other stations during her career, as Julie Heil, her maiden name.   She was the morning anchor for KDNL (ABC), St. Louis, and the overnight anchor for KSDK (NBC) St. Louis.   She also worked as a reporter for WAND in Decatur when it was an ABC affiliate, and now has changed to NBC.   Julie worked in Kansas City at American Cablevision's KCCP-TV as a news anchor and talk show host.   She also was a producer for the All News Channel in Minneapolis, MN.  Her career began in Carbondale, Illinois, where she attended Southern Illinois University, and anchored their news on WSIU-TV, while also being named News Director her Senior year.  
Julie's awards include the 2006 Illinois Associated Press Best Investigative Series, 2006 Communicator Award of Excellence, 2004 Communicator Award of Excellence, Master Communicator Award from the Association of Women in Communications.  At SIU-Carbondale Julie was named Broadcast News Student of the Year from the Department of Radio-Television.  As an honors student, Julie went on to get her Master's degree in Mass Communications from Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville and was the only Mass Communications student to recieve a University Symposium Award.
Julie also worked in the corporate world for Sprint at their world headquarters in Kansas City, MO.   She was named to the President's Club, which consists of the top ten percent of their employess in the country.
Julie also worked for Heil Sound, owned by her father, Bob Heil.   His work is on permanent display in an exhibit in the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame Museum in Cleveland, OH.
Julie's husband is Mark Staley, great-grandson of the founder of the Chicago Bears, A.E. Staley, and great-great-grandson of the inventor of the water tapper, Hieronymous. Mueller.   His work is on display in the Mueller Museum in Decatur, IL.
Paul Moon is Professor of History in the Faculty of Maori Studies at the Auckland University of Technology in Auckland, New Zealand.  He is the author of over a dozen books on New Zealand history, and specialises in the country's colonial period.  In 2003, he was elected a Fellow of the Royal Historical Society at University College, London.
National Business Review, 12 March 1999, p. 60.
The Press, 22 July 2006, p. 13.
Dominion Post, 19 August 2006. 
Diazom.J also known as Win32/Diazom.J, Troj/Bckdr-QGN, Downloader-BBD trojan and Backdoor.Win32.VanBot.bs is a trojan horse generator/downloader.
Virus main effect:
Infects Windows systems on all bases.
Virus side effect:
Allows others to access the infected computer 
Installs itself in the Windows Registry 
Opens links to websites with possible malicious content
Protection is available since: 30 March 2007 19:54:56 (GMT)
He was arwarded the 2006 Bogoliubov prize , mostly for works about quantum black holes .
Anders Boserup studied theoretical physics at the Universiy of Copenhagen, but became an associate professor of sociology at that university in 1972. He co-founded the Danish Peace Research Institute and later the Copenhagen Peace Research Institute (COPRI).
Anders Boserup worked as an independent expert for the UN and the Danish Foreign Office.
HS Leon (D-54) is the destroyer that served under the Greek Navy between 1951-1992. The ship had formely served with the US Navy under the name USS Eldridge (DE-173), famous for its alleged role in the Philadelphia experiment.
The ships dimensions were 93.3m long /11.2 m wide/ 4.2m deep.
It displaced 1900 tons and had an operational speed of 19 knots.
Initially, it was transfered to Greece under the Mutual Defence Assistance Program. It was put to service in Janury 1951 by Vice Admiral D. Foifas.
It was disarmed in November 1992 and later in November 1999 it was sold as scrap to Pireaus based V&J SCRAPMETAL TRADING L.T.D. 
Official Hellenic Navy website-> http://www.hellenicnavy.gr/leon51_92.asp
Share note with others
Camp Abubakar was the main stronghold of the Moro Islamic Liberation Front. It supposedly rests on a 10,000 hectare territory in Matanog in the province of Maguindanao in the island of Mindanao. The camp acted as the seat of the government and boasted numerous military related facilities. 
Among these facilities were training areas, an armory, as well as an officer training school.
Interviews conducted by philippine media indicated that the MILF was willing to hold on to Camp Abubakar at all costs by stating "''No retreat, No surrender''."
In July 2000 soldiers from the philippine army began attacking the camp. The commander leading the troops supposedly said on the radio at the start of the battle "''We are crashing the gates of Camp Abubakar''."
The camp was overrun soon after with the camps civilian residents receiving livelihood programs.
Christopher Gauker is a Philosopher and Professor of Philosophy at The University of Cincinnati, in Cincinnati Ohio.  He has published three books and many articles, mostly regarding the philosophy of language.
The Jabidah Massacre was a cover up attempt by then President Ferdinand Marcos to prevent the dissemination of information regarding the aborted attempt to retake Sabah(A part of Malaysia but claimed as property of the sultanate of Sulu). Some 70 muslim recruits were executed with atleast one surviving after his body was dumped in Manila Bay.
Mitchell is a talented musician. He is a great singer, lyricist and performer. He is a future rockstar and I know him XD
In her free time she likes to "hang with people", go to the movies, and "chillax". hehe. oh, um... she has, her friends call her "shi", and the selective few know her as... "SHIIIII TOWN". okay, well. thats all for now. you can contact her at YOUR MOM!
Shelko Consulting LLC, a New Jersey, New York Metro Area based software consulting company, emerged in 1993 as a single source sales and support provider of dominant ERP, CRM and accounting software in the region. Shelko Consulting deals primarily in the sales, consulting and implementation of business management software solutions, nationally, and provides premium comprehensive training and support services.
Founded in 1993, by CEO Aric Shelko, Shelko Consulting implements and customizes accounting and customer relationship management (CRM) software for small and medium size businesses. From its beginnings in the early 90   s, Shelko Consulting has expanded its sales, customer service and training and support services to reach clients throughout the United States. 
Shelko Consulting was listed in INC. 500 as one of its 500 Fastest Growing Companies in the country. According to INC.Com, the company experienced a five year sales growth of 418%.
The company   s growth over the past ten years has expanded the list of software applications it supports. The company offers an ever-growing list of various accounting, ERP and CRM software. Today, the company maintains a strong relationship with Sage Software and additionally provides other accounting and CRM options such as the MAS 90, MAS 500 and SalesLogix CRM and SAGE CRM business management programs.
Both glass and Dacron   glass can be served on either the bare magnet wire conductor or film construction. Dacron   glass is available as fused unvarnished, while glass or Dacron   glass is available varnished with epoxy (as standard), high-temperature organic polyester, or silicone varnish. The glass is a continuous filament glass yarn and the Dacron   glass is a combination of glass and polyester fibers. The advantage of glass is its high resistance to overload burnout, and the advantage to Dacron   glass is its abrasion resistance and increased flexibility.
Class B motors.
Krzyszof Chochlow (aka DJ KC) is a Polish trance and tech-trance DJ, remixer and producer. He was born in Wloclawek in Poland. He is currently one of the best Polish DJ's and producers. He's best productions: Reserve Midnight, Minimal Screw, Release.
At the beginning of 2005 preparations begun for Krzysztof's first artist album named DJ KC Presents Volume 1. The album was released in June 2005 on Pool Grooves. In that year he also began collaborating with Polish dance music producers such as Matys and Sound Players. Following this he began collaborations with international producers Marc van Linden, Sandra Flynn, Sundawner and Marc Romboy (Alphabet City).
In late 2005, Krzysztof released his first vinyl labeled as Krzysztof Chochlow Release, Minimal Screw on Midway Records. The release was supported by top DJs such as Paul van Dyk, Marc van Linden and Eddie Halliwell etc. It was also played on the London radio station BBC Radio 1.
Krzysztof Chochlow receives his inspiration from R.M.B due to their inventive and amazing music. Krzysztof has been invited to perform all over his home country in Poland and is very much looking forward to spreading and performing his music internationally. Listen out for his latest remixes of Safri Duo Baiao and CJ Stone vs Milo Exciting. The year 2007 will be huge for KC with many creative and unexpected releases on the way. This is one name to look out for!!!
Encore
West Virginia's First & Fifth Attorney General
Attorney General: 1863 - 1864 and 1869 - 1870
Elected 1863, Appointed 1869
Born: February 11, 1814     Died: June 18, 1893
Aquilla B. Caldwell was born on February 11, 1814 outside of Wheeling, on Caldwells Run in Ohio County. His grandfather, James Caldwell, settled in Ohio County in 1770. Aquilla was the the oldest son of James Caldwell, II, who was the first president of Merchants and Merchants bank. He began his education early in life and in his youth he went to Harvard where he took the full course and earned his degree. He earned his law degree from Jefferson College.
After graduating he began the practice of law. In 1863 he was elected as the first Attorney General of West Virginia. He served for 18 months, completeing his term. During President Lincolns first term in office, Caldwell was offered the appointment of Judge to the United States Court, but for personal reasons, he turned down the appointment.
On July 1, 1869 he returned to the Office of the Attorney General when he was appointed by the Governor after the resignation of Attorney General Melvin. After his term as Attorney General he was elected Ohio County Prosecutor and later Circuit Judge. Caldwell died at the home of his son-in-law in Wheeling on June 18, 1893. 
WV Blue Book
Jerry Sawyers is a powerful man. In 2002, while still attending East Limestone High school, he developed Madtech Computers a.k.a Alabama technical computer services. This company is devoted to the Customers by offering Low cost Computer networking and Repair.  You can find this at  or .  
Jerry Sawyers has done amazing work with the computer repair industrial and has placed first in a National Computer maintenance competition for SkillsUSA.  Making him the first in 15 yrs.  
After graduating high school he attended Drake State at which he received an Associates degree for Industrial computer electronics.  Also Calhoun Community college, where he continued to work for a BS major in Computer Science.  
Jerry also owns Testtune.com  Powered by google, this allows people to search and find exact links for what they are searching for.  In 2007, Jerry kicked off a quest to get the Madtech Computers going in full force. To compete with the Geeksquad.  He offers low cost contracts for businesses and low cost repairs for home users.  
Allan Zwick is a professional poker player and the current St. Louis Area Manager of the Nationwide Poker Tour.
Allan David Zwick (DOB: 03/04/1982) was born in Fenton, MO and attended Lindbergh High School, graduating in 2000. Growing up, Allan had a great passion for baseball, soccer and golf. After his graduation, he obtained his associate's degree in Business Administration at the St. Louis Community College of Meramec and is still taking studies intermittently at the University of Missouri - St. Louis. He has since changed his intended major to Economics.
Allan started playing poker at the age of 20 with his circle of friends, known as the "Metro Four," due to their early morning drinking spot. Other members of the Metro Four are Mike Tague, Matt Sartors, and Brian "Jimmy Dean Fingers" Georger. Allan's first experience with poker included nightly, dealer-choice ring games, with stakes from $.25 - $1.00. He then started playing $3-$6 Limit Texas Hold'em ring games at Ameristar casino in St. Charles, MO.
In late 2004, Allan began experimenting with tournament play through a free bar poker league called the Nationwide Poker Tour as well as online, playing in freerolls on Pokerstars. While playing with the Nationwide Poker tour, Allan has made a total of 8 invitational final tables, including the 2005 National Championship, finishing 2nd to National Champion Tim Meyer. His 2nd place finish earned him two free seats into the 2006 World Series of Poker where he was early chip leader in the $2,500 No Limit Texas Hold' em event on July 7, 2006, until he was crippled when his pocket tens lost to a flopped straight flush. Allan was eliminated from his second event ($1,000 No Limit Texas Hold' em event on July 10, 2006) when his Ace-Queen of hearts lost to Todd Brunson's Ace-Jack off-suit.
Allan has since taken over as Area Manager of the St. Louis Region for the Nationwide Poker Tour and continues to compete in World Series of Poker Circuit events as well as many other tournaments.
His career tournament winnings total over $20,000.
Lambda Pi Eta is the official communication studies honor society of the National Communication Association (NCA). 
LPH has over 400 active chapters at four-year colleges and universities worldwide.