The '''Battle of Alamance''' ended the so-called War of the Regulation, a rebellion in colonial North Carolina over issues of taxation and local control. In the past, historians considered the battle to be the opening salvo of the American Revolution, however, the rebellion was against local government, not against the king or crown. Named for nearby Great Alamance Creek, the battle took place in what was then Orange County and has since become Alamance County in the central Piedmont about eight miles south of present-day Burlington, North Carolina.
In the spring of 1771, Governor William Tryon left his lavish palace in New Bern, mustering and marching militia troops west to quell a rebellion that had been brewing in western counties for many years. Up to that point, the "war" had included only minor, scattered acts of violence. The Regulators, with approximately 2000 men to Tryon's 1000, hoped to gain concessions from the governor by intimidating him with a show of superior force. On May 16, 1771, the Regulators, led by men such as Maryland native Herman Husband, rejected Tryon's command to disperse peacefully. Tryon marched his troops south from their campsite on Alamance Creek, confronting the Regulators in formation along the road. 
The Regulators, on the other hand, were busy preparing for battle.  One report from a former Regulator says that the some of the men carried no more than 12 rounds of ammunition, believing that this would be sufficient to win the battle.
The evening of May 15, Tryon received word that the regulators were camped about 6 miles away.  The next morning, at about 8:00, Tryon's troops set out to an old field about one-half mile from the camp of the Regulators.  He set out 2 lines, and split his artillery between the two wings and the center of the first line.  He sent out one of his aide-de-camps, Captain Philmore Hawkins, and the Sheriff of Orange County with the following proclamation:
While the terms were being considered, Tryon's troops began to move forward.  The messenger returned and reported that the Regulators had rejected Tryon's terms.  Shortly thereafter, a large crowd of regulators appeared in front of the militia, waving their hats and daring the militia to open fire.  The militia approached to within 30 yards of the Regulators on the plantation of one Captain Michael Holt.
By midday, the hour had expired, Tryon sent the aide-de-camp with one final warning:
Around this time, two men left Tryon's camp who had been attempting to negotiate a peace between the 2 sides: Reverend Dr. Caldwell and Mr. Robert Thompson.  Dr. Caldwell made it to the field in between the 2 lines, but was warned off the field by the Regulators who sensed the governor was about to open fire.  Mr. Thompson, however, was detained by Tryon as a prisoner.  Tryon, in a moment of anger, took a gun from a militiaman and shot Mr. Thompson dead.  Realizing what he had done, he sent a flag bearer by the name of Donald Malcolm, with a white flag in hopes of calming things quickly.  The flag bearer failed and was himself fired upon by the Regulators, who responded, "Fire and be damned".  
A man considered to be one of the principal military leaders of the Regulators, Captain Montgomery, was shot and killed by a shell at about the same time that a bullet hit Tryon's hat.  The governor sent a second white flag by another aide-de-camp, but the aide-de-camp was killed even while Regulator Patrick Muller called for his fellow insurgents to cease fire.  Outraged at the disregard of a second white flag, the governor rallied his troops against the insurgents, who ammunition was rapidly running out.  At this point, many of the regulators fled the field.  Delays prevented approximately 300 reinforcements under Captain Benjamin Merrill from arriving in time to help the rebel cause.  After this, some of the Regulators remained behind to continue firing upon the milita.  Tryon ordered the woods to be set on fire.
Losses for both sides are disputed.  Tryon reported nine dead and 61 wounded among the militia.  Other historians indicate much greater numbers, between 15 and 27 killed.Williamson's History of North Carolina, Vol. 2, p. 150  Both sides count 9 dead among the regulators and dozens to over one hundred wounded.
Tryon took 13 prisoners, one of them (James Few) being executed at the camp, and six executed later in nearby Hillsborough. Many Regulators traveled on to frontier areas beyond North Carolina. The governor pardoned others and allowed them to stay on condition they pledge an oath of allegiance to the royal government.
The battle took place in what was then Orange County. During the American Revolution a decade later, the same section of Orange County (subdivided into Alamance County in 1849) hosted several minor skirmishes, including the infamous Pyle's Hacking Match in 1781.
According to Governor Tryon's journal, the following men served under his command:
The following individuals were members of the Regulators:
The following were excepted from pardon by Governor Tryon:
Six men were found guilty of treason, but were pardoned at Tryon's behest:
Six men were found guilty of treason and were sentenced to be hanged, drawn and quartered, although in practice, they were only hanged:
Visitors to Alamance Battleground State Historic Site may view the field of battle, memorialized in 1880 with a granite monument and a second monument from 1903.  Today the site contains exhibits, period cannon, and colored flags representing troop positions. The visitor's center offers exhibits, artifacts, and a presentation on the battle. Visitors may also tour the onsite Allen House, a restored frontier farmstead of the period.