Procter was born and raised in Raleigh, North Carolina. She was two years old when her parents William (a general practitioner) and Barbara divorced. She is a graduate of Ravenscroft School in Raleigh. While at East Carolina University she was a member of Alpha Delta Pi sorority.
After the move to Los Angeles, her father provided the funds for acting school for two years.  Before even graduating, she had already landed a number of small roles in films such as ''Jerry Maguire'' (1996) and ''Breast Men'' (1997), where she appeared along with David Schwimmer and Chris Cooper.  During the 1995   96 season (season 3) of '' '', she portrayed Lana Lang. She briefly appeared in the 1997 TV movie '' '' as Mavis. She was also in ''Body Shots'' as Whitney.
She had a recurring guest role as Associate White House Counsel Ainsley Hayes on NBC's ''The West Wing'' and she also portrayed a brief love interest of Joey (Matt LeBlanc) on ''Friends''.
She is a good friend of '' '' actress Jorja Fox, who persuaded her to try for the role of Calleigh Duquesne in '' '', which has been running on American television since 2002.
She participated in 2007's Live Earth by reading (along with several other actresses) an essay written by Michelle Gardner-Quinn while Gardner-Quinn was a student at the University of Vermont.
Procter prefers to keep her personal life private. She often enjoys taking holidays with her sister, a professional chef.  She jogs for two hours a day, five days a week, and has taken part in various triathlons and marathons.  An avid poker player, she learned to play the game as a child when her father would play a game called 'penny poker' with her, and has participated in at least one celebrity poker tournament. Procter also sings in a 1980s cover band called White Lightning, which is now renamed Motion. Procter has volunteered as an actress with the Young Storytellers Program, and helps out at homeless shelters.
Procter is very interested in interior decoration and antiques, putting this to practical use in the 1921 Spanish-style home that she owns in Los Angeles. During the 2007 writers strike, she designed a home for a friend in Saint John, U.S. Virgin Islands. In ''People'' magazine's Country Special of March 2009, it was revealed she decorated Kenny Chesney's home in Malibu. She has also acted as a guest judge on the Home & Garden Television show ''Summer Showdown''.
Procter gave birth to a baby girl, Philippa Charlotte, called Pippa, in early December 2010 with musician boyfriend Paul Bryan. Her pregnancy was not  written into the ninth season of CSI: Miami.