Family Tree DNA was founded in 1999 by Bennett Greenspan, an entrepreneur and lifelong genealogy enthusiast. Greenspan now serves as President and CEO of Family Tree DNA. 
Family Tree DNA became widely known for its Y-chromosome STR testing for the Cohen Modal Haplotype. Family Tree DNA includes among its scientific staff, Dr. Michael Hammer (PhD), one of a team of scientists that first published on the Cohen Modal Haplotype in 1997 in the journal Nature.
Family Tree DNA offers an autosomal chip-based DNA test called "Family Finder." Family Finder tests 710,000 autosomal SNPs using the Illumina OmniExpress testing platform. This test is used to help customers find family members comparing the autosomal DNA of customers in the database, and providing a list of "matches." Names, e-mail addresses, genealogical information, predicted degree of relationship (2nd, 3rd, 4th cousins, etc.) are shared between customers who match each other. Family Finder also includes a component called "Population Finder." This component uses the same autosomal data to conduct biogeographical analysis (BGA) of the autosomal DNA. The results of this test provide percentages of a DNA associated with general regions or specific ethnic groups (ex. Western Europe, Asia, Jewish, Native American, etc.).
Family Tree DNA offers the analysis of mitochondrial DNA, mtDNA, which is found in both men and women. mtDNA traces the direct maternal line. Family Tree DNA offers the testing of the HVR1 region, HVR2 region, and the Full Genome Sequence of the mitochondrial DNA. Results identify the ethnic and geographic origin of the maternal line.
 In addition Family Tree DNA has a test performed at their "advanced lab" led Dr. Thomas Krahn that seeks the discovery of new SNPs in accepted customers who participate, this test that customers can buy as a service is named ''Walk Through the Y'' (WTY).
Founded by Henry Louis Gates, African DNA combines DNA testing with genealogical research. Michigan Chronicle, December 6, 2007
DNA Ancestry & Family Origin is a genetic genealogy testing partnership between Family Tree DNA and Eastern Biotech & Life Sciences. Their website is available in both English and Arabic.
Family Tree DNA has a European partnership with iGENEA. Their website is available in English, French, German, Italian, and Spanish.
A dynamic partnership with myHeritage was launched in November 2008. myHeritage is a genealogical and family social networking website that produces online and PC based genealogy software.
Family Tree DNA is the testing company for all public participation in the Genographic Project.