Founded by Alibaba Group in May 2003, it facilitates business-to-consumer and consumer-to-consumer retail by providing a platform for businesses and individual entrepreneurs to open online retail stores that mainly cater to consumers in mainland China, Hong Kong, Macau and Taiwan.
Sellers are able to post new and used goods for sale on the Taobao marketplace either through a fixed price or by auction. The overwhelming majority of the products on Taobao are brand new merchandise sold at a fixed price; auctions make up a very small percentage of transactions.
Alipay, an escrow-based online payment platform, is the preferred payment solution for transactions on Taobao. 
Taobao reported more than 370 million registered users as of the end of 2010 and currently hosts more than 800 million product listings.  In May 2011, Taobao ranked 15th overall in Alexa's internet rankings.
A distinctive feature of shopping on Taobao is the pervasive communication between buyer and seller prior to the purchase through its embedded proprietary instant chat program, named AliWangWang. It has become a habit among Chinese online shoppers to    chat    with the sellers or their customer service team through AliWangWang to inquire about products, engage in bargaining, etc. prior to purchase.
In April 2008, Taobao introduced a dedicated B2C platform called Taobao Mall to complement its C2C marketplace. Since then, Taobao Mall has established itself as the destination for quality, brand name goods for Chinese consumers. In November 2010, Taobao Mall launched an independent web domain, , with an enhanced focus on product verticals and improvements in shopping experience. The site currently features products from more than 30,000 major multinational and Chinese brands.
In January 2010, Alibaba Group said it expects gross merchandise volume on Taobao to double from 200 billion Chinese yuan in 2009 to 400 billion Chinese yuan in 2010, as China   s e-commerce market is expected to grow significantly in the next five to eight years.
In May 2010, Taobao and Yahoo Japan launched a cross-border retail initiative that allows Chinese consumers to purchase Japanese products from Yahoo Japan shopping and Japanese consumers to purchase Chinese products from Taobao. For the Chinese consumers, Taobao launched a Chinese-language portal called TaoJapan (www.taojapan.com) offering Japanese products. For Japanese consumers, Yahoo Japan added a Japanese-language portal called    China Mall    to its shopping platform. However, in line with import/export restrictions in both countries, certain products are not available to non-local buyers; for example, mobile phones listed on Yahoo Auctions are not carried over to TaoJapan and certain name-brand goods listed on Taobao do not carry over to Yahoo Japan's  China Mall.
In June 2011, Jack Ma revealed that Taobao will be split into three different companies: eTao (to be used for shopping searches), Taobao Mall (a B2C platform), and Taobao Marketplace (a C2C platform). 
In 2009 Taobao saw advertising revenues of $220 Million.  Advertising accounts for a majority of Taobao's income.  Analysts believe Taobao's turnover exceeded 400 billion RMB in 2010 and revenues surpassed 5 billion RMB.  
There have been allegations that a lot of the clothing products are made of cat and dog fur. The most popular articles are pants and hats made of dog fur. User sjz2ys boasted that all the cat fur products that he sells are authentic. Animal Welfare activists have said that the sellers caught the animals in traps and then sells it to sellers in the east of China and the meat to restaurants in the south. Animal lovers have lift their voices against the trade in dog and cat fur on the social network Douban. Officially Taobao don't approve of the trade in dog and cat fur. According to the rules anyone that sells dog and catproducts will be penalised by having their position on the site scaled down, but the inspectors have too much work to regulate the site effectively.