Although in the United States informal discrimination and segregation have always existed, the practice called "redlining" began with the National Housing Act of 1934, which established the Federal Housing Administration (FHA).  The federal government contributed to the early decay of inner city neighborhoods by withholding mortgage capital and making it difficult for these neighborhoods to attract and retain families able to purchase homes. In 1935, the Federal Home Loan Bank Board (FHLBB) asked Home Owners' Loan Corporation (HOLC) to look at 239 cities and create "residential security maps" to indicate the level of security for real-estate investments in each surveyed city. Such maps defined many minority neighborhoods in cities as ineligible to receive financing.  The maps were based on assumptions about the community, not accurate assessments of an individual's or household's ability to satisfy standard lending criteria.  Since African-Americans were unwelcome in white neighborhoods, which frequently instituted racial restrictive covenants to keep them out, the policy effectively meant that blacks could not secure mortgage loans at all.  At various times the practice also affected other ethnic groups, including Latinos, Asians, and Jews.  The assumptions in redlining resulted in a large increase in residential racial segregation and urban decay in the United States. Urban planning historians theorize that the maps were used by private and public entities for years afterwards to deny loans to people in black communities.  However, recent research has indicated that the HOLC did not redline in its own lending activities, and that the racist language reflected the bias of the private sector and experts hired to conduct the appraisals.
On the maps, the newest areas     those considered desirable for lending purposes     were outlined in blue and known as "Type A". These were typically affluent suburbs on the outskirts of cities. "Type B" neighborhoods were considered "Still Desirable", whereas older "Type C" were labeled "Declining" and outlined in yellow.
Some redlined maps were also created by private organizations, such as J.M. Brewer's 1934 map of Philadelphia.  Private organizations created maps designed to meet the requirements of the Federal Housing Administration's underwriting manual. The lenders had to consider FHA standards if they wanted to receive FHA insurance for their loans. FHA appraisal manuals instructed banks to steer clear of areas with "''inharmonious racial groups''" and recommended that municipalities enact racially restrictive zoning ordinances, as well as covenants prohibiting black owners.
Prohibition of the occupancy of properties '''except by the race for which they are intended'''    Schools should be appropriate to the needs of the new community and they should not be attended in large numbers by '''inharmonious racial groups'''. Federal Housing Administration, Underwriting Manual: Underwriting and Valuation Procedure Under Title II of the National Housing Act With Revisions to February, 1938 (Washington, D.C.), Part II, Section 9, Rating of Location.
Redlining paralyzed the housing market, lowered property values and further encouraged landlord abandonment. As abandonment increased, the population density became lower. Abandoned buildings would serve as havens for drug dealing and other illegal activity.
The film ''Revolution '67'' examines the practice of redlining that occurred in Newark, NJ in the 1960s.
  Founded in 1973, ShoreBank sought to combat racist lending practices in Chicago's African-American communities by providing financial services, especially mortgage loans, to local residents. Many sources characterize ShoreBank's efforts as overwhelmingly inspirational and successful. In a 1992 speech, then-Presidential candidate Bill Clinton called ShoreBank "the most important bank in America."
Dan Immergluck writes that in 2002 small businesses in black neighborhoods still received fewer loans, even after accounting for business density, business size, industrial mix, neighborhood income, and the credit quality of local businesses. Gregory D. Squires wrote in 2003 that it is clear that race has long affected and continues to affect the policies and practices of the insurance industry. Workers living in American inner cities have a harder time finding jobs than suburban workers. Redlining has helped preserve segregated living patterns for blacks and whites in the United States, because discrimination motivated by prejudice is often contingent on the racial composition of neighborhoods where the loan is sought and the race of the applicant. Lending institutions such as Wells Fargo have been shown to treat black mortgage applicants differently when they are buying homes in white neighborhoods than when buying homes in black neighborhoods.
A survey of two districts of similar incomes, one being largely white and the other largely black, found that branches in the black community offered largely subprime loans and almost no prime loans. Studies found out that high-income blacks were almost twice as likely to end up with subprime home-purchase mortgages as low-income whites. Loan officers were also apparently aware that what they were doing was exploitative, as they referred to blacks as    mud people    and to subprime lending as    ghetto loans.   
 A lower savings rate and a distrust of banks stemming from a legacy of redlining may help explain why there are fewer branches in minority neighborhoods. In recent years while subprime loans were not sought out by borrowers, brokers and telemarketers actively pushed them. A majority of the loans were refinance transactions allowing homeowners to take cash out of their appreciating property or pay off credit card and other debt.
Several state attorney generals have begun investigating these practices which may violate fair lending laws, and the N.A.A.C.P. have filed a class-action lawsuit charging systematic racial discrimination by more than a dozen banks.
Redlining is apparently a reality in Hawaii where clear lines have been drawn and loans are not being granted on over 24,000 lots and thousands of homeowners in the districts of Captain Cook, Hawaii, Kau, Hawaii and Puna, Hawaii. The area involved encompasses hundreds of square miles and is termed Lava Zones 1 and 2. 
No FHA or VA loans may be made in the area owing to "potential volcano activity."  "It was concluded that these two zones should be classified as non-participation areas for the purpose of HUD program assistance"
Fannie Mae has a similar policy.  "Properties in lava zones 1 and 2 are not eligible due to the increased risk" 
Freddie Mac's Relief Refinance Program excludes homeowners in Lava Zones 1 and 2.   It is not clear if new mortgages can be sold to Freddie Mac..however..it appears not.
Lenders are heavily influenced by the Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac standards for two primary reasons. First, they are the leading purchasers of home mortgages in the secondary market. Second, the parameters that they set have been adopted into the technology of the loan approval process. Consequently, the loan policies that are set by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac become the de facto loan policies of the vast majority of lending institutions.  
One alternative to reselling loans, is to keep them in the lenders portfolio or on their books.  A portfolio lender can be a bank, credit union, private firm, or private individual.  When firms offer loans and put them in their own portfolio they can offer loans that need not conform to HUD, Fannie, or Freddie guidelines.  
It appears no one has formally contested bank denials to provide loans on fully insured and permitted properties in these areas.  
A second question homeowners have been asking is why their insurance policies which cost more since they are in a higher risk area are not acceptable proof that the collateral is protected.  Most insurance in the area is issued by an association formed by the State of Hawaii called the Hawaii Property Insurance Association.  Any firm offering insurance in Hawaii must join the association.  Therefore, homes are being backed by firms like Allstate and Statefarm.  By Hawaii State statutes that formed the association, any insurance policy issued by the association was supposed to be accepted as a valid policy.
In December 2007, a class action lawsuit was brought against student loan lending giant Sallie Mae in the United States District Court for the District of Connecticut, alleging that Sallie Mae discriminates against African American and Hispanic private student loan applicants.  
The case further alleges that the factors Sallie Mae uses to underwrite private student loans cause a disparate impact on students attending schools with disproportionate minority populations. The suit also alleges that Sallie Mae fails to properly disclose loan terms to private student loan borrowers. The case is in litigation.
Policies related to redlining and urban decay can also act as a form of environmental racism, which in turn have an impact on public health. Urban minority communities may face environmental racism in the form of parks that are smaller, less accessible and of poorer quality than those in more affluent or white areas in some cities.'''' by Angela Rowen The Berkeley Daily Planet This may have an indirect impact on health, since young people have fewer places to play and adults have fewer opportunities for exercise.
Robert Wallace writes that the pattern of the AIDS outbreak during the '80s was affected by the outcomes of a program of 'planned shrinkage' directed at African-American and Hispanic communities.  It was implemented through systematic denial of municipal services, particularly fire protection resources, essential to maintain urban levels of population density and ensure community stability. Institutionalized racism affects general health care as well as the quality of AIDS health intervention and services in minority communities. The overrepresentation of minorities in various disease categories, including AIDS, is partially related to environmental racism. The national response to the AIDS epidemic in minority communities was slow during the '80s and '90s, showing an insensitivity to ethnic diversity in prevention efforts and AIDS health services.
Instead of ''denial'' of services to low-income neighborhoods, sometimes the exact ''opposite'' can occur as well when it is the ''most'' lucrative option for the service providers. When those services are believed to have adverse effects on a community, that can be considered to be a form of "reverse redlining."  The term "liquorlining" is sometimes usedhttp://woodstockinst.org/document/liquorlining.pdf to describe high densities of liquor stores in low income and/or minority communities relative to surrounding areas. As neighborhoods decline in income, supermarkets, grocery stores, and other retail outlets move out, but liquor stores remain. However, unlike redlining, this is usually not illegal.