The '''Moana Hotel''', also known as the '''First Lady of Waikiki''', is a famous historic hotel on the island of Oahu, located at 2365 Kalakaua Avenue in Honolulu, Hawaii. Built in the late 19th century as the first hotel in Waikiki, the Moana opened its doors to guests in 1901, becoming the first large hotel in Waikiki. The Moana Hotel is regarded as the flagship in Hawaii tourism, and has been listed on the National Register of Historic Places. In Hawaiian, ''moana'' means "open sea" or "ocean."
The wealthy Honolulu landowner, Walter Chamberlain Peacock, in an effort to establish a fine resort in the previously neglected Waikiki area of Honolulu, incorporated the Moana Hotel Company in 1896. Working with a design by architect Oliver G. Traphagen and $150,000 in capital, The Lucas Brothers contractors completed the structure in 1901. Construction of The Moana marked the beginning of tourism in Waikiki, becoming the first hotel amidst the bungalows and beach houses.
The Moana's architecture was influenced by European styles popular at the time, with Ionic columns and intricate woodwork and plaster detailing throughout the building. The Moana was designed with a grand porte cochere on the street side and wide verandas on the ocean side. Some of the 75 guest rooms had telephones and bathrooms (unusual at the time), and the hotel featured a billiard room, saloon, main parlor, reception area, and library. Peacock installed the first electric-powered elevator in the islands at the Moana, which is still in use today.
Design features of the original structure that survive to this day include extra-wide hallways (to accommodate steamer trunks), high ceilings, and cross-ventilation windows (to cool the rooms prior to air conditioning).
The Moana officially opened on March 11, 1901. Its first guests were a group of Shriners, who paid $1.50 per night for their rooms. Peacock did not find success with his endeavor, and sold the hotel to Alexander Young, a prominent businessman with other hotel holdings. The Young estate operated the hotel until the Matson Navigation Company bought the property in 1932 for $1.6 million.
Over the course of Matson's ownership of the Moana, it grew along with the popularity of Hawaiian tourism. Two floors were added in 1928 along with Italian Renaissance-styled concrete wings on each side of the hotel, creating its H shape seen today.
The hotel's outward appearance was altered slightly over the years, including "updates" to such designs as Art Deco in the 30's and Bauhaus in the 50's.
From 1935 to 1975, the Moana's courtyard hosted the ''Hawaii Calls'' live radio broadcast. Legend has it that listeners mistook the hiss of the radio transmission as the waves breaking on the beach. When learning of this, the host instructed the soundman to run down to the waterfront to actually record the sound, which became a staple of the show.
In 1952, Matson built a new hotel adjacent to the Moana on the east side, called the Surfrider Hotel. They sold all of their Waikiki hotel properties to the Sheraton Company in 1959. In 1969 Sheraton built a towering new hotel on the Moana's west side. They named it the Sheraton Surfrider Hotel and the previous Surfrider was turned into a wing of the Moana. Sheraton sold all of their Hawaiian hotels in 1974 to Japanese industrialist Kenji Osano and his Kyo-Ya Company, though Sheraton continued to manage them. In 1989, a $50 million restoration (designed by Hawaii architect Virginia D. Murison) restored the Moana to its 1901 appearance and incorporated the two adjacent buildings into one beachfront resort with a common lobby, renaming the entire property the Sheraton Moana Surfrider.
The restoration has cemented the Moana as one of Waikiki's premier hotels. It includes 793 rooms, (46 suites), a freshwater swimming pool, three restaurants, beach bar and barpoolside snack bar.
The property has been recognized with the President's Historic Preservation Award, the National Preservation Honor Award, Hawaii Renaissance Award, and the Hotel Sales and Marketing Association International Golden Bell Award. The main historic section of the hotel, The Banyan Wing, has been listed on the National Register of Historic Places.
In 2007, Starwood Hotels & Resorts, management company of the Moana, rebranded the hotel from a Sheraton Hotel to a Westin Hotel. The name of the hotel became "'''Moana Surfrider, A Westin Resort & Spa'''".
The hotel is the base of operations for about 24 White House staffers who accompany Barack Obama to his Winter White House at Plantation Estate during Christmas visits.
In the center of the Moana Surfrider's courtyard stands a large Banyan tree. The Indian Banyan tree was planted in 1904 by Jared Smith, Director of the Department of Agriculture Experiment Station. When planted the tree was nearly seven feet tall and about seven years old. It now stands 75 feet high and spans 150 feet across the courtyard.
In 1979 the historic tree was one of the first to be listed on Hawaii's Rare and Exceptional Tree List. It has also been selected by the Board of Trustees of America the Beautiful Fund as the site for a Hawaii Millennium Landmark Tree designation, which selects one historic tree in each state for protection in the new millennium.
As soon as the Moana Hotel opened, a non-stop flood of tourists from the mainland United States poured through the Moana's doors. Its most famous guest came in 1920. The Prince of Wales, who would later become King Edward VIII, gallivanted around the Moana Hotel property and reportedly fell in love with the private pier from which he frequently dove into the ocean.
Duke Kahanamoku, the legendary Olympic swimmer and popularizer of the sport of surfing, frequented the Moana Hotel restaurants and private beachfront. The Moana Hotel became a favorite stomping ground for Kahanamoku's famed group, dubbed the Waikiki Beach Boys.
In 1905, the Moana Hotel was at the center of one of America's legendary mysteries. Jane Stanford, co-founder of Stanford University and former wife of California Governor Leland Stanford, died in a Moana Hotel room of poisoning.
An account of events says that on the evening of February 28 at the hotel, Stanford had asked for bicarbonate of soda to settle her stomach. Her personal secretary Bertha Berner prepared the solution, which Stanford drank. At 11:15 p.m., Stanford cried out for her servants and Moana Hotel staff to fetch a physician feeling that she had lost sensations. Robert W. P. Cutler, who wrote the book, ''The Mysterious Death of Jane Stanford'', recounted what took place upon the arrival of Moana Hotel physician, Dr. Francis Howard Humphris:
Stanford was dead from strychnine poisoning. Who killed her, remains a mystery. Today, the room no longer exists; it was stripped for expansion of the lobby.
The hotel's owners, Japanese businessmen and brothers Kenji Osano and Masakuni Osano purchased the Moana Hotel from the Sheraton Corporation in 1974 for US$10.7 million. The market price for the property was undervalued and the Osano brothers made millions of dollars in profit.
At the same time, they purchased the rest of Sheraton's holdings in Hawaii   the Sheraton Surfrider Hotel, the Sheraton Princess Kaiulani Hotel, the Royal Hawaiian Hotel and the newly opened Sheraton Waikiki Hotel.
The Osano brothers formed Kyo-Ya Company Limited, a subsidiary of Kokusai Kogyo Company Limited, as the corporate entity charged with overseeing the hotel properties. The purchases put the Osano brothers on the Forbes 400 list of the World's wealthiest people in 1999.
After the death of the Osano brothers, Takamasa Osano inherited billions of dollars in properties. The Moana Hotel continues to be the flagship hotel in the Osano corporate empire and is the part-time residence of Eiko Osano, widow of Kenji Osano.
Image:Moana-Hotel-porte-cochere.JPG|Porte cochere
Image:Moana-Hotel-column-capital.JPG|Capital of Ionic column
Image:Moana-Hotel-breadfruit-pattern-carpet.JPG|Carpet with breadfruit patterns
Image:Moana-Hotel-canoe-paddle-display.JPG|Hawaiian canoe paddles on wall
Image:Moana 2.jpg|View from oceanfront guestroom 