The role was originated on October 29, 1993 by Jonathan Jackson, who portrayed the character until May 24, 1999. The role was then played by Jacob Young from February 25, 2000 to February 10, 2003.  In 2000, Young also guest starred on the sketch comedy series MADtv, making a small cameo as the character.  Greg Vaughan stepped into the role on February 20, 2003. After almost seven years with the show, Vaughan was let go to allow for Jackson to reprise the role for the first time in over ten years. Vaughan last aired on October 20, 2009, while Jackson first aired on October 27, 2009.
Lucky Spencer was born in Texas to Luke and Laura Spencer on October 29, 1983, later revised to July 15, 1979. 
He spent the first 10 years of his life moving from place to place with his parents to get away from mobster Frank Smith, his father's former boss and enemy. While living in British Columbia, Canada, the threat from Frank Smith to their family began again, so Luke and Laura told Lucky to head to Port Charles on his own; they would meet up with him later. Lucky made it to Port Charles safely and Aunt Ruby hid him at Kelly's. However, Frank Smith's men found him there. Lucky then befriended a boy named Sly Eckert, who hid him in the city's catacombs. Luke and Laura found him there with his cousin after Sly's father Bill Eckert (a dead ringer for Luke) was mistaken for Luke and shot by Frank's men. A few months later, Lucky got shot when he followed his dad to a meeting with a henchman. Fortunately, Lucky made a full recovery. The Spencer Family settled in Port Charles and Lucky was quite happy with his life. He was thrilled when his new baby sister LuLu was born in 1994.
Lucky's happiness soon came to a halt when he found out his mother had a son by Stavros Cassadine while she was held captive by the Cassadines before he was born. Laura's other son Nikolas arrived in Port Charles with his uncle Stefan and became the anonymous bone marrow donor for their baby sister, LuLu, saving her life when she had aplastic anemia. Lucky instantly disliked Nikolas, who was a rival for their mother's love and attention. This rivalry continued on another level, when Lucky had a crush on Sarah Webber, who was more interested in Nikolas.
Things changed for Lucky when he found Elizabeth Webber, Sarah's sister, in the park Valentines night. Elizabeth was badly bruised and her dress was ripped. Lucky came to her aid and called his Aunt Bobbie for help. Elizabeth told them that she was raped in the park by an unknown man. Lucky started to feel protective of Elizabeth and promised to keep her safe. Lucky and Elizabeth worked together to try to find her rapist. Lucky's world was rocked again when Nikolas blurted out during a fight with Lucky that Luke had raped Laura years ago, before they were married. Lucky thought that Nikolas was lying but was shaken by this information. He confronted his father. Luke didn't deny that he raped Laura and confessed to Lucky what happened that night at the disco. Lucky was disgusted with his father and left the house. He refused to have anything to do with his father and was angry with his mother for allowing his father to get away with it. Laura returned home and tried to explain her reasoning but he refused to accept it. Lucky found a room above Jason Morgan's bike shop to rent in exchange for helping Jason at his shop. Lucky grew closer to Elizabeth during her ordeal and they fell in love. Elizabeth helped Lucky to understand and forgive his parents for not being perfect. Lucky eventually forgave them but wanted to live on his own. Lucky and Elizabeth made plans for the future, including exchanging vows in a church one year after Elizabeth's ordeal. However, their plans were cut short when a fire broke out at Jason's bike shop one night. A body was found in Lucky's room upstairs with the necklace Lucky had given to Elizabeth, leading everyone to believe that the body was Lucky. Actually, Lucky was alive and being held captive by Cesar Faison, who was hired by Helena Cassadine.
For almost a year everyone believed Lucky was dead. But before Faison died in a boat explosion, he revealed to Luke that Lucky was alive. Luke investigated this and started finding clues to Lucky's true whereabouts. Helena led Luke and Laura down memory lane as she traveled with Lucky to the Haunted Star, Ice Princess Island, and Texas. Their last destination was in Canada: the Triple L Diner where Luke, Laura, and Lucky had lived before returning to Port Charles. While there, Helena gave Lucky bus fare and turned him loose. When Luke and Laura had figured out the last clues and arrived to get Lucky, he slugged Luke in the face and ran off. It turned out that during the time Lucky was held captive by Faison, Faison had started to program Lucky through mind control. Lucky was instructed under hypnosis to forget about his last days in Port Charles and focus on the disgust he felt for his parents and especially for Luke raping Laura. Lucky returned to Port Charles, but he was under Helena's control. Helena instructed him to push Elizabeth away and encourage her to be with Nikolas, because Nikolas was the one that loved her. 
Elizabeth was suspicious of Lucky's behavior and did not believe him. So she continued to have contact with Lucky. Meanwhile Helena continued to use Lucky to do things for her. Lucky's love for Elizabeth kept him from falling deeper under Helena's control and also kept Lucky from pushing Elizabeth totally away. During a conversation between Lucky and his friend Emily Quartermaine, she accidentally spoke Helena's catch phrase for Lucky's programming, "protect your queen," and became the first person to actually witness Lucky's transformation. Emily literally shook him out of the trance but told Lucky what happened to him every time she said that phrase. Finally he realized that he was not himself and that he had been programmed by Faison and Helena. After some initial reluctance, Elizabeth was able to convince Lucky to see Dr. Kevin Collins. Kevin helped to break down the lower levels of the programming which helped Lucky lose the anger towards his parents. He was able to admit he loved them and advised them that he was under Helena's control. Lucky then continued to fight Helena's control and rebel against her. 
When Helena realized that the lower level of control had been broken, she resorted to a higher level involving the use of the Ice Princess diamond. She used the Ice Princess to hypnotize Lucky and instructed him to attack Jason Morgan, who Lucky felt was after Elizabeth romantically. Lucky attacked Jason with a knife on the docks, forcing Jason to defend himself by hitting Lucky several times to get the knife out of his hands. Elizabeth thought that Jason attacked Lucky without cause. Lucky came out of his trance and he didn't remember attacking Jason or why he did it. But he told Liz that Jason started beating on him for no reason. He had some more run-ins with Jason over Elizabeth. Helena gave Lucky a diamond ring (the same ring that Stavros gave to Laura when they were married) to give to Elizabeth and instructed him to propose to her. Lucky complied. Later, Lucky had a run-in with Nikolas at GH. They started fighting in the stairwell, when Nikolas tried to persuade him to get help from Kevin again. Stefan interceded to protect Nikolas from being hurt by Lucky. So instead Lucky hit Stefan in the face and knocked him down a flight of stairs. Nikolas broke up the fight and tried to keep the two apart. Stefan pressed charges and had Lucky arrested for assault at the Port Charles Grille during his engagement party. Realizing that Lucky was under Helena's control again, Luke and Laura tried to help Lucky by getting him to see Dr. Kevin once more. Kevin went to see Lucky in jail and tried to de-program him but wasn't successful. Helena, dressed as a cleaning lady at the jail, put him under her spell and instructed him to start a fire in his cell and escape. Lucky did what Helena asked and managed to escape but later didn't realize how or why. Elizabeth found him and convinced him to get help, telling him what he had done. Helena later instructed Lucky to pour a vial of mysterious liquid in his cousin Lucas' drink at the Brownstone. Lucky did what she asked but then didn't remember doing it later on. After he learned that Lucas was rushed to GH and was in a coma, Lucky felt uneasy and started to feel that he had something to do with it. He agreed to listen to Nikolas and Elizabeth. Lucky and Elizabeth moved into Nikolas' house so that they could keep a better eye on him and keep him from being alone with Helena. 
Lucky learned that he had a talent for photography. His cousin Carly recognized his talent and hired him to take pictures of Gia, his brother's girlfriend. Laura realized that his photos of Gia were very good and hired him to take pictures of Liz, who was offered a job at Deception as a model as well. However, Lucky was not immune to Helena's control. She managed to get him alone and put him under her control. He was told that he was one day going to have to get rid of his father and the rest of his family. Lucky resisted her control as much as he could but it was too hard. After Lucky denied making a pass at Gia, Nikolas kicked him out of the cottage. Later on Lucky spotted Nikolas and Elizabeth in conference several times. He told Elizabeth that she was better off with Nikolas. 
Helena gave Lucky instructions which led him to her secret lab underneath General Hospital. He found his father Luke there fighting with Stavros and Helena's men. Helena forced Lucky to inject Luke with a virus that would make Luke go crazy and render him useless as an opponent to the Cassadines. Lucky tried to resist and pled with Luke to forgive him before he injected him with the virus. Later, Lucky went to Luke's apartment above the club and wallowed in the feeling that he had done something to hurt Luke. Elizabeth showed up and immediately realized that Helena had got to him again. Lucky realized that he couldn't control himself and broke the engagement off with Elizabeth. He told her to go to Nikolas and be with him. Elizabeth left reluctantly. When Luke showed up alive at the apartment, Lucky asked Luke to help him fight Helena. But it had been days since Luke had been injected with the virus, so he was too out of it to be helpful to Lucky. Suddenly two goons broke into the apartment and took Lucky away kicking and screaming. He recovered and found himself tied up in a chair in a strange room. As Elizabeth emerged he told her to get out of there, but then he realized that she was the one who orchestrated his kidnapping to keep him safe from Helena. Lucky was impressed by her and realized just how much she loved him. They kissed and made up and Lucky agreed to stay put. 
Still in the dark about how to trigger Lucky's programming, Nikolas took Helena to where "he" had stashed Lucky and told her to erase his memories of love for Elizabeth. While Elizabeth hid in a closet, Helena pulled out the Ice Princess and told Lucky to forget his love for Elizabeth. It worked and Lucky pushed Elizabeth away. He behaved erratically in the weeks afterward and even pulled Gia into a kiss. Even though he couldn't remember the things Helena had made him do, Lucky still knew Helena and Stavros were his enemies. When Stavros, using the alias Lucien Kane, began sniffing around the newly single Gia, Lucky warned her to stay away from him but she didn't listen. When she overheard Nikolas tell Helena that he would kill Elizabeth to prove himself to her, Gia tried to get Lucky to help her protect Elizabeth but he refused. However, Lucky later showed up on the Cassadine yacht to accuse Helena of killing Chloe, Luke, and Elizabeth. 
When Helena took several Port Charles residents hostage in her underground lab, she gathered all of the captives and revealed her secret weapon: Lucky! She told Lucky the secret trigger phrase but nothing happened. So she pulled out the Ice Princess to get him to focus. But Helena didn't know that Lucky had managed to break through his programming by focusing on his love for Elizabeth. Fists started flying and people started running. Lucky helped Stefan destroy the massive computer system before they fled from the lab. Everyone made it out of lab and Helena was arrested. Lucky went to visit Helena in her cell to gloat over being free from her control and her new status as a jailbird. However the Spencers were flabbergasted to learn weeks later that there was barely any physical evidence to prove that her lab ever existed.
Finally free of Helena, Lucky and Elizabeth reunited. However, Helena's memory wipe of Lucky's love for Elizabeth was harder to shake than Lucky had anticipated. Feeling like he owed it to Elizabeth to make her happy, Lucky ignored his lack of love for Elizabeth and proposed to her. They planned a New Year's Eve wedding, but Gia told Liz that Lucky didn't love her anymore and the wedding never took place. They tried to start over and fall in love again but it was slow going. When Gia and Elizabeth were injured in a car wreck, Lucky stayed by Elizabeth's side at the hospital. Nikolas invited them to move into Wyndemere with Gia and him and they agreed. Elizabeth's newly-returned sister Sarah also moved in with them and the sexual tension between Lucky and Sarah began to grow. Lucky was temporarily distracted by the fact that Nikolas secretly helped Helena escape to protect Gia's secret guilt in the car accident. Lucky declared a new Cassadine/Spencer war but agreed not to tell Elizabeth the truth regarding the accident. When she finally remembered what had happened, she severed her friendship with Nikolas and Gia and broke up with Lucky. 
When the brothers briefly reunited to search for a presumed dead Carly, Nikolas tried to explain why he had helped Helena. But Lucky didn't want to hear it. Still wrapped up in his feelings for Sarah, Lucky was shocked to discover that Maxie wanted to take him to bed. He tried to let her down gently but she felt humiliated despite his efforts. In retaliation, Maxie told Elizabeth that she had seen Sarah and Lucky headed towards his room. Elizabeth found them there in bed together and told them off for sneaking around behind her back. Lucky and Sarah tried to have a relationship in the open, but Sarah was jealous of Lucky's concern for Elizabeth's safety. The last straw was when Lucky ran to Elizabeth's side after she was involved in an explosion while being rescued from a crypt. Sarah broke up with Lucky and left town not long after.
Lucky went back to being a photographer for Deception. His parents had reunited and planned to have a wedding in late summer. As Laura planned the wedding, she began to have flashbacks of a night in the attic of her childhood home. Luke then poked around in the attic for clues and discovered an old camera with film still in it. He took it to his son, and Lucky was able to develop it. The first picture he developed was of a young Scott Baldwin covered in blood. While Luke pursued the new lead, Lucky managed to get another picture to develop. Before Lucky could discern what was in the photo, Luke realized what it was and took off in search of Laura. 
When Luke and Laura didn't show up for their wedding, Lucky and Nikolas grew worried and went to the attic to search for clues. Instead, they found Rick Webber, Laura's stepfather, dead on the floor. Worried that Luke had killed him, they put Rick's body in his car, covered him in booze, and then pushed the car off a cliff to make it look like a drunk-driving accident. But Scott and Mac knew right away that it was staged. Lucky was also haunted by what he had done to Rick's body. While the boys evaded being arrested, they worried about their mother and speculated about what had happened in the attic. Lucky was relieved when Luke finally called but Nikolas was worried for Laura's safety. Against Lucky's wishes, Nikolas told Scott the couple's whereabouts but the couple had already left by the time they got there. Mac and Scott finally caught up to the couple when they returned to the attic. Lucky and Nikolas were devastated to learn that their mother had had a severe mental breakdown. They went to see her in the hospital, but she had retreated so far into herself that she believed she was still a teenager and didn't recognize them as her children. They said a tearful goodbye to her before she was committed to a mental institution. 
Scott arrested Luke for Rick's death and Lucky tried to get Luke to let him break him out of jail. But Luke refused and had Nikolas help him instead. Lucky worried when his father disappeared for a while, especially when a copy of Luke's will arrived on his doorstep. Elizabeth and Lucky managed to find Luke working on a chain gang in the south and brought him home kicking and screaming. Lucky did his best to keep Luke out of trouble. But Luke was determined to punish himself for Laura's condition. He set fire to the police station and would have died if Lucky had not run in and saved him. Luke began seeing a therapist on Scott's order and Lucky tried to get on with his life.
He met a beautiful blonde named Laura while enrolling in some college courses. They met on various occasions and a friendship grew between them. He learned that she was a former high-priced call girl trying to make a fresh start. But a powerful former client wouldn't let go. He beat her and had her arrested. So Lucky blackmailed Scott into helping her dispose of the man. After the incident, Lucky and Laura's friendship blossomed into something more, although it took her awhile to get used to being with a guy who didn't pay her. One day, Lucky saw Luke and "Laura" together. In turned out that Laura, whose professional name was Summer, was Luke's mystery blonde. Lucky got upset and believed that she'd been playing them both for suckers, hoping to gain financially from them. But they decided to keep Luke in the dark about knowing each other. When Scott discovered the truth, he gleefully told a shocked Luke. Luke tried to get Lucky and Summer back together. But they still had problems, and Summer returned to being a call girl. Lucky later discovered that Nikolas had hired Summer to distract Luke from trying to find their mother. Lucky told Luke and confronted Nikolas. Summer told Luke that Nikolas had blackmailed her into portraying a look-a-like Laura but she had met Lucky by mistake. Lucky, Luke, and Summer then embarked on an adventure to locate Summer's brother Matt. When they found him he revealed he wasn't Summer's brother before dying from a stab wound. Summer confirmed that she was only looking for Matt, her ex-boyfriend, so that he would tell her where the money he had stolen from the Cassadines was hidden. They got arrested for Matt's murder and Nikolas showed up to bail them out, although Luke refused to leave with them. Their adventure ended in a tunnel underneath an old Cassadine estate in Russia where the money was supposed to be buried. But the money had been replaced by worthless coins so they returned to Port Charles empty handed. 
Back in Port Charles, Summer finally admitted she loved Lucky and she became a waitress at Kelly's so she could move into the room across from his. When Lucky finally went to see his mother at the mental institution, Summer went with him. Luke blamed Lucky for giving Nikolas complete control over Laura's medical treatment and got into a physical fight with Lucky over it. Summer knocked Luke out to end the altercation, but Luke later showed up at Lucky's after being given drugs at the hospital. He was delusional and believed Summer was Laura. She went along with it, but when Lucky showed up Luke ran away. Later Summer helped Lucky trick Luke into being committed to a mental hospital. At Nikolas and Emily's engagement party at Wyndemere, Summer was walking out on the bluffs in the heavy fog when she was pushed from behind. Nikolas and Lucky rushed to the bottom to discover that the fall had killed her. Lucky was devastated and vowed to find the person responsible. When Luke showed up at the party, Lucky attacked a shocked Luke and accused him of being responsible for Summer's death. Alexis theorized that Luke didn't do it and that Emily was the intended victim since she had also been out there that evening. However, no one else believed that Luke was innocent. Lucky later learned that one of the servants on the island that night had since disappeared and he believed that servant was the one who pushed Summer off the cliff. 
Believing Stefan was responsible for Summer's death, Lucky tried to urge Mac to work harder in finding evidence to arrest him. But Mac told him to back off or become a cop and look into the case himself. So Lucky went to the academy and became a cop. He worked with Nikolas' new bride Lydia to secretly tape Stefan discussing how he had hired Darius to push Emily off the cliff, but Darius had pushed the wrong girl. The tape got Stefan arrested, but it didn't keep him in jail.
Luke came back to town, extremely unhappy to hear that Lucky had become a cop. Luke then brought his own brand of justice to Stefan by kidnapping him and holding a mock trial that he broadcast on TV. Lucky was later forced to arrest Luke after he fought with Stefan and Stefan wound up with a knife in the chest. Luke managed to escape and Lucky tracked him to Skye's lake house. Skye then knocked him out to keep Luke hidden. The charges against Luke were later dropped when Nikolas discovered a suicide note left behind by Stefan. Luke was free but the rift between father and son still existed. They had a brief moment of closeness around the holidays, but Luke continued to live his life apart from his son. 
Lucky had a hard time adjusting to being a cop. He was investigated and later cleared after he shot Dillon Quartermaine following an altercation between Sage and Alexis. When Sonny barricaded himself in the penthouse after trying to kill Alcazar in front of several witnesses, Lucky tried to behave like a cop but ended up helping a wounded Sonny and a hysterical Carly out of the building. When the body of Cody McCall was found in the tunnels of Wyndemere, Ric had Nikolas arrested for murder. Lucky pushed hard to get Ric to find the real killer, even when Ric pulled him off the case. Lucky suspected Ric of having an ulterior motive for getting Nikolas convicted, and after he realized that Zander was actually pulling Ric's strings, Lucky conferred with Nikolas on how to go after Zander and Ric for trying to frame Nikolas. Nikolas was later cleared of all charges and Lucky became involved in the hunt for Zander, who was named as the one who shot Detective Beck during a shoot out with mob members. 
The Quartermaines and Cassadines auctioned off the treasure from the sunken ship, and Lucky showed up as extra security during the event. But the treasure was stolen anyways. While Lucky detained all the patrons for questioning, news reached the room that a fire had broken out in the basement of the hotel. Lucky then helped coordinate the rescue efforts. While trying to find a way out with Luke, he was nearly killed by a falling beam. But Cameron Lewis, Luke's therapist, pushed Lucky out of the way and died instead. Nearly everyone was evacuated, but others were missing, including Nikolas. Lucky and Emily feared the worst, but Nikolas showed up alive a few days later. A body found in the room where the fire broke out was identified as Zander, but the autopsy showed he was dead before the fire consumed his body. Elizabeth finally admitted to a confrontation with Zander that ended in her knocking him out, making her the murderer. As Lucky, Emily, Nikolas, and Ric vowed to cover up Elizabeth's involvement, evidence began to surface that Zander was really alive. Zander emerged from hiding and took Emily hostage in an effort to force her to love him again. Lucky tried to negotiate with Zander to release Emily and Zander eventually agreed. As they walked out of the cottage, Zander made a threatening move and the cops opened fire on him. Zander died in Emily's arms. Nikolas, who was on the way home from a cancelled business trip, ran his car off the road after hearing that Zander had taken Emily hostage. Lucky and Emily worked hard to search for him. But after a few weeks, they were forced to conclude that Nikolas had drowned in a nearby river. Lucky tried to comfort Emily and supported her while she grieved and planned a memorial. At the memorial, Lucky watched as Helena cursed everyone in the room for Nikolas's death and then Luke got up to stop her. The pair began to grow close again as Emily leaned on him during her grief for Nikolas and for a sick Michael.
In 2005, Lucky and Elizabeth began their romance again. Elizabeth was now a nurse at General Hospital and had a son, Cameron Webber, fathered by Zander Smith. Before Lucky and Elizabeth married, Elizabeth chose to become a surrogate mother for Jasper and Courtney Jacks. Lucky did not approve and took a break from their relationship. After a car accident, Elizabeth miscarried. Lucky helped her through her pain, and they began a rocky marriage. Elizabeth was kidnapped by Manny Ruiz in 2006, and Jason rescued her once again. That same year, Lucky became addicted to painkillers and began an affair with Maxie Jones, his pill supplier. Elizabeth discovered Lucky's infidelity by walking in on him having sex with Maxie. Upset, she went to see Jason Morgan, and they slept together. She later learned that she was pregnant. Lucky went to rehab while he and Elizabeth divorced. A paternity test revealed that Jason fathered her unborn child. Elizabeth kept the truth a secret to protect the child from Jason's dangerous lifestyle and to keep Lucky from suffering devastation that she believed would cause him to relapse. After Lucky completed rehab, Elizabeth remarried him.
In May 2007, Elizabeth gave birth to another son, Jacob Martin Spencer. Elizabeth sought Jason's help when Jake was kidnapped and their continued friendship caused both Lucky and Sam McCall, Jason's girlfriend, to feel jealous.  Angry with Elizabeth, Sam then worked hard to get Lucky's attention as payback, and they began a steamy affair. Elizabeth and Lucky divorced again. In November 2007, during the Black and White Ball, Lucky discovered the truth about Jake's paternity and agreed to keep the paternity a secret to protect Jake. After Emily Quartermaine's death and funeral, Jason and Elizabeth began a secret relationship. They became engaged, but Jason later decided that his job was too dangerous for Elizabeth and her children, and he called off their relationship. Elizabeth decided to fight to be in Jason's life, and Jason reconsidered. He invited Elizabeth to go with him to Italy, but after he witnessed the shooting of Sonny's fiancee, Kate Howard, Jason once again feared for Elizabeth's safety and tried to use this incident to scare her into abandoning a relationship with him. In November 2008, a mob war began heating up in Port Charles. Lucky asked Jason to agree to send Elizabeth and the boys, along with Sam, to hide in a cabin. 
In early 2009, Elizabeth was poisoned while assisting in surgery. Lucky stayed by her bedside and promised to be there for her boys if she did not make it. An explosion caused a fire and led to an evacuation of the hospital. Lucky, who  stayed behind to help, kissed Elizabeth good-bye when she was put on a helicopter to be evacuated. Lucky later reunited with Elizabeth at Mercy Hospital. Then, they agreed that although they would always share a friendship and love, they should not get romantically involved again.
When Lucky started to date Rebecca Shaw (the deceased Emily's newly arrived identical twin), it bothered both Nikolas and Elizabeth. Nikolas, trying to get Lucky and Rebecca jealous, kissed Elizabeth at the hospital in front of them. That night, Elizabeth and Nikolas went to Jake's and got drunk. In the midst of talking about Lucky, Rebecca, Emily and their friendship with each other, they started to kiss, witnessed by Rebecca and Lucky, who had just walked in. Lucky stormed out and went back to Rebecca's room at Kelly's. They were about to make love when Lucky stopped because he kept thinking about Elizabeth. Back at the bar, Coleman Ratcliffe informed Elizabeth and Nikolas that Lucky and "Emily the sequel chick" witnessed the kiss, causing Elizabeth to feel guilty. Lucky went to see Elizabeth and they talked about the kiss he witnessed and how he almost slept with Rebecca. Lucky pointed out that they agreed to move on, but they both know that it doesn't seem to be working for either one of them. They decided to go forward with a relationship, but at the same time Elizabeth still found herself increasingly attracted to Nikolas. After a scare where Jake is injured at the carnival, Lucky proposed to Elizabeth at the hospital, but she told him she had to think about it. Elizabeth went to Wyndemere to see Nikolas, where they gave in to their mutual attraction and had sex. Still, Elizabeth returned to the hospital and accepted Lucky's proposal.
During this time and confusion between Lucky, Nikolas, Elizabeth and Rebecca, a stranger and con man named Ethan Lovett arrived in town and began working at the Haunted Star. Ethan turned out to be the son of Luke Spencer and Holly Sutton, making him Lucky and Lulu's half-brother. As an emotional rift had developed between Lucky and his father, seeing Ethan's instant closeness with Luke made Lucky jealous. Their relationship wasn't helped by learning Ethan was conceived during an affair Luke had while married to Lucky's mother Laura Spencer. Though Ethan and Lulu hit it off immediately (and even flirted some before their true relationship was revealed), Lucky was less friendly at first. However, he and Ethan bonded over their mutual dislike of Dominic Pirelli, a newcomer in Sonny Corinthos' organization who they beat up after seeing him with Lulu at Jake's. Lucky invited Ethan to a surprise engagement party he threw for Elizabeth as the brothers gradually warmed up to each other. Lucky also began to make more overtures toward his father, admitting that he misses their former closeness. Adding to his family drama, Lucky was put in charge of investigating the disappearance (and presumed murder) of Claudia Zacchara, Sonny Corinthos' wife; he quickly realized that his cousin Michael Corinthos III knew something about what happened and annoyed Sonny and Carly by speaking with Michael several times. He also discovered that Lulu's new friend Dominic was really Dante Falconeri, an undercover detective from New York City. They became fast friends and secretly began working together to investigate a mysterious graffiti artist who had been leaving the tag "CO77X" around town on the belief that he might be a serial killer. On Michael's 18th birthday, just after Christmas, Lucky happened upon him getting pulled over by a cop for drinking and driving. Lucky interceded and drove Michael home without charging him, but not before giving him a long talk about how he understands why Michael is being so self-destructive. Lucky related how he too had once become disillusioned with his own father, his former hero, and the only way he could punish his father was to hurt himself.  
Elizabeth and Lucky seemed to get tighter over the holidays. They went tree shopping with Cam and Jake, and they all spent Christmas Eve celebrating at Lucky's with the extended Spencer family, including Luke (who arrives after a special entreaty from Lucky) and Ethan. For New Year's Eve, Elizabeth surprised Lucky by arranging for a romantic private party at Jake's, an effort to recreate the night when Lucky asked her to be his girl more than 10 years ago at Luke's old club. Elizabeth presented him with his old guitar and he sang "My Girl" to her, just like old times. Lucky's happiness was short-lived, as shortly afterwards he discovered Nikolas's feelings for Elizabeth, although Nikolas lied about Elizabeth's mutual attraction to him. Nikolas told Lucky he was leaving Port Charles for Paris so that Lucky and Elizabeth could be happy together without his interference. Lulu talked Lucky into reaching out to Nikolas to say goodbye, but when Lucky went to Wyndemere to do so, he walked in on Nikolas and Elizabeth having sex (unbeknownst to either Nikolas or Liz). Devastated over seeing Nikolas and Elizabeth together, Lucky returned home and destroyed the contents of his house with a baseball bat. Lucky did not tell either Liz or Nikolas that he had seen them, telling Liz that the destruction was the work of a burgalar and asking Nikolas not to go to Paris. After several years of sobriety, Lucky began drinking without attempting to hide it, which was witnessed by Ethan, Lulu, and finally Luke. Lulu, unaware of why Lucky had relapsed, went to Nikolas and Elizabeth to enlist their help in getting Lucky sober. Liz and Luke agreed and tried to talk to Lucky, who as a result finally confronted the two about what he had witnessed.  
On Valentine's Day, Lucky spends his time at Jake's talking about the past with Ethan, while Elizabeth goes to the church where her and Lucky were married and passes out from hypothermia. Lucky finds her and takes her to the hospital. She finds out that she is pregnant and the baby could be either Nikolas' or Lucky's. Elizabeth, Lucky, and Nikolas are blindsided when Kelly tells them Elizabeth's pregnant. Lucky and Nikolas both vow to stand by Elizabeth no matter who the father turns out to be. After finding Elizabeth on the hospital roof looking ready to jump, Steve, Lucky and Nikolas agree she needs to go to Shadybrook. Lucky tells Luke he believes the best thing for Elizabeth would be for them to get remarried and raise the baby together, even if Nikolas is the father, but Luke points out the flaws in his thinking. 
Nikolas stuns Lucky when he tells him he plans on asking Elizabeth to marry him. Helena menaces Elizabeth, causing her to unravel even further. Lucky warns Helena to stay away from Elizabeth. Lucky tells Elizabeth what he thinks she needs to hear to get better: that he forgives her and he'll stick by her. He keeps his anger and frustration to himself, though, and while he speeds down the highway, he ends up on a collision course with Maxie.  Lucky missed Maxie and runs his car into a ditch. Overall okay Maxie tries to give Lucky advice about Elizabeth.
On March 17, 2010 it is revealed that Lucky is indeed the father of Elizabeth's baby. However, Helena Cassadine rigs the test results to say that Nikolas is the father.
Although Elizabeth remains determined to win Lucky back, he is adamant that he wants nothing to do with her beyond Cam and Jake. He begins to enjoy life outside of his relationship with Elizabeth. He starts up a friendship with Maya Ward and begins spending time again with Maxie. He also agrees to partner up with district attorney Claire Walsh, to put an end to the mob scene in Port Charles, by putting Sonny Corinthos and Johnny Zacchara behind bars. Lucky has a personal interest in removing Johnny, as Johnny begins to pull Ethan into the growing mob war between him and Sonny, despite Lucky's warnings to Ethan.
Claire also asks Lucky out on a date.
On July 19, 2010, Elizabeth gives birth to his son, but the baby is still believed to be the son of Nikolas and Elizabeth and was named Aiden Alexi Nikolossovich Cassadine. Lucky still does not know that Aiden is his child.
On March 15, 2010, Kristina Davis, Sonny's daughter with Alexis Davis, is brutally beaten in her own home and claims that it was Lucky's brother, Ethan Lovett, who attacked her. Though Lucky initially believes it, Jason points out the inconsistencies in Kristina's story and manages to convince Lucky and his partner, Dante Falconeri, to investigate. On April 2, Lucky and Dante zero in on Kristina's boyfriend, Kiefer Bauer, and after interrogating him in a good cop/bad cop routine, they put two and two together and realize the truth: that Kristina was actually assaulted by Kiefer, and she had falsely accused Ethan to protect Kiefer from her father's wrath. Shortly afterwards, Kiefer attacks and beats Kristina again, though Alexis arrives home and catches him in the act this time. Sonny, believing that Ethan was the culprit, sends Jason to the Haunted Star to kill Ethan, but Lucky intercepts him while Dante questions Kristina about the incident. Lucky tells Jason of the evidence they have found against Kiefer, and in the middle of their conversation, Dante calls to inform him that Kristina has finally identified Kiefer as her assailant.
That same night, however, Kiefer is hit by a car. Though Sam and Molly find him and take him to the hospital, he dies from his wounds shortly after arriving; nonetheless, his abusive nature and the truth about Kristina's attacks quickly become public knowledge. Unfortunately, Ethan becomes a suspect for the hit-and-run when Lucky discovers damage to his car and arrested, but released, and Alexis confesses to Mac that she accidentally hit Kiefer while taking Kristina to the hospital. However, Ethan, furious that he keeps being accused of crimes he didn't commit, goes to the hospital and takes his frustration out on Kristina. Lucky and Maya Ward quickly intervene on Kristina's behalf and Ethan leaves. Later, during a subsequent argument between himself and Lucky, Ethan calms down enough to realize that he was out of line and goes to apologize to Kristina, while Luke, having had enough, tells Lucky that, while he should probably do so, everyone else in Port Charles, including Kristina herself, should line up and apologize to ''him'' first.
During this time, Sonny is put on trial for the murder of his wife Claudia. However, just as the verdict on Sonny is about to come in, Dante discovers that Michael was the one who killed Claudia and announces it in court. Lucky is sent out to arrest Michael, and though Jason pleads for him to look the other way, Lucky turns a deaf ear to it and brings Michael in. However, like everyone else, Lucky is taken aback when Judge Carroll unfairly sentences Michael to two-to-five years in Pentonville Adult Correctional Facility. While Michael is being processed, Lucky apologizes to Carly for not looking the other way and letting Jason spirit Michael away when he had the chance, but Carly assures him that she only blames Dante for this. Dante eventually convinces the judge to let Michael go early.
Kiefer's father, Warren Bauer, becomes obsessed with getting revenge on Kristina and Alexis for Kiefer's death, and his campaign comes to a head on July 22, 2010, when he tries to attack Kristina at the hospital only to be attacked and nearly strangled to death by Michael. Though Warren claims that Michael attacked him unprovoked and demands that Lucky arrest him, Lucky and Mac, knowing that Warren has been prosecuting Kristina's family for months, choose to look the other way and cleverly make it impossible for Warren to press charges against Michael. Shortly afterwards, Warren snaps and causes a shootout at General Hospital, critically wounding Mac and Ethan before turning on Michael and Kristina. Fortunately, Warren is shot and killed by Mac before he can harm them, and Mac and Ethan are quickly treated and stabilized.
Meanwhile Lucky's relationship with Nikolas deteriorates further. Believing Elizabeth's child to be his thanks to Helena's machinations, Nikolas begins to apply a lot of pressure onto Elizabeth to move into Wyndemere with him and start up as a new family. Elizabeth flat out refuses, blaming Nikolas for her losing Lucky, and also not wanting her children around Helena's influence. Nikolas reacts badly, and both he and Helena separately accuse an incredulous Lucky of manipulating Elizabeth to punish Nikolas. Lucky denies this, not caring what happens to Elizabeth, although he does agree that he will not allow Cam and Jake to be brought up in the same household as Helena, the woman who murders people, and who kept Lucky hostage for a year back in the early 00s. Jealous over Elizabeth's continuing love for Lucky, Nikolas fails to see Lucky's point of view.
Things worsen when Tracy Quartermaine begins to suspect Helena may have had a hand in the paternity test results. Taking action, Helena arranges for Tracy to be abducted and held in the dungeon of the Cassadine estate in Greece. Luke eventually realises what has happened, and flies over to Greece, only to end up prisoner himself. Back in Port Charles, Lucky is the only one who is concerned about Luke and Tracy's disappearance. He immediately realised Helena is responsible. Although Ethan and Maya are both initially dismissive of the idea, with their help Lucky soon proves his theory is correct. He flies out to Greece alone, and tries to sneak into the Cassadine palace by way of disguise. Just as his ruse is uncovered by Helena's henchman, Nikolas arrives, having wanting to check Lucky's theory out for himself. Despite their rift, Lucky asks for Nikolas' help in finding Luke and Tracy. Still smarting over Elizabeth, Nikolas completely refuses and orders Lucky be thrown off the island. Nikolas does find Tracy and Luke himself in the end, and frees them. Lucky arrives at this point, having found another way into the dungeon. Once Tracy and Luke are safely on their way back to Port Charles, Lucky has it out with Nikolas one last time. He pours out his feelings of betrayal, and explains that he has never truly returned to his old self after Helena's abduction in 1999; Elizabeth had been his way of trying to put his life back together again, and Nikolas had completely destroyed it without a thought. Although Nikolas looks stung, he continues to try and justify his behaviour. Frustrated and hurt, Lucky declares he will never forgive Nikolas, and locks Nikolas in the Cassadine's own dungeon, before returning to Port Charles.
Nikolas is let out within minutes by his family servants, and on his return to Port Charles, chucks Helena out of Wyndemere for her abduction of Tracy and Luke. Helena tries to convince Nikolas that he should be siding with her, not Lucky. Meanwhile, after her traumatic experience in the dungeon, Tracy appears to forget her initial suspicion over the paternity test.
Lucky is approached by Interpol to pose as an Irish hitman called Ronan O'Reilly; Lucky and Ronan shared an uncanny resemblance, and Ronan had recently been killed in a random accident. Ronan had links with an international criminal known as the Balkan, who was then unaware of Ronan's demise. Interpol planned to use Lucky to flush the Balkan out, who was at the time targeting Brenda Barrett (who had accidentally killed the Balkan's son years previously).
Whilst in Ireland, Lucky finds himself attacked by a young local woman, Siobhan McKenna; Ronan had been responsible for the death of her boyfriend shortly before his own demise. Lucky quickly turned things around and, still posing as Ronan, claimed to have found God and repented for his sins. Siobhan was to gradually fall for the newly sensitive "Ronan" despite herself, and similarly Lucky found himself increasingly charmed by the fiery Irish barmaid, pleased for something new and exciting after Elizabeth. However things came unstuck when Lulu and Dante arrived in Ireland to offer unwelcome assistance to Lucky. Overhearing a conversation between the three, Siobhan realised that "Ronan" was not really Ronan. Angry and humiliated, she railed against Lucky for tricking her. However, before she could walk away from Lucky for good, the Balkan's men snatched her; planning to use her as leverage to force "Ronan" into following the Balkan's orders. Posing again as "Ronan", Lucky had no choice but to agree to the Balkan's assignment; to deliver Brenda to the Balkan. Siobhan was released, but with the Balkan's men having decided that Siobhan was a complication they did not need, Lucky was obliged to bring her along on his mission with him to keep her safe. 
As they arrived back in Port Charles, Lucky approached Nikolas and asked him to keep Siobhan hidden in Wyndermere. Nikolas readily agreed, hoping to help repair some of the damage to his relationship with Lucky. Although still posing publically as "Ronan", Lucky's cover was blown when the Balkan's men spotted him conferring with Jason, who was at the time acting as Brenda's bodyguard. Escaping Wyndemere for a brief moment of fresh air, Siobhan was promptly abducted again and used as a bargaining chip for Brenda.
Surprising himself with his feelings for Siobhan, a desperate Lucky teamed up with Brenda, Jason and Dante - "agreeing" to exchange Brenda for Siobhan, the group quickly ambushed the Balkan's men and eliminated them. The Balkan's identity remained uncovered however, and the group quickly began to suspect a mole in their midst. Jason and Dante gradually became suspicious of Siobhan, who had been asking more and more questions about the effort to keep Brenda safe. Although he initially was quick to refute their allegations, Lucky eventually sprang a trap for Siobhan; giving her a false location for the setting of Brenda's forthcoming wedding to Sonny Corinthos, Lucky then finds Siobhan at the false location carrying out surveillance for the Balkan.
Siobhan breaks down and admits the truth; whilst she was held hostage the Balkan made it known to her that he had also snatched her sister Meagan, and was holding her in Ireland. Siobhan was to do the Balkan's bidding in exchange for Meagan's life; including spying on and ultimately killing Lucky. Although she had never been prepared to take Lucky's life, she had carried out the Balkan's other demands hoping to placate him and ensure Meagan's safety.
Although Jason and Dante remained suspicious of Siobhan's story, Lucky vowed to help Siobhan rescue her sister. His faith in Siobhan was ultimately proved justified, and journeying to Ireland again, they were successful in freeing Meagan. With a heavy heart, Lucky attempted forced Siobhan to hide out with Meagan in Spain, reluctant for the sisters to be used as bait again. However, having genuinely fallen for each other, Siobhan refused and they returned to Port Charles together. Upon their return, they found that in their absence the Balkan had been uncovered as Theo Hoffman, a defence attorney within Diane Miller's law firm. With his cover blown and his attempt at revenge on Brenda failed, the Balkan was no longer a threat to Lucky or Siobhan.
On March 18, 2011, Elizabeth finds out Lucky is Aiden's father. While Elizabeth is distracted, Jake runs onto the road and is hit by a car. Jason and Lucky race to the hospital. Jake is in extremely critical condition, and may die. Sam and Dante team up to find out who caused Jake's hit-and-run.
Despite Patrick and Robin's best efforts, Jake tragically dies on the operating table as Jason watches. Jason breaks the news to Lucky, who then tells Elizabeth. Devastated, Lucky blames himself, insisting that it never would have happened if he had just taken Jake and Cameron for the night like he was supposed to. While alone with Jason, Lucky tells him that he understands that Jason chose to let go of Jake for his own protection, and thanks him for giving him (Lucky) the opportunity to be Jake's father instead.
When Carly's daughter Josslyn is diagnosed with advanced kidney cancer, Jason, at Carly's request, asks Lucky and Elizabeth to consider donating Jake's organs to Josslyn. Though Elizabeth initially refuses, Lucky manages to persuade her, stating that they can save other children if not Jake.
As Carly is one of the suspects, Lucky immediately assumes that she is indeed the hit-and-run driver and goes to her house to berate her. However, he is shattered when forensics evidence reveals that Luke was the one who hit Jake. Lucky confronts his father and accuses him of driving drunk, but Luke continually denies it. Despite this, Lucky reassures Luke that he could never hate him before leaving. Upon discovering that Dante told Jason that Luke hit Jake, Lucky immediately makes his way to Jason's apartment only to find Sam there alone. After breaking the news to a sympathetic Sam, Lucky asks Sam to tell Jason not to kill Luke.
Lucky continues to try and convince Luke that he is an alcoholic, but to no avail. With the exception of Tracy and Nikolas, the rest of the family are initially equally unconvinced; Lulu being particularly vocal in her disagreement. Riddled with guilt, but still in denial over his alcoholism, Luke descends into self-destruct mode, culminating in a stand-off whereby he tries to goad Jason into killing him. Jason resists the temptation, but the incident allows Lucky to finally convince Luke's family and friends that he needs help. Siobhan and Ethan spike Luke's drink during one of his binges, allowing Lucky to bring Luke to an abandoned warehouse and stage an organised intervention - he, Tracy, Ethan, Nikolas, Sonny, Carly and a hesitant Lulu all take part. One by one they plead with Luke to accept help, and warn Luke that they will all cut him out of their lives until he agrees. Lucky personally pleads with Luke to be the father that he always looked up to. However a furious and bitter Luke holds out and refuses, devastating Lucky.
In the midst of all this, there are some small joys for Lucky; the family crisis sees he and Nikolas finally reconcile. In order to avoid Siobhan being deported back to Ireland, Lucky also asks Siobhan to marry him. Although Siobhan is sceptical and wary of taking advantage of Lucky, she eventually agrees, and the two are married in a civil ceremony with only Nikolas in attendance.
Weeks after, and although Lucky and Tracy remain firm, the rest of the family are struggling to continue to shun an increasingly destructive Luke. Things come to a head during an altercation then Luke drunkenly verbally tears into Lulu, and then punches Lucky in the face. Luke finally accepts that he needs help, and is dropped off at rehab by Tracy. Lucky is hopeful that his father will recover and return a changed man, but is left devastated when Luke skips out on rehab that same night and disappears. The situation worsens when an increasingly distraught Lulu takes out all of her upset over Luke on Lucky; she drunkenly berates him for tearing the Spencers apart and unleashes her pent-up bitterness over the fact that Lucky was always Luke's favourite. Although Lulu immediately regrets her harsh words, a numbed Lucky takes them to heart, and decides he must set things right by finding Luke and bringing him back to Port Charles. Siobhan insists on accompanying him.