The '''effects of Hurricane Wilma in Florida''' concerns how Hurricane Wilma in 2005 affected the U.S. state of Florida in late October.  Initially, orange future prices soared on October 19, 2005.  As the system drew closer, schools and government offices closed on October 21.  Professional and college sports games were rescheduled during Wilma's advance towards Florida.  Evacuations were ordered for southwestern Florida and the Keys.  As the storm made landfall, a storm surge swept into coastal sections of southern Florida and high winds led to significant damage near and along Wilma's path, particularly to the power grid.  Some locations were without power for 2   3&nbsp;weeks after the storm.  Wilma spawned ten tornadoes in Florida.National Hurricane Center.  Retrieved on 2007-05-22.  At least 35 Wilma-related deaths were reported in the United States, all in Florida. Wilma was also blamed for at least 26 indirect deaths.Bonita News.  Retrieved 2005-10-26.NBC 6.  Retrieved on 2007-05-22.  Damage in Florida totaled $20.6&nbsp;billion (2005&nbsp;USD; $22.7&nbsp;billion 2008&nbsp;USD).National Hurricane Center.  Retrieved on 2007-01-26.
A mandatory evacuation of residents was ordered for the Florida Keys in Monroe County. However, media reports suggested that as many as 80% of residents may have ignored the evacuation order. County offices, schools and courts were closed Monday, October 24. At least 300 Keys evacuees were housed at the Monroe County shelter at Florida International University in Miami-Dade County.Monroe County, Florida (Oct. 23, 2005 12:45 PM).  Retrieved 2007-06-02.
All Collier County public schools were declared closed for Friday, October 21. The schools were closed to "allow parents and staff to prepare for the storm and potential evacuation", and also allowed "for needed preparation of schools to be used as hurricane shelters." The schools remained closed on Monday, October 24 as the hurricane made landfall.Collier County Public Schools (October 19, 2005).  Retrieved 2007-06-02.
Florida Gulf Coast University in Fort Myers completed an evacuation; classes were canceled until further notice. Eckerd College in St. Petersburg, Florida also evacuated by 5 p.m. EDT on October 20. All campuses of the University of South Florida, the University of Tampa and the University of Central Florida were closed on Monday, October 24.
Mandatory evacuations were in effect for all Collier County residents living West or South of US 41. Other areas that were included in the mandatory evacuation were Seagate, Parkshore, The Moorings, Coquina Sands, Olde Naples, Aqualane Shores, Port Royal and Royal Harbour. Hurricane shelters in the area were opened. Curfews were put in place for several cities in Lee and Collier counties. ''NBC-2.com''. Retrieved 2007-06-02. 
Anticipating high winds all public school districts south of Marion closed their schools on Monday, October 24 in order to prevent possible harm to county employees and students. The last places to issue this warning sat within the gap between bands as tornadoes were observed as far north as Sumter, Marion, Pasco, and Polk Counties. Schools in Palm Beach and Broward counties were closed for two weeks due to extended power outages and some physical damage to school buildings.  Schools in Collier and Miami-Dade counties were closed for a little over a week, including the University of Miami and Barry University.
Orange juice futures reached the highest level in six years on Wednesday, October 19, closing up 2.9 cents at $1.118 per pound due to the storm's expected damage to orange trees which would have compounded problems caused the previous year by Hurricanes Charley, Frances and Jeanne. ''AccuWeather.com'' (link dead)  As dynamic models moved the storm's track east over Florida, oil futures eased as worries of another direct hit on the oil producing regions of the Gulf of Mexico subsided.There were many robberies reported.
The NFL moved up its regular-season game between Kansas City Chiefs and Miami Dolphins to 7 p.m. on Friday, October 21 in preparation of the hurricane. The NCAA postponed two college football games scheduled in south Florida on Saturday, October 22. Georgia Tech vs. University of Miami was rescheduled for Saturday, November 19 and West Virginia vs South Florida was rescheduled for Saturday, December 3. The NHL rescheduled its Saturday, October 22 regular-season game between the Ottawa Senators and Florida Panthers to Monday, December 5. Due to roof damage caused by Wilma and the loss of power at the BankAtlantic Center, the Panthers also had to postpone their October 29 match up against the Washington Capitals. Furthermore, a concert by the industrial rock band, Nine Inch Nails, expected to have taken place Monday, October 24, was postponed and later canceled.  Key West's Fantasy Fest held around each Halloween was postponed until December.
After the hurricane had passed, a storm surge from the backwash of up to 8&nbsp;ft (2.4&nbsp;m) from the Gulf of Mexico completely inundated a large portion of the lower Keys. Low-lying areas of Key West and the lower Keys, including major tourist destinations were under up to 3&nbsp;ft (.9&nbsp;m) of water from the storm surge. 60% of the homes in Key West were flooded.
In the city of Fort Lauderdale, in Broward County, several highrise office buildings suffered extensive damage, including  One Financial Plaza, 110 (AutoNation) Tower, the 14-floor Broward County School Board building and the Broward County Courthouse, which was forced to remain closed for two weeks as a result of the storm. Broward County Public Schools also remained closed for two weeks, and some Miami skyscrapers and high-rises suffered severe damage during the storm. Even while the center of Wilma was still a long way away from Florida, its effects were felt from its expansive outer bands.
The Naples Airport was severely damaged by the hurricane, while areas like Immokalee and East Naples suffered extreme and widespread roof damage to numerous homes and communities. Out of the 170 signaled intersections in Collier County, 130 were destroyed. There was damage to the 90 high-rise condominiums in Coastal Naples, where some levels were blown out completely by the high winds brought by the storm (much like the damage in downtown Miami and Fort Lauderdale).  Ninety percent of all mobile homes in East Naples were destroyed, while 30% of the mobile homes in all of Collier County suffered the same fate. Widespread roof damage was evident across the county even outside the City of Naples. At least three deaths were blamed on Hurricane Wilma in Collier County, and widespread wind and water damage is commonplace. Most schools in Palm Beach County had extensive roof and building damage.  Also, power failure left schools closed for two weeks.  In Boca Raton, a city in southeastern Palm Beach County, the local Boca Raton Airport suffered extensive damage, including the collapse of two hangars, planes that had flipped over, and hangar doors which had blown in.  The airport reported $12&nbsp;million in damages, according to the ''South Florida Sun-Sentinel''.
Florida experienced eleven tornadoes during Wilma's transit. Broward, Collier, Hardee, Highlands, Indian River, Okeechobee, and Polk Counties were each struck once, and Brevard County experienced four. In addition, a tornado may have touched down in Miami-Dade County, causing damage to the South Beach Community Hospital.