3.0 (unofficial)
SVGA graphics card with 2MB of memory
DirectX 6.0 or higher
Quicktime 3.0 or higher
In the original game the countries are organized into an Eastern Alliance and a Western Alliance.  China, Mongolia and North Korea comprise the Eastern Alliance. The USA, Russia, 13 other countries and the United Nations comprise the Western Alliance.   Vietnam is included as an un-allied country.
Gamer created campaigns and scenarios have expanded this premise to include different regions of conflict, different alliances and other countries.
The original campaigns and scenarios expanded on this premise with a more detailed background story provided by SSI via an introductory video.  The video narrated hypothetical "future" events occurring from 2000-2004, i.e., after publication of the game and before the start of the campaigns and scenarios.
According to this video, both the USA and Russia reduce their military spendings.  Russia is in turmoil from food shortages and other internal conflicts.  China grows stronger militarily.  After invading Taiwan it initiates a plan to dominate all of Asia from Sakhalin Islands and Vladivostok in the east to Volgograd and Kazakhstan in the west; from Siberia in the north to Southeast Asia and Singapore in the south.  China justifies this as "reclaiming traditional Chinese territories".   
The USA sends its 7th Fleet to the Taiwan Straits to force China to withdraw.  Chinese air attacks sink 7th Fleet's flagship USS Abraham Lincoln (CVN-72), claiming it was in Chinese waters.  United States denounces this as an unprovoked attack and declares war on China.  The US is joined by the United Nations and most of its members.
Many campaigns and scenarios created by gamers diverge from this background story.
The game dynamics in ''PeG'' are essentially the same as those in ''PG2'' and SSI's earlier ''Generals'' games:  
Some specifics have been changed though so ''PeG's'' dynamics are not exactly the same as those of the others.  
Nine campaigns were included in the original release of ''PeG''.  Most of these are based on the idea that China grows increasingly powerful, runs low on resources and sets out to conquer Asia.  The Western Alliance led by the USA hopes to stop China but the conflict becomes World War III covering all of Asia plus Russia.
The original campaigns are:
In addition to the scenarios that are part of the campaigns, ''PeG'' was released with 103 stand-alone scenarios.  These can be played against the AI, against other human players using a hot-seat, via e-mail, via the Internet or LAN.
These stand-alone scenarios can be played from either the Western or Eastern side.   Several of the scenarios are multi-player:  2, 3 or 4 human players can play.
The most visible hallmark of the Living Battlefield series is "painted" maps   a single image of the whole battlefield.  This contrasts vividly with the discrete tiles used for each hex in ''Panzer General'', ''Allied General'', ''Pacific General'' and other hex-tile games.
New 16 bit maps in the Living Battlefield style have been created specifically for ''PeG'' which cover India, Pakistan and the Caucasus.  In addition, several tools have been developed which allow conversion of ''Panzer General 2'' maps to the PeG map graphics format.  This provides a map inventory for ''PeG'' of well over 600 maps covering Europe, North Africa, the Middle East, Asia and to a lesser extent the Americas and sub-Saharan Africa
The PeG community includes active and creative proponents of both approaches.
All three of these versions are unofficial, fan created modifications of ''People's General 1.0''.
Gamers have also produced ''PeG-WW1'' and ''Peg-Napoleonic'' variations although these have not been developed to the same extent as ''Red Danger Asia'', ''Red Danger Europe'' or ''PeG-WW2''.
1.  Several game review sites give the release date as August 31, 1998.  Others state ''PeG'' was released on September 15, 1998.  At least one site gives September 10, 1998 as the release date.