The '''Riverside County Sheriff's Department''' (RCSD, RSD), or '''Riverside Sheriff's Office''' (RSO), is a law enforcement agency in Riverside County, California. Overseen by an elected sheriff-coroner, the department polices unincorporated areas of Riverside County as well as many of the incorporated cities in the county by contract (see contract city).  The department is responsible for enforcing criminal law on all Native American tribal land within the county, as prescribed by Public Law 280, enacted in 1953, which transferred the responsibility of criminal law enforcement on tribal land from the federal government to specified state governments, which included California. The department also operates the county's jail system.
In addition to performing law enforcement and corrections roles, the department performs the functions of the coroner's office and marshal's office. In its coroner function, the department is responsible for recovering deceased persons within the county and conducting autopsies. When California reorganized its judicial system in the early 21st century and eliminated state marshal's offices, the department assumed responsibility for state courts within the county, providing court security and service of warrants and court processes.  The department also provides services such as air support, special weapons teams for high risk critical incidents, forensics services and crime laboratories, homicide investigations, and academy training to smaller law enforcement agencies within the county and in surrounding counties.
Riverside County was created from portions of San Bernardino and San Diego Counties on May 9, 1893. In the early history of the county, the sheriff's office was a one-person operation. As the county grew in population, so too did the department, eventually transforming into a modern full-service law enforcement agency.
The department made national headlines on May 9, 1980, when five men armed with shotguns, an assault rifle, handguns, and an improvised explosive device robbed the Norco branch of Security Pacific Bank. Since dubbed the "Norco shootout," deputies responding to the bank robbery call, armed only with their pistols, confronted the perpetrators outside the bank and a prolonged gun battle and subsequent vehicle pursuit ensued.  The aftermath of the incident left 33 patrol cars damaged or completely destroyed, one sheriff's helicopter shot down, three robbers imprisoned for life, two robbers dead, eight sheriff's deputies wounded, and one deputy killed in the line of duty. 
Today the Riverside County Sheriff's Department is responsible for 7,310 square miles, spreading over 200 miles in length, and embracing approximately 50 miles in width. This territory constitutes the third largest county in the state of California. Vast changes have occurred in Riverside County since its inception. The population, having increased from 13,745 in 1893, to more than 2,189,641 in 2010, ranks it fourth in population among California's counties behind Los Angeles, Orange, and San Diego Counties respectively. Expanding to keep up with the county's explosive growth, the Riverside County Sheriff's Department is now the second-largest sheriff's department in California, with a staff of over 3,000.
The Riverside County Sheriff's Department operates the county's jail system. The Riverside County Jail provides short-term incarceration services for the county, jailing subjects arrested and charged with felony crimes pending their court disposition as well as those convicted of misdemeanor crimes and sentenced to less than one year of incarceration. Services also include transportation of prisoners if necessary related to court appearances, and transferring prisoners between jurisdictions such as other counties, states, or the California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation. Jails are staffed by fully sworn deputy sheriffs as well as specialized correctional deputies. The county's jail system consists of the Robert Presley Detention Center (RPDC) in downtown Riverside, the Southwest Detention Center (SWDC) in French Valley near Murrieta, the Larry Smith Correctional Facility (SCF) in Banning, the Indio Jail, and the Blythe Jail.
The Riverside Sheriff's Academy is located at the Ben Clark Public Safety Training Center (BCTC) near the March Air Reserve Base. Sheriff's academy training at BCTC is standardized and certified by the California Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training (POST). Trainees receive a minimum of 24 weeks of intensive training.  The county's municipal police departments as well as other regional law enforcement agencies utilize the department's academy in training their own trainees. Upon successful completion of the academy, graduating deputy sheriff trainees also receive additional detention-specific training at the academy related to possible future jail assignments. BCTC is also the location of the sheriff's corrections and dispatch academies. In addition, BCTC provides ongoing advanced career training for the department and surrounding agencies.
BCTC is a public safety training center jointly operated by the Riverside County Sheriff's Department and the Riverside County Fire Department in cooperation with the California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection, the California State Fire Marshall, the California Highway Patrol, and Riverside Community College.
Also serves the Riverside County Regional Medical Center (contract fulfilled through the Moreno Valley Station).
A tribute to the Riverside County sheriff's deputies that made the ultimate sacrifice for their communities:
Updated March 2011