Mitchell had played in defence, on the wing and even filled in as emergency striker for Town.
Graham Mitchell signed professional for Huddersfield Town in 1986, after spending two years in the Academy system. Mitchell spent a period on loan, in 1993, at Bournemouth and played four games for them. After a few disagreements with then manager Neil Warnock, after playing 310 games and scoring 5 goals he was sold to Bradford City in 1994. He later returned in 2002 to take up coaching at the Huddersfield academy. And as of 2009 has held the roles of Caretaker Assistant Manager, Caretaker Manager (In Gerry Murphy's absence), Reserve Team Manager, U18's Coach and is now the Head of Academy, following Gerry Murphy's retirement.
Mitchell played for City between 1994 and 1996. During this spell Mitchell was a member of the 1995   96 play off promotion team. He moved to Raith Rovers on a free transfer in 1996. Mitchell played 79 games and scored one goal in all competitions for Bradford.
Mitchell played for Raith between 1996 and 1998; during this time he also had a spell on loan with Cowdenbeath. During his spell at Raith, Cardiff City showed interest in Mitchell and on 1 August 1998 he signed on a free transfer. He had played 23 games for Raith in all competitions. Mitchell also had a spell as captain at Raith.
Mitchell spent three years at Halifax where he played 144 games and scored four goals in all competitions. During his three year stint at Halifax, Mitchell began coaching at Huddersfield Town's academy. Mitchell had a spell as captain at Halifax and he wore the squad number 4. After retiring from professional football, Mitchell signed for non-league Bradford Park Avenue.
Mitchell played at least eight games for Park Avenue and during this spell he scored 3 goals in a week, he scored 2 goals in the game against Barrow, more than he had ever scored in a whole season. He scored at least 4 goals.
In another one of these games he was sent-off for swearing at spectators while receiving treatment for a head injury and throwing his captain's armband at the referee didn't help his cause.
He was released in 2003 and signed for old teammate Lee Sinnott at Farsley Celtic. Mitchell played at least four games and scored at least 1 goal. He is thought to have left in 2004.
He joined Huddersfield Town once again in 2002 to coach one of the youth sides. In 2007, Gerry Murphy, John Dungworth, John Vaughan, Martyn Booty and Mitchell teamed together to coach the Huddersfield Town side in the aftermath of Peter Jackson's dismissal. A year later, when Andy Ritchie was dismissed, Gerry Murphy and Mitchell took over as caretaker manager and caretaker assistant manager respectively. At the end of the 2007   08 season, Stan Ternent was given the Town job; he was dismissed in November, when Murphy and Mitchell were placed in temporary charge once again. The team played six, won four and lost two. Mitchell took charge of the team, when Murphy was ill, against Southend United which Huddersfield won 1   0. Lee Clark took over the next day. Mitchell is coach for Huddersfield Town's under-18 youth squad. In February 2009, he took over as head of the academy following the retirement of Gerry Murphy.
On Sunday 26 April 2009, a Centenary Matchday took place at The Galpharm Stadium which saw two teams, one managed by Andy Booth and the other managed by Mitchell, played each other full a full 90 minutes and have a penalty shootout. With both teams having a mix of fans, legends and staff Mitchell's team eventually beat Team Booth 12-11 on penalties after draiwng 6-6 in normal time. Mitchell also took a penalty in the shootout.
During Mitchell's spell as Caretaker Assistant Manager at Huddersfield, he was in charge of the Terriers' second string up until Paul Stephenson took over in February 2009.
Here is Mitchell's record as manager of the reserve side.