Upon first introduction Kate Howard is a 30-something year-old woman, famous for being the editor-in-chief of a high fashion magazine, similar to the character of Miranda Priestly in ''The Devil Wears Prada''.  Her history is told through bits of dialogue, primarily between her and the character Sonny Corinthos, played by Maurice Benard. Through these glimpses, it is revealed that Kate Howard was born Constanza Louise Falconeri, "Connie" Falconeri for short. She was raised in Bensonhurst, New York a blue-collar neighborhood, to an Italian American family, where she worked at a bakery and attended a catholic school called Sacred Heart in Brooklyn, New York (which may make reference to  or ).
 She attended Princeton University, on a full scholarship, and worked her way up the ranks to become the editor of the fictional top fashion magazine, ''Couture''. Since then, she has hidden her past as Connie Falconeri, claiming instead to be from Connecticut.
She and mob boss Sonny Corinthos dated as teenagers and had planned to run away together, but on the night they were to leave, she stood him up. She later explained to him that she wanted to pursue her dreams of having a career, something she could not do had she run away with Sonny.
The character was introduced to the show on May 8, 2007 when she walked into Sonny's office unannounced and demanded the use of a phone because her car had broken down. She at first pretended that she did not know Sonny, but he eventually recognized her as Connie Falconeri from Bensonhurst. Diane Miller, Sonny's lawyer, later mentioned that Kate Howard is considered one of the "100 Most Powerful Women in America" in the fictional world of General Hospital. She purchased a mansion next door to Sonny and proceeded to re-decorate to serve as her vacation residence, much to the annoyance of Carly Corinthos Jacks, Sonny's ex-wife. However, though Kate knows that Sonny is a mobster she is badly shaken when she witnessed Sonny physically threatening Jerry Jacks, and rethinks her desire to pursue a new relationship with him.
During a reception for a charity sponsored by the singer Eli Love, Kate was suffering from a headache and mistook a libido-enhancement pill for ibuprofen, which she found in her boss' jacket, Warren James. She then visited Sonny Corinthos, while she was under the effects of the drug, and seduced Sonny. On another occasion, Kate, who does not swim, rescued Morgan Corinthos from drowning in her pond. While she was in the pond, she was bitten by a snake and was hospitalized.
 She side swiped a police car and did not stop. She also has a prior traffic violation in which she also side swiped a parked car while she was in the Hamptons, but did not stop. She received a six months suspended license for the first violation. Kate cites this as one of the reasons why she moved to Port Charles. Her lawyer had advised her to not visit the Hamptons for a while and thus, she bought the house in Port Charles. She was released into Sonny's custody on August 14, 2007, after spending the night in jail. Diane Miller was attempting to work on a plea agreement for Kate. As a thank you for her work, Kate was going to reward her by scheduling her a fitting for a custom designer dress. The interim District Attorney, Ric Lansing, refused the plea agreement seeking to take revenge on Sonny through Kate.
Kate's friend and former lover was Trevor Lansing, Ric Lansing's father and he arrived in town on August 22, 2007. He blackmailed Ric, unbeknownst to Kate, and threatened him with losing custody of his daughter Molly if he did not accept reducing the charges against Kate.  The charges were reduced and a plea agreement was reached with a fine and community service.
Upon learning of Kate's close relationship with Sonny, Trevor contacted personal friends to remove advertisements from ''Couture''. He wanted to blackmail Kate into choosing between him and her career or Sonny. She chose her career. After a confrontation between her and Trevor, Kate was drugged and got into a car accident. She was later arrested and tried for reckless driving. She received 6 months of community service and forced to wear an ankle monitor thanks to Sonny blackmailing the judge. She is now doing community service as part of her 6-month community service sentence. Trevor had her fired from Couture magazine due to a breach of her contract. Kate has decided to become a fashion designer and start her own magazine. Jasper Jacks is financing the magazine. Kate moved back to Manhattan trying to get away from Sonny. Warren offered her her job at Couture. Nevertheless, Sonny went to Manhattan looking for her.
Sonny, after a few days in Manhattan, had to leave the city because of a restriction order against him. The restriction order was filed after he assaulted a man at an art gallery show on New Year's Eve. Kate briefly worked as a collaborator for ''Couture'' but is again in charge of the magazine.. Issue of January 28, 2008.(Kate "blows up the giagantic announcement that she is back up to head ''Couture''.) Sonny later came back to take Kate to Bensonhurst. They visited several memorable places from the youth and Sonny then proposed. Kate did not answer and ran away. She later went looking for Sonny in Port Charles and she told him that she did not accept his proposal because he does not love her as who she is now, he loves Connie from Bensonhurst. Megan Ward echoes her character's words; she stated that Kate "fears that Sonny is really in love with the girl she was and not the woman she has become.", page 36. Issue of February 5, 2007.
In Sept., 2008, Kate's cousin Olivia Falconeri moved to Port Charles to be her maid of honor.
An emotional Kate met with Jax. Megan Ward explains that her character was "feeling very lost" and that is "why she came clean to Jax.", page 18. Issue of February 19, 2008. She told him about her life as Connie in Bensonhurst. Jax questioned her about what her family thought about this. Before she could answer Carly interrupted. Sonny has asked the same question, which Kate has not answered. Fans and soap opera magazines speculate that the character of Kate Howard is keeping a secret which forces her to keep her real identity secret., page 4. Issue of February 11, 2008. (Jill Farren Phelps has stated that "Kate will reveal a well-hidden secret which explains why she is unable to embrace the woman she used to be and why she ran away from Sonny in Bensonhurst.")
Later, Kate met with Sonny in an attempt to reconcile with him and kissed him. Kate, while visiting a building she wanted as a based on operations for her new magazine, was shot by Sonny's son, Michael Corinthos, by accident. Sonny found her and rushed her to the hospital. Kate survived the surgery but knows that the gunshot wound took some years off her life. She forgave Michael for what happened.
Kate is now flirting with/dating Coleman Ratcliffe.
Kate and Sonny knew each other since their childhood in Bensonhurst, a tough Italian area of New York City. They often talk about their shared past and wonder what would have happened if Connie and Sonny had run off and got married. Kate and Sonny have been dating off and on since September 2007. Kate did not like Sonny's sons, finding them ill-behaved, until they became part of the package of dating Sonny. She helped Sonny with getting his daughter Kristina into a private school.
Sonny has cheated on her twice, once with Claudia Zacchara and secondly with ex-wife Carly Jacks on the way back to Port Charles after dropping off their son Michael in his permanent care facility. Sonny was worried that Carly was pregnant in late July, but it turned out to be a false alarm.
Sonny and Kate attempt to marry, but Kate was shot shortly after walking down the aisle. Sonny was stabbed on Halloween and saved by his ex-wife Carly Jacks. Kate learned from Jax that Sonny and Carly slept together again and ended things with him.
Kate learned that Sonny's ex wife Claudia Corinthos is the one that hired Ian to shoot Sonny (which lead to Michael getting shot instead). Kate also learns that Anthony is the one that shot her.
In 2010, after Dante was found out to be Sonny's son, Sonny and Kate have a conversation about Kate's knowledge of Dante and the fact that she kept it from him since they were teenagers.  Kate also acknowledges that she finally knows that they were never meant to be, with Sonny nodding his head in agreement.  It is also implied that Sonny doesn't hold a grudge that Kate didn't tell him about Dante.
 Pages 66-67. Issue of February 11, 2008. (Fans e-mail their opinions about the pairing of Sonny and Kate). Fans were disgusted in March 2009 when ABC announced that General Hospital was dropping Megan Ward to recurring status and Rick Hearst (Ric Lansing) off contract, which resulted in him last airing that June.http://www.soapcentral.com/gh/news/2009/0406-hearst_ward.php
Kate Howard is a woman full of contradictions. She is a character that is constantly trying to hide where she came from and who she really is, Connie Falconeri. Megan Ward says:
Megan Ward further adds:
Megan Ward stated in an interview with Soap Opera Weekly that "At least half the inspiration for the character is Anna Wintour, but she is an older woman who's had a long career. I'm not of that age yet, but I imagine Kate could become that person, eventually. I draw from Aerin Lauder, Estee Lauder's granddaughter, who runs the Estee Lauder company, and a well-known interior designer named Kelly Wearstler, who was one of the judges on Bravo's TOP DESIGN. What I loved about her was every week she had a completely different look."
Megan Ward has also stated that she relates more to Connie than to Kate because:
The character of Kate Howard is reminiscent of that of Miranda Priestly (portrayed by Meryl Streep) from ''The Devil Wears Prada'' and Anna Wintour, editor of ''Vogue''. Megan Ward has stated that she has also based her character on Aerin Lauder and Kelly Wearstler. Miranda Priestly's character is allegedly based on ''Vogue'' editor-in-chief Anna Wintour, although the author for The Devil Wears Prada, Lauren Weisberger, denies it.Weisberger, Lauren; ; randomhouse.com; retrieved September 3, 2006.
Anna Wintour and the character of Miranda Priestly share many similarities. The character of Kate Howard shares many characteristics with them as well. Further, Howard's character has a similar haircut to Wintour's signature hairstyle. This was unintentional; Megan Ward chose her haircut because she was looking for something practical.
In turn, the characters are different in that Wintour and Priestly are Londoners who did not attend college, whereas, Kate Howard is a New Yorker who attended Princeton University. Also, to date, she has no children, whereas Wintour and Priestly each have two.
Kate Howard's real name, Connie Falconeri, may also be allusive to ''The Godfather'''s Connie Corleone, who is the sister of Michael Corleone and Santino "Sonny" Corleone  (these names are in turn allusive to Michael "Sonny" Corinthos).