Channel 4 documentary ''The Human Footprint'' includes the following "interesting if true" statistic: "More households in the UK own two cars than two novels".  UK census shows 31% of households have 2 or more cars.  Various surveys put the number of people who don't read books or haven't bought a book in the last year at around a third.  Can anyone guess at Human Footprint's source on this, or provide other (better?) sources for UK book ownership statistics.  Thanks. -  01:26, 28 April 2007 (UTC)
I suspect that this is a misreading by the program of a different figure. I found this:
Hey!
I was wondering if anyone knew what the theme(s) of the book "Bloodletting & Miraculous Cures" is. As well, I was wondering if anyone could find any symbols/images in it. Thank you!!    The preceding   comment was added by   ( ) 04:47, 28 April 2007 (UTC).
Hallo, here is my last design of the map of England in 1683. Schottland has another color because it belongs to England through personal union, not through conquest. It is possible, that the syncronization isn't so good - may be you must double-click the image to get the actual version of the map. Thanks to all, especially   and  . --   08:39, 27 April 2007 (UTC) 
Two comments:
Who was stronger (in all means, military, economic, cultural influence...), the USA or the USSR during every period of the Cold war? I guess the west was somewhat stronger, but I don't know to which degree. Thanks. --  15:10, 28 April 2007 (UTC)
In many respects it is difficult to draw strict comparisons between the military power of Russia and the United States, and much depends on what point in time one's analysis begins; but in terms of conventional forces-tanks, guns, army divisions and the like-the old Soviet Union was considerably stronger than the United States at almost all stages in its history from 1945 onwards.  As you will see if you read the page on the Military history of the Soviet Union, the Russians had up to thirteen million men in arms by 1945, far stronger than the United States or any other nation.  Though this figure was reduced after the defeat of Germany, the Soviets still maintained a force of some five million.  The real weakness at this time, with regard to the United States, was the abscence of a nuclear capability.  This gap in offensive strength was made good in 1949 when the Russians tested their their first nuclear weapon.  From this point forward the chief thrust of Soviet military policy was to attain parity in nuclear arms with the United States, a position they achieved in strategic weapons by the late 1960s.  Even after the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks the Soviets continued to have a powerful arsenal which, by 1986, was reckoned to be the strongest in the world, with no less than 45,000 warheads, according to estimates supplied by the Natural Resources Defence Council.  In terms of Naval forces the Soviets made efforts to keep up with the west, sacrificing, to some degree, quality in favour of quantity.  
So, by the time of Leonid Brezhnev the Soviet Union was, in a number of respects, the strongest military power on the planet.  But this came at a huge cost.  The United States was able to maintain high levels of investment in both the military and the civilian economy; the Russians could not.  From the time of the first Five Year Plan under Stalin the chief emphasis had been on military investment at the expense of consumer goods of all kinds.  In the late 1980s as much as a quarter of Soviet economic output was being spent in the defence sector, with growing shortages in all other areas of the economy, from housing to food.  Even areas like health care, in which the Communists had always taken some pride, began to suffer.  Figures on infant mortality, for example, were so embarrassingly bad that they simply stopped being published.  The whole impressive military superstructure was built, to use a Marxist analogy, on a weak and weakening economic base.  The 'Race of the Economies' was comfortably won by the United States, stronger in all respects than the Soviets, even in periods of slump.
Cultural influences are the most difficult of all to determine, and it really depends where in the world one happens to be standing.  In most aspects of popular culture, particularly in cinema and music, the influence of the United States-even in the Communist world-was well ahead of the Soviet Union.  Russian directors, despite censorship and restrictions of all kinds, did make some very high quality movies, though these tended to have a limited 'art house' appeal in the west.  Russian writers maintined their influence in the world right through the Soviet years, though the best among them, notably Solzhenitsyn, Pasternak and Shalamov, often operated in the most disadvantageous circumstances.  But overall the Americans also won the battle of cultures.    18:33, 28 April 2007 (UTC)
Those two guys wear similar hats as shown in photos. Does it have a name? --  15:12, 28 April 2007 (UTC)
Ah, the politics of headgear!  I think what you have in mind is the military-style Peaked hat, with a visor to the front.  Hitler almosy always wore this for public appearances, and Stalin in his role as generalissimo.  However, you should also note that Stalin, earlier in his career, usually wore the kind of cloth cap favoured by Russian workers, while Hitler, in his more casual moments at the Berghof, was to be seen in a bourgeoise fedora.  For real style in hats you should check-out Mussolini, who, amongst other things, wore a fez!    17:07, 28 April 2007 (UTC)
Fair governments that depend upon source of revenue have always given favor to that source. Labor currently finds favor with government as the result of earned income. If earned income as the source of government revenue is replaced by sales will government then favor the consumer instead of labor and even more so the rich, who always have plenty left over after meeting basic needs and virtually anything else they want?   15:20, 28 April 2007 (UTC)
Typically, when thinking back to 20th century events, every decade has its own distinct flavour; the fashion, tastes, music, architecture and politics of 1950s were very different to those of the 1940s or the 1960s. But further back, would 10 years have such an effect on society? Would people in 13th century think the 1250s to be all that different from the 1260s?   19:25, 28 April 2007 (UTC)
If you're interested in the concept of an ever-quickening rate of change, you may want to read the book ''Future Shock''.  Personally, though, I believe there are some limits on the rate of change, such as humans only being able to change at a relatively slow rate (for example, many older people still don't use computers at all).   22:18, 28 April 2007 (UTC)
It seems to me that the more closely one researches a given era of the past, the more complex and changing it seems.  When asking whether 10 years would have much of an effect on society, it's only fair to compare societies of reasonably equivalent cohesion and communication.
And that's the short, mainly political list. How many people can honesty say they have the same feeling of the difference between the 1950s and the 1960s in, say, London, as they do of the difference between the 1670s and 1680s in, say, Boston? 
I'm not arguing that the size of "society" and the speed of communication has not been accelerating lately, for some of the planet's people.  But I do wonder how much of the sense of accelerating change is due to a general forgetting of the past and an increasing inability to imagine what life was like long ago.   07:46, 29 April 2007 (UTC)
I remembered hearing about one of the Louis being insane but can't remember which one. It was said that he used to capture mice and hang them and all sorts of other weird stuff. I've looked through the pages of Louis XIII to Marie Antoinette's son and cannot find record of it.   20:54, 28 April 2007 (UTC)
It's more likely to be Charles than Ludwig, as there is still some doubt over the nature and degree of the Bavarian king's madness.  All the French Louis' were sane enough, though some of them were highly eccentric.  I'm not familiar with any accounts of a king hanging mice.  It's worth remembering, too, that the historical record can occasionally be quite scurrilous, and there is often an explanatory gap between what did happen and what is occasionaly said to have happened.  Perhaps the most notorious example of this is ''The Secret History'' of Procopius, with its savage caricature of Justinian and Theodora.    22:52, 28 April 2007 (UTC)
I'm 17 years old, and my parents have been divorced for 12 years. Over that period of time, I have lived out of a suitcase and switched houses at LEAST twice a week, every week, for these past 12 years. how can my father get full custody of me?    The preceding   comment was added by   (       ) 22:05, 28 April 2007 (UTC).
I have never understood why the war with Japan became part of WII and not just another war that was happening at the same time.
While I realise both Gerrmany and Japan were reacting to similar issues, such as Treaty of Versailles, I don't see many other similarities.
Why for example, after Pearl Harbor did this lead to the US supporting Europe in defeating Germany rather than just Japan. It seems to me that it would seem sensible for both the Germans and UK to not get involved in another war when they had so much going on closer to home.
Why are these wars lumped together and given the single label "WII"?     &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;               23:22, 28 April 2007 (UTC)