One of the show's unique aspects was the "interview" sequences filmed in black and white and interspersed throughout each episode, where the characters would reveal their innermost thoughts and memories to the camera.
Lily Manning (Sela Ward) is a 40ish suburban soccer mom living in Deerfield, Illinois. Recently separated from her philandering husband Jake (Jeffrey Nordling), Lily is raising her two daughters, insecure, anxiety-ridden 14-year-old Grace (Julia Whelan), and wide-eyed, innocent 9-year-old Zoe (Meredith Deane). For support, she turns to her more free-spirited younger sister, Judy (Marin Hinkle), with whom she works at their bookstore called My Sister's Bookstore (renamed Booklovers later in the series).
Lily's life changes when, during the pilot episode, she meets Rick Sammler (Billy Campbell) in the principal's office of Grace's school, Upton Sinclair High School.
Rick is a single father and co-head of an architectural firm, Sammler/Cassili Associates, which is located in downtown Chicago. Rick has been divorced from his uptight ex-wife Karen (Susanna Thompson) for three years and has two children, Eli (Shane West), a 16-year-old basketball player at Sinclair High who suffers from a learning disability, and sensitive 12-year-old Jessie (Evan Rachel Wood), who longs for the days before her family's disintegration.
Lily and Rick share an immediate mutual attraction and begin dating. Their budding relationship causes problems in both of their respective families. Grace strongly objects to Lily and Rick's relationship as she still hopes to see her parents get back together. Karen, a public interest attorney at the downtown law firm of Harris, Riegert, and Sammler, is worried about the toll Rick's new relationship would take on their children, particularly Jessie, who is shy and emotionally fragile. She is also working through her own feelings of jealousy that Rick is moving on to a new relationship.
In addition to Lily and Rick's relationship, the show also focused to a lesser degree on their exes, Jake and Karen, and their own struggles to move on in a post-divorce environment.
Lily is in the process of divorcing her restaurateur husband, Jake. She is reluctant to begin dating again due to the sensitivities of her daughters, who are still emotional about the divorce. She meets and is instantly attracted to divorced architect Rick Sammler. However, their new relationship is complicated by Lily's many remaining emotional and financial issues with Jake. Grace and Eli become close when she becomes his tutor.  Judy has a relationship with Rick's partner, Sam Blue (Steven Weber) before discovering Sam is married.  
Lily and Jake's divorce is finalized, and she hopes to spend more time with Rick. However, Rick becomes sidetracked by difficulties at work and has to begin working with unscrupulous developer Miles Drentell (David Clennon, reprising his role from the series ''thirtysomething''). Things become difficult for Lily when Rick's project runs into legal difficulties and his ex-wife Karen is hired to represent the opposition.  Jessie flirts with an eating disorder, and begins to address her problems with the help of a therapist (played by show producer Edward Zwick).  Jake's girlfriend Tiffany announces she is pregnant.  At the end of season two, Rick has to dissolve his architectural firm and Lily and Rick get married.
Rick resumes his partnership with Sam Blue, now divorced, to design a hotel for a new client.  Sam and Judy try to be friends but eventually resume their relationship.  Jake and Tiffany have a baby girl and eventually decide to marry.  Grace develops a crush on her English teacher, Mr. Dimitri (Eric Stoltz); although their relationship never became sexual, an investigation eventually forces Mr. Dimitri to leave the school.  Jessie discovers she is attracted to another girl, Katie (Mischa Barton).  Karen deals with her depression; just as she is starting to make progress, she is hit by a car, leading to months of painful rehabilitation where she meets physical therapist Henry Higgins (DB Woodside).  Lily faces domestic struggles when her mother begins to show signs of Alzheimer's Disease and her brother Aaron (Patrick Dempsey), who is schizophrenic, wants to move in with his girlfriend.  By the end of the season, Rick and Lily face big decisions when he is offered a job in Australia and she is offered a nationally syndicated radio show.  Their ultimate decision is never shown, and in the last moments of the series finale, Lily reveals she is pregnant.
It originally aired on ABC from 1999 to 2002.
In the U.S it was in syndication on Lifetime Real Women the spinoff channel from Lifetime Television. The channel stopped running ''O&A'' in April 2005, and no American outlet presently carries the show.
The series was filmed at the Century Studio Corporation sound stages in Culver City, California, and also on location in the Los Angeles area.
Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment '''(formerly Buena Vista Home Entertainment)''' released Season 1 on November 5, 2002, mere months after the series finale.  It was expected that the remaining two seasons would be released soon afterward.  However, it took three more years and numerous petition drives for season two to be released, which occurred on August 23, 2005.  A little over a month later, on September 30, 2005, news broke about the release of the third and final season, which was slated to occur on January 10, 2006, but by October 2005 the title was delayed and has been ever since, with no explanation.  It was almost two years before another official word was uttered on the subject and in July 2007, it was reported that Buena Vista's license on the program was soon to expire and, as a result, could lead to a new company acquiring the distribution rights to the title and thus a potential third season release.