In preparation for Weihnachten (Christmas), many German families celebrate Advent. This is a time of religious preparation for the arrival of das Christkind (the Christ Child). Traditional advent activities include the Adventskranz (Advent wreath), which is set up four weeks before Christmas. Four candles adorn the wreath, and a new one is lit each week. Families often sing Christmas carols as they gather around the wreath to celebrate the preparation and Christmas season.
Children also enjoy the Christmas calendar, which contains 24 doors (one for each day of December leading up to Christmas). Children open one door each day, and find a chocolate treat awaiting them. Many of the calendars also include pictures inside the doors, often Christmas-related.
Each year, millions flock to Nuremberg for the Christkindlesmarkt (Christmas market). Visitors enjoy booths, entertainment, and food. Famous Christmas-time treats include Lebkuchen (gingerbread), stollen (fruit cake), and marzipan (confectionary often made into sweets).
The Weihnachtsbaum (Christmas Tree) is usually put up in the afternoon of December 24. The trees can be bought at special traders' sites, but some Germans may still go into the forests and cut one themselves.  The event of gathering the Christmas tree often involves the drinking of Gluhwein.
Traditionally, on ''Heiligabend'' (Christmas Eve) a simple meal will be prepared and served before or after the ''Bescherung'' ("time for exchanging gifts"), in contrast to the big meal on Christmas Day that is eaten in certain other countries. A typical meal on ''Heiligabend'' may include Fish, Duck, Fondue or Raclette.
In some families the whole family comes together; in others December 24 is celebrated only by the close family, whereas the larger family (grandparents, uncles & aunts, etc.) will visit on the first or second Day of Christmas (December 25 and 26 respectively).
Before the ''Bescherung'' (gift giving) begins, many Germans go to church. Christmas masses/services often last around one hour. Families with children go to a children's mass which is usually shorter and dramatised with a ''Krippenspiel'', which is a nativity play.
While everyone else is at church, one of the adults prepares the Christmas tree and turns on electric lights or lights decorative candles, and puts on festive Christmas music and places the gifts under the tree. 
When the family comes back from the church, the living room is locked. The children must wait to enter into the prepared room until a little bell rings. This bell marks the departure of  the Christ Child (''Christkind'') who, according to tradition, brings the presents (instead of Saint Nicholas or Santa Claus). Revealing the decorated Weihnachtsbaum (Christmas tree) with all the presents is a big surprise. For the ''Bescherung'', the only light comes from the Christmas tree lights (in the past real candles, today electric lights rather than candles).
Many families will sing traditional Christmas carols or play music on flutes and/or guitars around the tree before opening the gifts.
The gifts lie under the tree, wrapped in colorful paper, and the children unwrap them before the big Christmas feast. Adults may also share gifts while the children are opening theirs. Many families also prepare decorated paper bags or carton plates (''Weihnachtsteller'') for each of the children and adults. These are full of treats and are often in the shape of angels or Santa Claus, who is called ''Weihnachtsmann'' in German.
This is just one version. The celebration of Christmas in Germany varies by region. In many parts there are no presents underneath the tree but the Weihnachtsmann (Santa Claus) actually appears in person. The Weihnachtsmann (normally played by a relative) knocks on the door while the family sits together. Once he is let in, he puts his sack and 'rute' (shepards stick) aside and greets the family. He then asks the child or children to perform by singing a Christmas song or reciting a poem. He then asks if they were naughty or nice. Most children admit that they have not always been nice, so the Weihnachtsman wants the promise that they do better next year before giving all their presents. He then retreats and the family spends the rest of the evening together enjoying their gifts and company.
On the first or second Day of Christmas (25th and 26th), many of the typical Christmas meals will be served. The most common include goose, chicken, fondue (with many types of meat), raclette and lamb.
The Christmas Tree is also decorated with candies and chocolates (''Kringel''), which can be eaten when the Christmas Tree is being "plundered" (''geplundert'') on December 25. The Christmas tree is disposed after the second week of January, often by the municipal waste management.