This template is part of the  .
These selected parameters can be used to form a completely functional Infobox. The template can be pasted into a new article.  See below for working examples.
This table describes all parameters which can be used in building infoboxes. Only the name parameter must be assigned a value.
Depending on the value of the iucn_category parameter, one of the following banners will be displayed below the name. Valid values are Ia, Ib, II, III, IV, V and VI. For more information read the World Commission on Protected Areas article,
A few cells allow alternate parameter names which can be used to generate an appropriate label. Editors should probably not be overly concerned with using the correct label unless using the wrong label would be a blatant error.
Protected areas are often created as the result of a governmental procedure. For example, in the United States, national parks are ''established'' by an act of congress, National Monuments are usually ''created'' by presidential proclamation, and wilderness areas are ''designated'' by an act of congress. National Park Service Affiliated Areas are ''authorized''.
Some areas are privately own and it might be inappropriate to use the label ''Governing body''. For example, the Aleutian World War II National Historic Area is affiliated with the National Park Service but is owned by the Ounalashka Corporation.
Any image of a map showing the location of the protected area can be used. There are two methods by which maps using a marker can be displayed. 
A marker can be superimposed on one of a set of special map templates. If a valid map name is specified this is the method the template will attempt to use. To display a marker the geographic coordinates must be specified using the parameters lat_d, long_d, etc. The marker will not be displayed if the  template is used. See the documentation for . The parameters for this template map to a subset of the parameters for Location map. A map template can be found using these sources:
All of the names begin with the words "Location map" followed by the area covered. The value you need to specify is the area name. The map template for the for Alberta, Canada is  . In this case specify map=Canada Alberta. For example:
Many of the maps for large areas in this set of templates use equirectangular projection. Large scale maps, using this projection, look different than those with which most are familiar. However, there are some large area maps that that use a familiar map projection. A list of large area maps that do not use equirectangular projection can be found  .
To use the USA shaded relief map use map=USA2 and relief=1 or use map=USA relief. Other relief maps are available. See  
First, the x and y coordinates in pixels must be found using a map image with a width of 288px. Use the upper left hand corner as the origin. The sub-template  uses these special coordinates to superimpose the marker on the map image showing the location of the protected area.
The maximum and default display width is 283px, but smaller maps can be displayed by setting map_width to a different value.
Yosemite National Park is located at locator_x=20 from the left of the image and locator_y=84 from the top. You can experiment by pasting this example code into a   and substituting your own values.
The articles created using this template include an hCard microformat. For more information read  .