A '''station model''' is a symbolic illustration showing the weather occurring at a given reporting station. Meteorologists created the station model to plot a number of weather elements in a small space on weather maps. Maps filled with dense station-model plots can be difficult to read, but they allow meteorologists, pilots, and mariners to see important weather patterns.
Station model plots use an internationally-accepted coding convention that has changed little since August 1, 1941. Elements in the plot show the key weather elements, including temperature, dewpoint, wind, cloud cover, air pressure, pressure tendency, and precipitation.Dr Elizabeth R. Tuttle (2005).  J. B. Calvert. Retrieved on 2007-05-10.
Weather maps primarily use the station model to show surface weather conditions, but the model can also show the weather aloft as reported by a weather balloon's radiosonde or a pilot's report.
Station model plots use a mixture of metric and Imperial units depending on the map's location and what is being shown.  Surface maps in the United States primarily use Imperial units, such inches, degrees Fahrenheit, and knots. Most of the world, however, uses metric measurements for everything but wind speed, which is shown in knots.
The station model uses a wind barb to show both wind direction and speed. The wind barb shows the speed using "flags" on the end.
  In the United States, the change to the modern convention of flags shown on one side of the staff to indicate wind speed took effect on August 1, 1941.
  The circle in the middle of the station model represents cloud cover.  In the United Kingdom, when the observation is taken from an automated weather observation site, the shape is a triangle.  If the shape is completely filled in, it is overcast.  If conditions are completely clear, the circle or triangle is empty.  If conditions are partly cloudy, the circle or triangle is partially filled in.  The cloud cover shape has different looks depending upon how many oktas (eighths of the sky) are covered by cloud.  A sky half full of clouds would have a circle that was half white and half black.  Below the shape indicating sky cover, the station model can indicate the coverage of low clouds, in oktas, and the ceiling height in hundreds of feet.  The ceiling height is the height at which more than half the sky is covered by clouds.
For pilots, knowledge of the sky cover helps determine if visual flight rules are being met.  Knowing the degree of cloud cover can help determine whether or not various weather fronts, such as cold fronts or warm fronts, have passed by a location.  A nephanalysis, contouring areas that are cloudy with scalloped lines, can be performed to indicate a system's cloud and precipitation pattern.  This technique is rarely performed nowadays, due to the prevalence of satellite imagery worldwide.
Above or below the shape indicating sky cover can lie a symbol indicating cloud type.  One cloud type is depicted for each of three possible cloud layers, if known.  The top two cloud layer types are depicted above the sky cover circle in the station model, while the lowest cloud type is indicated below the sky cover circle.  The symbols used for clouds emulate the cloud shape.  Cirrus is indicated by a couple hooks, cumulus are indicated by a mound shape, with cumulonimbus indicated with an upside down trapezoid on top of the cumulus symbol to indicate its anvil.  Since the station model has limited room, when there is more than one cloud type present per level, the cloud type with the highest priority is included.  Knowing the cloud type at various locations can help determine whether or not a weather front has passed by a particular location.  A low deck of stratus could indicate a station is still north of a warm front, while thunderstorms can indicate the approach of a squall line or cold front.
Image:Lowcloudsymbols.gif|Low cloud types
Image:Midcloudcymbols.gif|Mid cloud types
Image:Highcloudsymbols.gif|High cloud types
To the left of the cloud shape in the center of the station model is the symbol depicting present weather.  The present weather symbol depicts the current weather which normally is obstructing the visibility at the time of observation.  The visibility itself is shown as a number, in statute miles in the United States and meters elsewhere, describing how far the observer can see at that time.  This number is located to the left of the present weather symbol.  For pilots, knowledge of the horizontal visibility helps determine if they are flying through instrument meteorological conditions, such as foggy or smokey conditions, as well as areas of intense precipitation.   Present weather depicted with the station model can include:
To left of center in the station model, the temperature and dewpoint are plotted.  Within the United States on surface weather maps, they are still plotted in degrees Fahrenheit.  Otherwise, they will be in units of degrees Celsius.  This knowledge is important to meteorologists because when this data is plotted on a map, isotherms and isodrosotherms (lines of equal dewpoint) are easily analyzed, either by man or machine, which can help determine location of weather fronts.
On the top right corner of the model for a surface weather map is the pressure, showing the last two integer digits of the pressure in millibars, or hectopascals, along with the first decimal.  For instance, if the pressure at a certain location is 999.7&nbsp;hPa, the pressure portion of the station model will read 997.  Although the first digit or two of the pressure is left off, other nearby stations give away whether or not the first digits is a 10 or a 9.  Most of the time, choosing first digits that would lead to a value nearest to 1000 works out best.  The plotting of this value within the station model allows for the analysis of isobars on weather maps.  Within maps which plot data on constant pressure surfaces, the pressure is replaced with the height of the pressure surface.
The time of the day must be considered, as there are two natural rises per day (locally around 10&nbsp;am and 10&nbsp;pm) and two natural falls per day (locally around 4&nbsp;am and 4&nbsp;pm).  These daily changes in pressure can mask the movement of pressure systems and fronts past a location.  The lowest natural dip in the pressure, in a stagnant weather pattern, occurs around 4&nbsp;pm while the highest natural peak in pressure occurs around 10&nbsp;am.  Once plotted on a map, the analysis of isallobars (lines of equal pressure change) can be plotted on a map, which can indicate the direction of motion of high and low pressures systems across the map domain.
Station models can have past weather plotted within them, which would be located just under the pressure tendency.  They indicate the type of weather experienced during the past six hours.  The weather types are limited to obstructions of visibility and precipitation.