For solar power, South Asia has the ideal combination of both high solar insolation  and a high density of potential customers.
Cheap solar can bring electricity to a major chunk of subcontinent's people who still live off-grid, bypassing the need of installation of expensive grid lines. Also since the costs of energy consumed for temperature control squarely influences a regions energy intensity, and with cooling load requirements roughly in phase with the sun's intensity, cooling from intense solar radiation could make perfect energy-economic sense in the subcontinent. 
However, a thriving market for solar technology may only develop when it becomes competitively cheaper.
In Bangladesh, a number of domestic solar energy systems are in use in houses around the country.  The use of solar energy on this scale is advantageous as 75% of homes in the country do not have access to mains electricity.  The World Bank is backing a programme of making solar energy available to the public in Bangladesh, as part of the Rural Electrification and Renewable Energy Development Project (REREDP), which subsidizes solar energy systems.
A typical 'solar home system' can power four to six 'low energy' lights, plus a socket for TV, radio or battery recharging, and a mobile telephone charging unit, too.  Each system consists of a solar photovoltaic panel, mounted on the house roof. Depending on its size, this provides between 40W and 135W of electricity in full sunlight (the most common being 50W).
BRAC is also a supplier and installation company in Bangladesh. Others company working on soalar energy are Grameen Shakti, RSF and Hilfulfujal.
Rahimafrooz is a major supplier of batteries and they are also supplying solar components (imported) for the programme. It has also installed centralised systems, water pumps, street lights, and solar-powered telecom solutions(as a subcontractor of Ericson) to various organisations, totalling about 448KWp.
Digital Technology also doing research and development in solar pv products like solar billboard lighting, mini grid system for irrigation etc. They are the first company doing solar billboard lighting in Bangladesh as well as world.
In China there now are six factories producing at least 2 MW/year each of monocrystalline, poly-crystalline and non-crystalline Photovoltaic cells. These factories include the LDK Solar Co , Wuxi Suntech Solar Energy Co., Ltd., which produces approximately 50 MW/year of solar cells and photovoltaic modules; the Yunnan Semi-conductor Parts Plant, which manufactures approximately 2 MW/year of mono-crystalline cells; the Baoding Yingli Solar Energy Modules Plant, which manufactures approximately 6 MW/year of polycrystalline cells and modules; the Shanghai Jiaoda Guofei Solar Energy Battery Factory, which produces approximately 1 MW/year of modules; and the Shanghai PV Science and Technology Co., Ltd., which produces approximately 5 MW/year of modules.
China has become a world leader in the manufacture of solar photovoltaic technology, with its six biggest solar companies having a combined value of over $ 15 billion. Around 820 megawatts of solar PV were produced in China in 2007, second only to Japan. .Suntech Power Holdings Co based in Jiangsu, is the world's third- biggest supplier of solar cells.. 
There are some obstacles to the further development of the Chinese solar energy sector that China faces. These obstacles include the lack of a nationwide comprehensive photovoltaic (PV) plan, the lack of updated facilities and sufficient financial resources to support PV research at research institutes, the lack of sufficient facilities and resources at companies manufacturing PV products, the failure of companies to be able to produce high quality, reliable and low cost PV products and the relatively weak educational and training opportunities in China for PV science and technology. 
About 50 MW of installed solar capacity was added in 2008, more than double the 20 MW in 2007, but still a relatively small amount. According to some studies, the demand in China for new solar modules could be as high as 232 MW each year from now on until  2012. The government has announced plans to expand the installed capacity to 1,800 MW by 2020. If Chinese companies manage to develop low cost, reliable solar modules, then the sky is the limit for a country that is desperate to reduce its dependence on coal and oil imports as well as the pressure on its environment by using renewable energy.
In 2009 centre to the PRC Government   s plans is the recently announced "Golden Sun" stimulus program. Under this program the Ministry of Finance will subsidize half of the total construction
According to the speech given by the Chinese President Hu Jintao's at the UN climate summit held on September 22, 2009 in New York, China will intensify effort and adopt ambitious plans to plant enough forest to cover an area the size of Norway and use 15 percent of its energy from renewable sources within a decade.
India is both densely populated and has high solar insolation, providing an ideal combination for '''solar power in India'''. Much of the country does not have an electrical grid, so one of the first applications of solar power has been for water pumping, to begin replacing India's four to five million diesel powered water pumps, each consuming about 3.5&nbsp;kilowatts, and off-grid lighting. Some large projects have been proposed, and a 35,000&nbsp;km   area of the Thar Desert has been set aside for solar power projects, sufficient to generate 700 to 2,100&nbsp;gigawatts.
The Indian Solar Loan Programme, supported by the United Nations Environment Programme has won the prestigious Energy Globe World award for Sustainability for helping to establish a consumer financing program for solar home power systems. Over the span of three years more than 16,000 solar home systems have been financed through 2,000 bank branches, particularly in rural areas of South India where the electricity grid does not yet extend.
Launched in 2003, the Indian Solar Loan Programme was a four-year partnership between UNEP, the UNEP Risoe Centre, and two of India's largest banks, the Canara Bank and Syndicate Bank.
According to Development Counsellors International (DCI), a United States marketing company, India is the second best country, after China, for business investment. United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) has reported that India has seen a 12% increase in investment in the renewable energy sector with an investment of $3.7 billion in 2008. The largest share was asset finance at $3.2 billion which grew by 25%. The clean renewable energy includes wind, solar, biomass and small-hydro projects. The major portion of investment has been made in wind energy sector. The investment in wind energy sector grew at 17% from $2.2 billion to $2.6 billion.
In 2008, Korea came 4th in the list of installed PV capacity according to EPIA statistics as a result of the favorable feed-in tariff system with a cap of 500MW in 2008. According to Displaybank, the new    PV Market Creation Plan    announced in 2009 is expected to boost the Korean PV installment market to increase to 200MW by 2012. The government further announced plans to increase more than double its financing for renewable R&D projects to 3.5 trillion won ($2.9/  1.9bn) by 2013. The government also plans to expand its system of tax breaks to cover new technologies in solar such as wind and thermal power, low-emission vehicles and rechargeable batteries etc.
The average amount of daily sunlight in Pakistan is nine and half hours, there are few cloudy days even in the wettest regions. Eight power generation plants have been installed and eleven are in various stages of completion. Further feasibility studies are undergoing. In December 1981 the first solar photovoltaic system was commissioned, located in Mumniala (a village 60&nbsp;km from Islamabad). Four solar systems has been commissioned in Khukhera (Lasbela district), Ghakar (Attock district), Malmari (Thatta district) and Dittal Khan Leghari, Digri (Mirpurkhas district).