India is densely populated and has high solar insolation, an ideal combination for using '''solar power in India'''. India is already a leader in wind power generation. In the solar energy sector, some large projects have been proposed, and a 35,000&nbsp;km2 area of the Thar Desert has been set aside for solar power projects, sufficient to generate 700 GW to 2,100 GW.
 Under the plan, the use of solar-powered equipment and applications would be made compulsory in all government buildings, as well as hospitals and hotels. On November 18, 2009, it was reported that India was ready to launch its National Solar Mission under the National Action Plan on Climate Change, with plans to generate 1,000 MW of power by 2013.
  The daily average solar energy incident over India varies from 4 to 7&nbsp;kWh/m2 with about 1500   2000 sunshine hours per year (depending upon location), which is far more than current total energy consumption. For example, assuming the efficiency of PV modules were as low as 10%, this would still be a thousand times greater than the domestic electricity demand projected for 2015.
Solar power is currently prohibitive due to high initial costs of deployment. To spawn a thriving solar market, the technology needs to be competitively cheaper (i.e. attaining cost parity with fossil or nuclear energy). India is heavily dependent on coal and foreign oil, a phenomenon likely to continue until non-fossil/renewable energy technology becomes economically viable in the country. The cost of production ranges from 15 to 30 per unit compared to around 5 to 8 per unit for conventional thermal energy.
The Australian government has awarded UNSW 5.2 million to train next-generation solar energy engineers from Asia-Pacific nations, specifically India and China, as part of the Asia-Pacific Partnership on Clean Development and Climate (APP). Certain programmes are designed to target for rural solar usage development.
Lack of electricity infrastructure is one of the main hurdles in the development of rural India. India's grid system is considerably under-developed, with major sections of its populace still surviving off-grid. As of 2004 there are about 80,000 unelectrified villages in the country. Of these villages, 18,000 could not be electrified through extension of the conventional grid. A target for electrifying 5,000 such villages was set for the Tenth National Five Year Plan (2002   2007). As of 2004, more than 2,700&nbsp;villages and hamlets had been electrified, mainly using solar photovoltaic systems. Developments in cheap solar technology are considered as a potential alternative that allows an electricity infrastructure consisting of a network of local-grid clusters with distributed electricity generation. It could allow bypassing (or at least relieving) the need to install expensive, lossy, long-distance, centralised power delivery systems and yet bring cheap electricity to the masses.
Projects currently planned include 3000 villages of Odisha, which will be lighted with solar power by 2014.
Solar PV water pumping systems are used for irrigation and drinking water. The majority of the pumps are fitted with a 200   3,000&nbsp;watt motor that are powered with 1,800&nbsp;Wp PV&nbsp;array which can deliver about 140,000&nbsp;liters of water per day from a total head of 10&nbsp;meters. By 30&nbsp;September, 2006, a total of 7,068 solar PV water pumping systems had been installed.
Solar driers are used to dry harvests before storage.
Bangalore has the largest deployment of rooftop solar water heaters in India.  These heaters will generate an energy equivalent of 200 MW every day .
Bangalore is also the first city in the country to put in place an incentive mechanism by providing a rebate (which has just been increased to 50) on monthly electricity bills for residents using roof-top thermal systems.  These systems are now mandatory for all new structures.
Pune, another city in the western part of India, has also recently made installation of solar water heaters in new buildings mandatory.
Per capita land availability is a scarce resource in India. Dedication of land area for exclusive installation of solar arrays might have to compete with other necessities that require land. The amount of land required for utility-scale solar power plants   currently approximately 1&nbsp;km2 for every 20   60&nbsp;megawatts (MW) generated   could pose a strain on India's available land resource. The architecture more suitable for most of India would be a highly-distributed set of individual rooftop power generation systems, all connected via a local grid.  However, erecting such an infrastructure, which does not enjoy the economies of scale possible in mass, utility-scale, solar panel deployment, needs the market price of solar technology deployment to substantially decline, so that it attracts the individual and average family size household consumer. That might be possible in the future, because PV is projected to continue its current cost reductions for the next decades and be able to compete with fossil fuel.
While the world has progressed substantially in production of basic silicon mono-crystalline photovoltaic cells, India has fallen short of achieving the worldwide momentum. India is now in 7th place worldwide in PV cell production and 9th place in solar thermal systems, with nations such as Japan, China, and the US currently ranked far ahead. Globally, solar is the fastest growing source of energy (though from a very small base) with an annual average growth of 35%, as seen during the past few years.
Some noted think-tanks recommend that India should adopt a policy of developing solar power as a dominant component of the renewable energy mix, since being a densely populated region in the sunny tropical belt,  the subcontinent has the ideal combination of both high solar insolation and therefore a big potential consumer base density.  In one of the analyzed scenarios, India can make renewable resources such as solar the backbone of its economy by 2050, reining in its long-term carbon emissions without compromising its economic growth potential.
The government of India is promoting the use of solar energy through various strategies. In the latest budget for 2010/11, the government has announced an allocation of  towards the Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission and the establishment of a clean energy fund. It is an increase of  from the previous budget. This new budget has also encouraged private solar companies by reducing customs duty on solar panels by 5% and exempting excise duty on solar photovoltaic panels. This is expected to reduce the cost of a roof-top solar panel installation by 15   20%. The budget also proposed a coal tax of 1 per metric ton on domestic and imported coal used for power generation. Additionally, the government has initiated a Renewable Energy Certificate (REC) scheme, which is designed to drive investment in low-carbon energy projects.
The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE)provides 70 percent subsidy on the installation cost of a solar photovoltaic power plant in North-East states and 30 percentage subsidy on other regions