Brian Fechino is a guitarist who grew up in Virginia where at the age of 8 began learning as much about the guitar as possible. By 13 he was not only playing but, tearing guitars apart and putting them back together just to see how they worked. Inspired by all the classic rock, blues, and jazz he could find, he set out to create his own personal style. At 20 he moved from Virginia and spent 7 years in Nashville doing sessions for singer/songwriters and playing a nonstop tour of blues and country road gigs. It's there he started doing his own instrumental records pulling from all the great influences Nashville had shown him. He later moved to Los Angeles to see what the west coast had to offer. Oddly enough it offered him an east coast gig with the Virginia based "Pat McGee Band" with whom he has been a member for since 2000. While still living in L.A. he recorded his second solo instrumental record. Finding it hard to stay in L.A. while with an east coast based band, Brian moved back to Nashville then onto New York where he now resides. By the end of 2008 he finished his third instrumental release. Currently he splits his time between producing singer/ song writers, playing guitar and bass on sessions, touring with the Pat Mcgee Band, Keith Kane, Brian Fechino and Friends, Benjy Davis Project and a host of others.
Brian was a member of Rosebud for 8 years with future GWAR drummer Brad Roberts, Steve Covert on bass, and Lee Harris on vocals.  After Rosebud broke up in 1991, he formed the band Groovestone with other Richmond musicians, notably future Pat McGee Band bandmates John Small and Chris Williams. While living in Nashville Fechino hosted many blues jams, played on several sessions for various artists and toured with The Norris Twins, Delicious Blues Stew and Chris DiCroce.
In the late 1990s Fechino started sitting in with the Pat McGee Band, often to sub for their regular guitarist, Al Walsh, when he was unable to make a gig.  He eventually lent a hand in recording their major-label debut, ''Shine''.  
Fechino moved to Los Angeles in 2001, and on January 19 he was asked to play on the band's appearance on The Late Late Show with Craig Kilborn, after which he was made a full member of the band.
Fechino's role with PMB is much wider than his guitar duties; he earned the nickname "Techno" from his bandmates for his soundboard skills, and has mixed and/or produced several of the band's projects including the EP ''Drive-By Romance'' found on iTunes, the bonus acoustic tracks on the Kirtland release of ''Save Me'' and the Wolf Trap portion of the ''Vintage Stages Live'' DVD.
While in the Pat McGee Band, Brian has had the opportunity to sit in and jam with many notable acts including but not limited to: Sister Hazel, Vertical Horizon, Blues Traveler, Stroke 9, Boys Gone Wild, Michael Tolcher, Josh Kelley, OAR, The Samples, Better Than Ezra, Hootie and the Blowfish, Cowboy Mouth, Edwin McCain, Hanson, The Kin, Howie Day, Vaco, Five Times August, Fransico Vidal, Drew Copeand, Getaway Car, The Clarks, Steven Kellogg & the Sixers, Gavin Degraw, Marc Broussard, David Ryan Harris, Keaton Simons, Matt Nathanson, Maroon 5, Train, Shawn Mullins, Dexter Freebish, Carbon Leaf, plus many, many more.
Besides the producing he has done for the Pat McGee Band, Fechino produced and laid down guitar for Boston singer Nicole Russo on her self-released, self-titled debut. 
Brian also played guitar and produced two of the tracks on Alex Nackman's ''Sunrise Falls''. 
Brian produced and played on singer/songwriter Chuck Hodges ''Rainin' Again''.  
Although Brian is not Jewish, he has also played guitar on numerous Modern Jewish Rock song's by Rick Recht and Sheldon Low. He's also played guitar on the Josh Kelley/Diane Warren song "Unfair" that appeared in the movie "27 Dresses."  In 2009 he played guitar on the re-mix of Bilboards #1 country song of 2008, James Otto's "Just Got Started Lovin' You (pop mix)"
Brian has personally appeared on: