On October 24, 2004, palmOne officially unveiled the Treo 600's successor, the Treo 650.
The Treo 600 is a rather large device by cell phone standards but compact for a PDA. The 600 is slightly longer and thicker than its predecessor and is nearly half an inch narrower; giving it a more cell-phone like feel. The new form factor has been compared to a bar of soap. The design is definitely an example of form-follows-function, the front of the phone consists of a full QWERTY keyboard at the bottom with menu and home buttons at the bottom right. Above the keyboard are the 4 application buttons with a "five-way" navigator in-between. Each application button can be mapped to two applications, with the exception of the last button which has one of its functions permanently mapped to the on/off.  Above the buttons and navigator is a small Treo logo and the large 160x160 color touch screen.
The top of the phone is occupied by the earpiece, antenna, SDIO/MMC slot; in front of the slot is the Infrared port with the power button  which can be used to turn off the screen, or, if held down for a few seconds can turn off the radio functions. Opposite of the IR port is a switch which, by default is set to switch between normal ringer operation and silent mode with vibration. The back of the Treo is simple enough with a Palm logo at the bottom with a reset pin hole offset to the right.
On the back of the phone towards the top is a sticker with various serial numbers and a triangular shaped speaker grill offset to the left. Above the speaker grill is the VGA camera lens and the top of the stylus is visible above and to the left of the lens. The bottom of the Treo houses the 2.5mm jack which can output stereo sound and accept an adapter for standard 3.5mm jack. Next to the audio jack, in the center of the phone, resides a connector used for data transfer and charging. The upper left side of the phone contains 2 volume keys, the right side is a mirror image of the left without the volume keys.