Cell Phones for Soldiers was founded in 2004, when Brittany Bergquist, then 13, and her brother, Robbie, 12, heard a news story about an Army Reserve sergeant stationed in Iraq who had racked up a $7,624 cell phone bill calling home to his family in the states.
The teenagers pooled their money to raise their first $21. The pair went on to collect change from their friends and hold a car wash that raised almost $1,000. When they went to a local bank to start an account for the collection drive, the bank chipped in another $500. 
The local media reported on what the Bergquist family was doing, and the coverage led to a massive surge in contributions. That, in turn, put Brittany and Robbie in the national news and won them support from across the country. That inspired the Bergquist family to launch    Cell Phones for Soldiers    as formal 501(c)3 charitable organization     with the goal of helping every service member call home for free. 
The organization took a novel approach to fundraising, collecting old cell phones that are too often left sitting in drawers. The Bergquists have teamed up with ReCellular, Inc. to process their phones and are paid for every phone they collect, with the average phone worth enough to provide a 60 minute calling card for international use. ReCellular is the worlds largest mobile device recycler, processing over 2 million phones for Cell Phones for Soldiers in 2008 alone.
As their efforts gained momentum, the Bergquists gained more media coverage, including CBS Evening News with Katie Couric  and Foxnews.
By 2009, Cell Phones for Soldiers had a nationwide network of some 3,000 volunteers running collection drives, from Boy Scout Troops to Fortune 500 companies. The biggest of their corporate supporters has been AT&T Mobility, which offered its 2,000 stores in 1,100 cities as collection points.
At that time, the family had raised more than 2 million dollars, which provided members of the U.S. Armed Forces with more than 500,000 one hour calling cards. That   s more than 30 million minutes of connection with family and friends at home.