Towards the end of 2008, she opened for Jason Mraz on his Europe tour, touring in the UK, Sweden, Denmark, the Netherlands, Germany and France among others. In the second half of 2009, Ingrid began her "Everybody" tour of the United States and Europe which continued in 2010.
Four of her songs have also appeared in ''One Tree Hill''. "Masochist" was featured in Season 4, Episode 13: "Pictures of You"; "Overboard", was used in Season 4, Episode 14: "Sad Songs for Dirty Lovers"; "The Way I Am" was used in Season 4, Episode 19: "Ashes of Dreams You Let Die"; and "Can't Help Falling In Love" was used in Season 6, Episode 23: "Forever And Almost Always". Other appearances include "The Way I Am" and "Breakable" in ''The Real World: Denver'', as well as "The Way I Am", "Die Alone" and "Far Away (Untitled)" in ''The Bad Girls Club''.  "Breakable" was also featured in Season 2, Episode 3: "The List is Life" of ''Kyle XY''. Old Navy featured "The Way I Am" in their fall/winter advertisement. "Are We There Yet" was featured on the ABC family show "Make it or Break it"
On Valentine's Day 2008, Michaelson was the musical guest on ''Good Morning America'', and the following day she appeared on ''Live with Regis and Kelly''. She has also appeared on VH1, ''Late Night with Conan O'Brien'', ''The Tonight Show with Jay Leno'', ''The Ellen DeGeneres Show'', ''The AT&T Blue Room'', ''Live From The Artists Den'', NPR's ''Bryant Park Project'', ''The Rachael Ray Show'' and ''Last Call with Carson Daly'', where she performed with Joshua Radin.
Her song "Be OK" appears in ''The House Bunny'', episode 15 of the second season of NBC's 2010 series ''Parenthood'', and a Mott's Apple Juice commercial featuring actress Marcia Cross. It was also used in a season 4 episode of ''Ugly Betty''.
Michaelson recorded a duet with Sara Bareilles called "Winter Song", which featured on the ''The Hotel Cafe Presents Winter Songs''. An animated music video was released to accompany the song. They performed the song on ''The Tonight Show with Jay Leno'' on December 9, 2008. This was also featured in ''Grey's Anatomy''s fifth season. "Winter Song" was also featured on the eighth episode of season 4 of ''Brothers & Sisters'', the seventeenth episode of ''Scrubs'' season eight, and on the fifth episode of the third season of ''Army Wives''.  Michaelson and Bareilles performed the song at the 2010 National Christmas Tree Lighting.
Her song "Starting Now" appeared in ''Pretty Little Liars'' on July 20, 2010 in the seventh episode of season 1, "The Homecoming Hangover".
Her song "You and I", from the 2008 album ''Be OK'', plays over the credits of the 2010 romantic comedy ''My Girlfriend's Boyfriend'', starring Alyssa Milano, Christopher Gorham, Michael Landes, Tom Lenk and Beau Bridges.
Part of her song "Everybody" was featured in 2010's Ramona and Beezus.
Additionally, her song "The Chain" was featured in the CW show Hellcats, season 1, episode 12 "Papa, Oh Papa" on January, 24, 2011.
Her song "Maybe" was featured on the ABC medical drama "Body of Proof" in the episode "Society Hill", the sixth episode of the first season.
Her song "Turn to Stone" was featured on The Vampire Diaries in the episode "As I Lay Dying", the season 2 finale on May 12, 2011. In the same month her song, Sort Of, was used on the advert for the internet browser Google Chrome. The advert premiered during the champions league final.
Ingrid provided vocals on Joshua Radin's song "Sky" off of his ''Unclear Sky'' EP which was released in 2008. 
In 2006, Ingrid teamed up with William Fitzsimmons on his album ''Goodnight'', which was released that same year.
Ingrid and her friend Sara Bareilles co-wrote "Winter Song" which was featured on ''The Hotel Cafe Presents Winter Songs'', a compilation of both original recordings as well as classic holiday tracks sung by a lineup of female singer-songwriters. Ingrid also worked with Bareilles, performing "Winter Song" for the President Obama and his family as well as many spectators at the National Christmas Tree Lighting in December 2010.
Ingrid provided back-up vocals on two songs from PlayRadioPlay!'s album ''Texas'', including "I'm a Pirate, You're a Princess" and the title track, "Texas".
Ingrid provided back-up vocals on Greg Laswell's album, ''Take A Bow'', which was released on May 4, 2010. Collaboration was done on the songs "Take Everything," "My Fight (For You)," and "Come Clean."
Ingrid's band includes Allie Moss and Bess Rogers on guitar, who are singer/songwriters in their own right. Allie Moss released a 2009 EP entitled ''Passerby''.  A single from the EP, "Corner", has been picked up by BT for their BT Infinity television commercials in the UK. Other band members include Chris Kuffner (guitar), husband of Bess Rogers, Saul Simon-MacWilliams (keys) and Elliot Jacobson (drums).
In 2010, Ingrid co-wrote a song entitled "Parachute" with Marshall Altman for British pop singer Cheryl Cole's debut solo album ''3 Words''; it gained great success and reached number 1 in the UK. Ingrid initially felt the track was "so poppy" that she could not release it herself. However, after the the song was reworked by "Everybody" producer Dan Romer to make a more "interesting, funky production", Ingrid released the song as a personal single.  To date, the song has received two separate music videos.
Of the release of "Parachute" and upcoming material, Ingrid explained in a 2010 interview with Billboard.com, "I just felt like I wanted to put something out. I'm not ready to put a full album out, so we thought we'd put this out and see how people take it or don't take it," saying that she expects to release her next album, "probably in the middle of next year." 