Michael W Ryan, Born 08/03/1948 and recieved a Death Sentence on 09/12/1985.
Ryan was the leader of a small, anti-government, and racially prejuiced religous cult 
Evil Harvest: The True Story of Cult Murder in the American Heartland by Rod Colvin
In Between, is a song off of Linkin' Parks third album, Minutes to Midnight, though four other albums exist, two of them are not acknowlegded.  The song is performed by Mike Shinoda alone.  Some people claim that the song was made as an apology for Fort Minor, Mike Shinoda's 'project' band, yet there are many disputes as to if that is really why the song was written.  The songs chorus is as follows:
Those are the only words to the song, with the exception of line two ("but trying to be genuine was harder than it seemed") which changes for every new chorus, and a small paragraph in between chorus' 3 and 4.
Lexinny is derived from the most emo character in a popular text based game. The player in which the term Lexinny derived from is --Lex-- and his player id is 18691. The term originated from a name used by him in the past which still haunts him to this very day. Most players do not know the exact meaning, but one player does. That players name is A_Nightmare, and he often uses the "nick" Lexinny to taunt Lex. Contrary to popular belief, Lexinny does not refer to him bellbutton being an inny, nor does it refer to any other of his apendages. Maybe one day A_Nightmare will in fact divulge the true meaning of this word and the entire online text based community can benefit from it
The grandson of Noah, the same Noah from Noah's Ark. Eilam (or Elam, or         ) is the son of Shem (    ) one of three Noah's sons.
Book of Genesis
Austin August is a Sacramento California resident.
Sometimes he's dum, but he's always the best lovah!
DOn't stop, get it get it.
An Annotated Bibliography and Guide to the Published Trumpet Music of Sigmund Hering 
Erdmann, Thomas R. 
After a short introductory chapter on Sigmund Hering, this work analyzes his published trumpet works, draws conclusions on each text for suitability of use, and creates a guide for trumpet pedagogues for using Hering's 408 trumpet etudes for one trumpet without piano accompaniment. Appendices include: A Brief Look at the Compositional Relationship Between Leon Lester and Sigmund Hering; Brief Biographies of Sigmund Hering's Principal Viennese Instructors; A Complete List of Sources Used to Create the List 'Twentieth Century Topics of Trumpet Pedagogy'; and Definitions of Some Terms Used in that list.
Raptor Arts is a Sculpture Studio based in California. The owner of the studio "Vincent Chiantelli" is a well known artist and is on hell of a nice guy. His costumes, creatures, and sculptures in general are enough to make your jaw drop and eyes pop. Yes hes that good. Why he isn't in Hollywood or LA beats me but in any case I highly suggest you view his site. He will answer any and all questions within the day or even the hour! He gives tours to of the studio which was amazing to say the least. If you see anything that is called Raptor Arts make sure its Vincent's or its not worth looking at. 
Born on August 2nd 1938 to illustrious parents Prof G. Srinivasan and Thangam Srinivasan 
Started learning music from the age of eight and had her early lessons under the late SMT AKILA NATESAN then became a disciple of Maharajapuram Santhanam, Pattamadai Sundaram Iyer , Trivandrum R.S.Mani, Thanjavoor. S Kalyanaraman and Smt Sulochana Pattabhiraman 
Has been singing from all India radio, Chennai for the past 46 years .An A TOP grade artist    concerts broadcast from other stations of AIR in the south and also from doordarshan (TV center) , Chennai. Have so far taken part twice in the national programmes sponsored by the AIR i.e. Saturday night broadcast all over India and also in the radio, Sangeet Sammelans on 21st November 1984. and 21st November 1988 , Maharaja Swathi Thirunal music festival sponsored by AIR Trivandrum on 25th April 1984.
Has been featured in the national network (television) on 10th November 1987 and on 14th September 1994. Concert recorded at central production center New Delhi on 17th September 1996 for telecast on DD-3 ,national network of doordarshan 
Has won innumerable prizes in the music competitions conducted by madras city Sabhas
Recipient of the gold medal(Justice T.L Venkatrama Iyer   s  prize) for Dikshitar Kritis , first prize awarded by the Indian fine arts society and Smt D.K Pattamal award in the music academy 52nd  conference in 1978 .
Recipient of the title NADAKKANAL from Nadakannal (regd.) which aims at popularizing Mahakavi Subramania Bharathiyar   s songs and THOLLISAI VENDU in Muthu Thandavar Thamilisai Vizha on 5th October 1994 
Has given concerts all over India and in all the leading Sabhas, music festivals etc. Was invited to Houston (Texas, USA) in 1996 and 1998 on a teaching assignment concert tour 
Has a rich and a mellifluous voice supported by an imaginative Manodharma which make her concerts always noted for their devotional appeal, melodic content and technical excellence. Her attention to details, her restrained improvisation and her refusal to indulge in ornate frill work give her concerts a sense of unity and earnestness.
A post graduate in Tamil language and literature from presidency college, madras  with a first class in 1963 and was for sometime, a lecturer in Tamil in Ethiraj college , Chennai
Has served as teaching staff in Kala Peetam , a music institute in Chennai
Has served as a teacher in SYAMA, a music institute in Singapore.
Has the honour of being invited as a visiting faculty at the Tamil Nadu Music College.
Has acted as the judge in several music competitions conducted by various music Sabhas and institutes.
Is a music critic and has offered her services by writing the reviews in the Hindu for the 2006 music season held by music academy.
Has been felicitated by the music organization, Swaralaya, Houston Texas in August    06.
Has students in countries like USA, Canada, Singapore and Australia.
1.	SRI KARPAGAMBAL ANDHADI -(Songs of Sri Karpagambal)     Sangeetha    release
2.	CHINNA CHINNA SLOGANGAL -    Gayathri    release 
3.	THAYEY THULASAMMA -    Gayathri    release
1.	Marriage songs     Kalyana Padalgal
2.	Gowri Kalyana Vaipohame
3.	Kummi Kolattam songs
4.	Mangalya Dharana Gaanangal
5.	Thillana Charithram     part 1 & 2
6.	Devi Chamundeshwari 
7.	Sampradaya Mangala Haarathulu     Telugu devotional
8.	Varalakshmi Vratham Paatalu     Telugu devotional
9.	Sadguru Thyagarajaswami   s Pancharatna Krithis 
10.	Sampradhaya Pelli Paatalu     marriage songs in Telugu
The stereotype of the Italian stallion is a male of italian descent who is thought as a macho, lustful, and virile man. Oftentimes he is also believed to have a big Italian penis.
Frank Marano was a God of imaginary wrestling.  Ayatollah Marano ran a famous stable of wrestlers including such luminaries as Sheik Yerbutti.  Marano got his greatest fame when he was featured in Wrestling World magazine.  Shortly after this he spent the weekend in Seaside Hts, NJ, and flying clotheslines Jonny "Leader" Lieber.  He then got cancer and died.  Thankfully.
Signed by Sydney FC for the upcoming season.
ChessX is a free, open source chess database for Linux, Windows and Mac OS X. At an embryonic stage, it was planned to be a community maintained version of Scid (a popular, open source chess database). However, ChessX is now evolved into a more modern project that uses Qt library to create advanced graphical interface and C++ language to run as fast as possible. 
Current features of ChessX are:
A Printer_Command_Language type language used in Canon LaserBase printers.
James Morris has been the Nation Sales Manager for Volvo Trucks Australia since August 2006. Since then he has made a valuable contribution to the reputable company. In the month of May 2007, the company exceeded sales budget for that quarter. In Australian Transport News magazine, he was quoted as saying;
An example of how this research has been utilised in the development of the new Volvo FE is the broadening of engine maintenance periods with oil change intervals now extended to 100,000kms.
Morris says the Volvo FE is ideal for fast and efficient local and regional transportation with a gross combination weight of up to 44 tonnes and will be available as a 4x2 tractor and as a 4x2, 6x2, or 6x4 rigid with a wide selection of chassis applications.
New truck on the block as Volvo releases distribution vehicle
Wednesday 23 May 2007
Volvo Trucks is aiming to reach a broader customer segment with the release of a new distribution vehicle.
Buoyed by the success of its European launch, the Volvo FE has emerged as a serious middleweight contender here in Australia.
Volvo Trucks has pioneered a new era in the medium duty market segment with the recent arrival of the Volvo FE range.
The new Volvo FE targets the upper end of the medium duty market and sends a clear message that Volvo is investing heavily in a new business concept in Australia, encompassing both trucks and services for customers in areas such as distribution, refuse collection, light construction duties and municipal transportation.
The new 7-litre Volvo FE offers both a 280 hp and a 320 hp version and will give local and regional transport operators a safe and dependable truck with industry     leading technology encased in a modern design. The truck expands the Volvo range to fit neatly below the larger Volvo FM and Volvo FH.
The Volvo FE is aimed at the tough 18 to 26 tonne class and replaces the heavy end of the previous Volvo FL range.
An example of how this research has been utilised in the development of the new Volvo FE is the broadening of engine maintenance periods with oil change intervals now extended to 100,000kms.
Morris says the Volvo FE is ideal for fast and efficient local and regional transportation with a gross combination weight of up to 44 tonnes and will be available as a 4x2 tractor and as a 4x2, 6x2, or 6x4 rigid with a wide selection of chassis applications.
The air bag rear suspension is equipped with an ergonomically designed remote control which enables the Volvo FE to be lowered 60 mm and raised up to 140 mm above standard height for easier loading or to cope with specific road conditions.
The new Volvo FE features an impact-tested safety cab, electronically controlled disc brakes (EBS) with electronic stability program (ESP) and brake blending as standard.
Hill Start is another feature that adds to the total package delivering additional productivity gains with convenience and safety.
James Frederick Morris is the National Sales Manager for Volvo Trucks Australia. He has been in the position since August 2006. Since then he has been quoted in various trucking magazines, including the Australian Transport News.
Volvo Trucks is aiming to reach a broader customer segment with the release of a new distribution vehicle.
Buoyed by the success of its European launch, the Volvo FE has emerged as a serious middleweight contender here in Australia.
Volvo Trucks has pioneered a new era in the medium duty market segment with the recent arrival of the Volvo FE range.
The new Volvo FE targets the upper end of the medium duty market and sends a clear message that Volvo is investing heavily in a new business concept in Australia, encompassing both trucks and services for customers in areas such as distribution, refuse collection, light construction duties and municipal transportation.
The new 7-litre Volvo FE offers both a 280 hp and a 320 hp version and will give local and regional transport operators a safe and dependable truck with industry     leading technology encased in a modern design. The truck expands the Volvo range to fit neatly below the larger Volvo FM and Volvo FH.
The Volvo FE is aimed at the tough 18 to 26 tonne class and replaces the heavy end of the previous Volvo FL range.
An example of how this research has been utilised in the development of the new Volvo FE is the broadening of engine maintenance periods with oil change intervals now extended to 100,000kms.
Morris says the Volvo FE is ideal for fast and efficient local and regional transportation with a gross combination weight of up to 44 tonnes and will be available as a 4x2 tractor and as a 4x2, 6x2, or 6x4 rigid with a wide selection of chassis applications.
The air bag rear suspension is equipped with an ergonomically designed remote control which enables the Volvo FE to be lowered 60 mm and raised up to 140 mm above standard height for easier loading or to cope with specific road conditions.
The new Volvo FE features an impact-tested safety cab, electronically controlled disc brakes (EBS) with electronic stability program (ESP) and brake blending as standard.
Hill Start is another feature that adds to the total package delivering additional productivity gains with convenience and safety.
Dj Instagata is one of the top DJ's in the central texas area. His experiance is remarkable. If you've ever been clubbing at Denim and Diamonds, Franks Lakeview Inn, Club Fusion, Bar Austin, or Club Jaguar within the last 10 years, you've probably heard his Unique Mixes, Breaks, and Mash-ups. He is also a Great Producer in the works. He composes several different genre of music like Hip Hop, Rap, Gospel, Rock, Pop, House, Trance, Techno and R&B. If he continues to stay on the grind and art of music, he has a chance to be the next big thing in "Pop Culture."
General curriculum prescribed by the Government of Tamilnadu is followed from 6th standard to 12th standard
Sharma was born August 5, 1924 in Nathdwara, a small town near Udaipur,. Nathdwara is home to the Shrinathji Krishna temple complex, which supports an artists community, and Sharma's family had been artists for generations. 
Sharma has exhibited internationally in London, Germany and the United States. The Shri B.G.Sharma Art Gallery in Udaipur, near his home town, contains an extensive collection of his works.
Former Indian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi, British monarch Queen Elizabeth II and former Australian Prime Minister Malcolm Fraser all commissioned portraits by Sharma. His various awards include India's National Art Award for Master Craftsman. 
1.  retrieved June 1, 2007
2.  retrieved June 1, 2007
3.  retrieved June 1, 2007
4.  retrieved June 1, 2007
Maram is a village situated in the senapati district of Manipur State(India). The people out here speak Maram as their official language. Apart from that the people also comprise of Nepali, Mao, Poumai and many others. The main occupation of the people out here is agriculture. Maram is very rich and famous for its old-age culture. They have their own traditional shawls, traditional songs, traditional outfits and many others. Maram is located in the heart of the NH-39 of Manipur state and also lies in the border of the Manipur and Nagaland State. The literally rate is very high now as compare to literacy rate 5 years back. The main religion of the people is Christianity. Maram is proud of two main educational centers in manipur, i.e. Don Bosco School (which is considered to be on of the best school in manipur state and Don Bosco College (which is also among the top colleges in manipur state offered Science, Commerce , Arts and also others vocational courses. The temparature is very moderate both in winters and summer. The best time to visit maram is during christmas season when everyone relaxes and celebrates, and that is the time when all the outstation people of maram come home to meet and celebrate the biggest celebration.
General curriculum prescribed by the Government of Tamilnadu is followed from 6th standard to 12th standard
In 1935 Church of Scotland crept the western education through Rev. Laurie and Rev. Mathew Bouie at the congregation at St. Andrew's Kirk. Then it was called Andrew's School. The Rev. John Anderson arrived in Madras on February 2nd 1837. He was a man with zeal and imagination. He became the Headmaster. Under his headship it was shifted to Armenian Street and was called Madras General assembly'school . To develop the whole man was the underlying principle of this institution. Then the school moved to Errabalu Chetty St on June 15th 1838. 9th December 1862, was a D Day. The Rev. William Miller, a perceptive and effective administrator took over the school. His was to make western impact on Indian life.
Padmashri Mr. Kuruvila Jacob a dynamic born leader became the Headmaster in 1931. He felt the need of "A larger, quieter and healthier site" for a growing school. His pragmatic and practicable endeavours yielded generous contribution and the amount collected by the building committee under the Chairmanship of Sir. Mohamed Usman helped the school to move into Napier Garden (the present campus) at Harrington Road, Chetput. His Excellency the Governor of Madras - Maharaja of Bhavanagar opened it on 25th October 1950. The firmness and the pleasantness of Mr. Kurivila Jacob made him a towering Headmaster    He visited UNO as a senior fellow of the UN. He was the member of "Government of India Study Commission".  He was the only Headmaster awarded with Padmashri then.
In 1962 his close associate Mr. Mathias became the next Headmaster. He founded the Parent Teacher Association and stalwarts like Dr.A.L.Mudaliar and Dr. Chittibabu were its Presidents.In 1967 Mr.E.D.Savarirayan became the Headmaster. The State as well as the Nation honoured him with "best teacher award". 
Dr.Clement J. Felix became the Headmaster in 1973. The BAT (Brittania Amirtharaj Tennis Foundation The MRF(Madras Rubber Factory ) Pace Foundation are his ventures. He received the State as well as National best teacher awards. 
Dr. A. Jefferson Christopher has brought the Primary Section and Matriculation Stream into our campus. He was conferred upon the State best teacher award for his outstanding contribution in the field of education.
The school has a beautiful campus that few others can boast of-fifteen acres in the heart of the city, with stately buildings, sylvan surroundings and spacious playgrounds. The main building, with its three floors, spacious class rooms extending in wing like fashion from the central body, lecture halls, and laboratories are rare features for any school. The school has added new facilities such as a new auditorium, library, laboratories for physical sciences, the life sciences and computer sciences.
The school offers various activities such as NCC, NSS, RSP, Scout, JRC. 
The various clubs are Scripture, Art, Kindness, Interact, Music, Garden, Care, Photography, UNESCO, Environment, Internet and Electronic Awareness.
There are three hostels, for Juniors (boys of 6th to 8th Stds), for Seniors (boys of 9 th and 10 th Stds) and Super Seniors (boys of 11th and 12th Stds). The Headmaster lives in the campus which adds to extra care round the clock and around the year, which is the uniqueness of MCCS.
Sextary: A medieval Term refering to a quantity (one sixth). Sextary also refers to a one acre plot of land leased by an estate holder to a serf farmer. The term sextary refers to the produce tax on the use of the land. The serf would recieve one sixth of any agricultural produce grown on a rented farm plot. 
Reference: The Name of the Rose by Umberto Eco
FreeStyleGames is a video game development company based in Leamington Spa, Warwickshire, UK.
It was founded in November 2002, by a creative team of experienced gaem developers.
As of May 2007, the staff count is 43. Titles are under development for the PlayStation 2 console, due for release in Summer 2007.
The website is www.freestylegames.com.
The first ever World Crohn's and Colitis Day was held on May 23, 2007 with the goal of raising awareness about Crohn's Disease and ulcerative colitis. 
The day was invented by Josh Golder, filmmaker and creator of True Guts: The Struggle with and Triumph Over Crohn's Disease and Ulcerative Colitis, as a way of making Crohn's (CD) and colitis (UC) better known in the public eye. To ask other to reach out to people and tell them about the diseases is an important step in making people more aware and, therefore, better able to contribute to a cure.  Currently there is no cause or cure for UC or CD, collectively known as Inflammatory Bowel Disease (IBD). 
Mercedes Terrell is a Sicilian-Mexican model, she currently lives in the OC America, born to Mexican and SIcilian parents she is working as a model for various car magazines and websites, she was born June 2 1984 in Orange county american, meaning she is a American born Mexican-Sicilian, Although she is Sicilian it is sometimes classed as Italian. more information can be found on her site www.MercedesTerrell.com
Ian Barniskis is a normal person. He is just a normal guy with a normal life. But he has some interesting quotes that have need of looking into:
Holy Family Catholic High School
The current El Paso Playhouse is the result of a merger of two separate community theaters during the summer of 1978. This merger combined the Upstairs Theater Downtown and the Festival Theater. The Upstairs Theater Downtown can trace its origin to the Playhouse Inc. established in 1951. The Festival Theater came into existence in late 1964 at 2501 Montana although its first production did not open until April 8, 1965. After the merger in 1978 the two theaters became what is now the El Paso Playhouse Inc. 
The El Paso Playhouse is a non-profit organization and is staffed mostly with unpaid volunteers. These volunteers are the life blood of the theater. 
Discography:
The film starts in a city. A brown rat named Ratso is trying vainly to impress a crowd of black rats by claiming he has working for him the longest worm in the world (which is in fact a tiny maggot called Wesley stuffed inside a straw). When his spoof is revealed, the rats jeer and leave. Wesley says he has had enough and tries to leave, but Ratso pleads with him. Ratso is planning to go to a carnival to show off the 'longest worm in the world' but Wesley is not willing to cooperate. 
Ratso speedily traps him in a converted-matchstick-box-to-a-backpack, and is about to leave when he is confronted by a female grey rat called Phyllis and two of her muscle bound rat bodyguards. Phyllis gloats over finding him, and Ratso agrees that there is nowhere to run. Phyllis wants him for something, although it is not revealed. Ratso shoves her into the guards and runs for it.
Ratso manages to escape with Wesley and sits on the top of a train. Ratso sees the carnival but the train goes in the opposite direction. He and Wesley are thrown into a nest, where, because of a bouncing and hatching egg, Ratso is atapulted, with egg, into a duckyard, and Wesley is trapped in a dumped whisky bottle.
In the duckyard, an angry goose with the chicken inhabitants turns up, and is about to punsih ratso for entering, so Ratso tellsthem he is the father of the egg. The goose doesn't believe him until the hatchling emerges, showing to be an especially ugly duckling. The goose says, "He's the father alright."
Ratso is unhappy with his roll as 'mama,' and offers him to a white duck called Daphne who gains a crush on Ratso. The ugly duckling goes with the chickens and chicks to the waters edge, and they see three beautiful swans land in the pond. Some of the chicks bully him and drive him off. 
Ratso digs a tunnel as escape, and evidence is uncovered. Ratso pretends he's staging a show on that very night, and dumps the duckling on stage. He catches up with Wesley after making his escape, and realises he could use the duckling as 'the ugliest duckling in the world.' He manages to take the chick out of show, where everyone is cracked up with laughter at his ugliness.
They come to some woods, and Ratso convinces him to dance. After finishing, a fox turns up, with a dead duck in its mouth. Ratso and the chick, nicknamed 'Ugly,' watch the duck in horror. Her eyes open, and she says, "Help me," before being dragged off by the fox. Ratso starts to run away, but Ugly runs after the fox, and there is a scuffle, in which the duck escapes thanks to Ugly and Ratso is left with the chick trying to persuade the fox not to eat them. When Ratso holds up the duckling, the fox reacts in disgust, saying, "Eurrrrrgh! I can't eat that!"
Phyllis turns up, and interrogates Wesley. She follows Ratso with her intention still unclear.
Ratso and Ugly sleep in an abandoned car, where Ratso tells him "Growing up doesn't happen overnight."
The very next morning, Ratso is shocked to find Ugly has become a moody teenager, and snaps at him often. When questioned on how a teenager acts, Ratso says, "Speak funny, be rude to me, and fall in love with the first girl wo smiles at you." At that moment, the female duck tunrs up; smiling. Ugly immediately is smitten. The duck reveals her wing was broken in the scuffle with the fox, and her name is Jessie. Ugly persuades Ratso to let her come along.
Phyliss finds the fox den, and finds one of Ugly's feathers. She carries on.
Ratso tries to cross a frozen river, and is nearly eaten by a huge pike. Ugly saves him, and is enjoying a tender moment with Jessie when Ratso asks, "If your wing is really broken, then how did you cross the river?" Jessie tells him she used the bridge a few metres away that Ratso had overlooked.
On their journey, Ugly falls even more in love with Jessie, and shreds Ratso's blanket to make a sling for her. When he dances for her by a fire, she laughs, then realising he was serious. She is horrified she hurt his feelings, but Ugly thinks she just believes he is ugly and stupid.
Ugly uncovers the carnival, where Ratso says his cousin Ernie will help them. Phyllis shows up, and almost catches Ratso when a huge tomcat turns up and nearly eats them. Phyllis and Ratso and the two other rats go on a violent ride to escape, and the cat is about to eat Ratso when Ratso realises the cat is his supposed cousin Ernie. 
Ernie immediately befriends him, Ugly and Jessie, as well as his handpuppet William who can talk independantly of his hand. ratso feels guilt for what he has brought Ugly to the carnival for, but Ugly dances nontheless. When the crowd is left in hysterics, Ugly realises what Ratso has been about the entire journey, and is heartbroken. He shares a comforting hug with Jessie, before Phyllis captures him and uses him as a ransom. If Ratso wants him back he has to go to the duckyard.
Ratso, with a newly healed Jessie, and saddled Ernie, go to the duckyard where Ernie fight off all the rats, but is hit with a sucker by Phyllis, and the game is lost. Ratso and Ugly are imprisoned in a pen on their own, Jessie with the geese and chickens.
In the morning, Ratso is taken away, and Ugly assumes he is going to be executed. As he hangs his head, convulsions go through his body, as he cries out in pain.
Ratso goes onto a platform with Phyllis, and a black rat with a book is seen. Ratso begins to plead, when a newly formed swan Ugly breaks out of his pen, much to the astonishment of Jessie, Ratso and the other rats.
Ugly runs to the platform, and finds Phyllis is trying to marry Ratso.  Phyllis tells him that Ratso ran away a year ago in the middle of their wedding, but she doesn't really love him. She can only maryr him because there are no more unmarried rats in the city.
Phyllis reveals she isn't interested in love, and just wants the perks that come with marriage-the ring, the cake, flowers, and the gifts. When Ugly pleads Ratso not to do it, calling him dad, Phyllis realises she can't marry him because he has children.
Ugly smacks her into the cake, where it falls down on her.
Three swans turn up, and tell Ugly it is time to follow them and leave the others. Ugly goes with the swans, but the swans are rather full of themselves, thinking all there is to life is beauty and respect. Ugly knows he will never be happy, and flies back to the others, marries Jessie, and participates in a marriage party.
9arcade - Dress Up - Makeover Games - Fashion Games - Doll Maker - Cool Online Games
Excerpted from the website description:
Google.com
Nguoidaukhovn.com
Share-Games.com
Vnseo.com
The Sphere 1 was one of the first PCs created.  It was made in 1975 by Mike Wise, founder of Sphere Corporation.
The Sphere 1 featured a Motorola 6800 CPU, ROM Monitor, 4 KB of RAM, and a keyboard.
French professor Mme. Harris is a students favorite at Jackson Liberty High School. She is not just a teacher but a student's best friend. With Every class she gets, afriends are made and a special student-teacher relationship is adopted. She has a unique way of teaching and a freidnly way of taking authority. She is a hero to many and one of the best teachers to come into the school  LOVE YOU MS. HARRIS!
The service uses interactive mapping to locate the nearest on and off-street parking to the user's destination. The service covers an area incorporating 71,000 parking spaces and includes parts of London outside the congestion charge zone. The service enables parking spaces to be searched for via computer or Internet-enabled mobile device and at present covers Camden, City of London, Islington, Kensington & Chelsea, the Royal Parks, Westminster, central parts of Hackney, Lambeth/Southwark and Tower Hamlets. 
Park-Up.com enables the user to search for the least expensive parking spot available and is expected to benefit motorbike and scooter riders who currently park for free but will soon face a parking charge in Central London. 
The service is also expected to benefit the environment by helping motorists to circulate less in search of a space, helping to minimise carbon monoxide emissions. 
Hourly parking costs in London vary from GBP2.48 to GBP16.40 and more than 200,000 cars enter the congestion charge zone each day in Central London, looking for parking, while only 40,500 parking spaces are available. 
Campus Pride represents the only national nonprofit organization for student leaders and campus groups working to create a safer college environment for LGBT students. The organization is a volunteer-driven network "for" and "by" student leaders. The primary objective of Campus Pride is to develop necessary resources, programs and services to support LGBT and ally students on college campuses across the United States.
Founded in the Fall of 2001 and launched a year later in October of 2002, Campus Pride started as an online community and resource clearinghouse under the name Campus PrideNet.  The original founding partners were M. Chad Wilson, Sarah E. Holmes & Shane L. Windmeyer. In 2006, the organization broadened its outreach efforts and restructured as the current educational non-profit organization Campus Pride.  As part of the restructuring process, the Lambda 10 Project for LGBT Fraternity & Sorority Issues (www.lambda10.org) became an educational initiative of Campus Pride.  The executive director is national LGBT civil rights leader and campus pioneer Shane L. Windmeyer. 
Shane L. Windmeyer recalls his "coming out" on a small rural campus in Kansas as difficult, frightening, lonely, emotionally complex and yet liberating     all at the same time.   His commitment for LGBT issues comes from this inner strength and passion to help others coming out today and his desire to motivate college students, gay and straight, to stand up against prejudice, bigotry and hate against all people. 
Windmeyer is a national leader in gay and lesbian civil rights and a champion for LGBT issues on college campuses.  He is the founder and Executive Director of Campus Pride, the only national organization for student leaders and campus groups working to create a safer college environment for LGBT students.  Released in Fall 2006, Windmeyer is author of The Advocate College Guide for LGBT Students, the first-ever college guide profiling the    100 Best LGBT-Friendly Campuses.   
Windmeyer is often best-known for his pioneering work with the Lambda 10 Project     National Clearinghouse for GLBT Fraternity & Sorority Issues.  His leadership with the Lambda 10 Project led to the publishing of his first book, the only one of it's kind and national bestseller Out on Fraternity Row: Personal Accounts of Being Gay in a College Fraternityand his second book Secret Sisters: Stories of Being Lesbian & Bisexual in a College Sorority. His third book titled Inspiration for LGBT Students & Their Allies came out in October 2002 published by Collegiate Empowerment Company, Inc.  In October 2005, Windmeyer edited his fourth book, a much-anticipated sequel, titled Brotherhood: Gay Life in College Fraternities.  In addition, Windmeyer currently serves as the coordinator of Stop The Hate, a national bias and hate crime prevention program. He led and developed this train the trainer initiative in 2001 with the Association of College Unions International, the Anti-Defamation League, the Southern Poverty Law Center, the Center for the Prevention of Hate Violence and the Higher Education Center   s Drug, Alcohol and Other Violence Prevention Programs.
Windmeyer has been featured on IN THE LIFE TV and his work has been the focus of national attention from MSNBC   s The Situation with Tucker Carlson, The New York Times, Rolling Stone and TIME Magazine.   His educational efforts also have been noted by national press such as OUT Magazine, The Advocate National Gay & Lesbian News Magazine, Fort Worth Star-Telegram, Indianapolis Star, Salon Magazine, HERO Magazine, U. Magazine and the Chronicle of Higher Education.
Windmeyer graduated from Emporia State University with a bachelors degree in Communication and received his masters degree in Higher Education and Student Affairs Administration from Indiana University. He lives in Charlotte, N.C.
Born 1960'''
Born in the Upper Peninsula of Michigan during the summer of 1960 (heretofore known as the summer of Glove) Stephen J. Alberts lived a quiet and uneventful childhood. That is until the fruits of his youth sent him into a tumultuous time culminating in his first legal run-in. It was 1973 Steve had just turned 13 and was caught eating his entree with his salad fork. After spending 3 months in the Lower Detroit Etiquette Correction Facility Steve went on to attend the Garrison Keeler High School progressing rapidly to the top of his class of 4. The school   s unofficial motto was    Where the women are strong, all the men are good looking and the sheep are above average    
From there he continued his educational endeavors at the Steve Martine Trade Academy School (SMTAS ), pursuing his dream of studying entomology. Unfortunate circumstances seemed to surround Steve Alberts, and have become a common theme in his life. After finishing his sophomore year at SMTAS the school he fell victim to a embezzlement scandal involving the Savings and Loan debacle of the time. (the full story has never been revealed due to legal settlements)
Tragically for Steve his time spent as a SMTAS student was for naught. The faculty at SMTAS was neither trained nor certified to teach entomology. This experience left Steve a bitter and change man. After spending his 20th summer traveling through south-east Asia, an experience he still refuses to talk about, he made his way back to school.  In September 1980 Steve enrolled as a freshman at the Entomology of Michigan University (EMU ) (affectionately known as EMU.). Unfortunately for him the school decided to change their mission due to low enrollment and drop entomology from their name and from their curriculum and rename the school Southern Michigan Technology of Assumptive Zoology School (SMTAZS). He was given 2 choices for switching his major Crypto Zoology () or Chemistry. Steve chose the latter believing career choices to be more forthcoming in Chemistry . His assumption was correct but it was not to be. At the least, not after he started wearing glasses and drinking beer. The professional Chemists who hold sway over the industry are, arguably, too concerned with fashion and have no tolerance for drunkards to ever hire a beer drinker with glasses . So Steve was again belted by the belt of unfortunate circumstances and relegated to the backwater of environmental chemistry. To this day he lives on the fringe of society.
Indianapolis, IN. The American Basketball Association (ABA) today announced that it will return to Honolulu, Hawaii this season after a two year hiatus. 
The team will be owned and operated by Hawaii Basketball, Inc (HBI). Team President will be Andrew Moss. Prior to becoming HBI President, Andrew represented athletes as an agent in national and international basketball leagues as well as the NFL. A resident of Hawaii and a member of the Hawaii business community since 2003, Andrew has a proven record for success in creating business relationships, including the automotive and power equipment industries. 
The team Vice President and co-owner is Ira Harge, Jr. The ABA has been a part of his family since his childhood. He is the son of former ABA great Ira Harge, Sr. Ira, Jr. played college basketball at San Diego State and the University of Denver. After graduation, he played professionally in Europe. From Europe, he transitioned from basketball to business. Over the past nineteen years, he has worked in the banking, financial planning, wealth management industry. 
Back...
ABA NEWS, www.abalive.com
Honolulu Advertiser, www.honoluluadvertiser.com
All the three social networking sites are focused on the people and community in the Czech Republic.
The independent social network Libimseti.cz is rapidly growing and it  s possible that it could even surpass Seznam  s Lide.cz. Libimseti.cz has currently over 950.000 registered user accounts. Formerly leader Xchat (owned by Centrum.cz) is continuously decreasing.
My password is 'Password'. It is probably the most ingenious password in the history of computing. It is near impossible to guess. 
Sources for this information include google, the people i know, and the guy i dont know that i see on the bus every tuesday morning of July.
Loose cannon is the debut album of cashis from shady records. He said that "many of my fans were killin my myspace page so it should meet the expections witch im very positive in." He also stated it wont be released anytime soon since the ep just came out. Also he stated that 50's album is coming out and he doesnt want his to mix with 50's and get poor sales. expect Loose cannon some were in early 2008-late 2007
Weeeel....what can we say bout keegan a!? 
Acts stupid alot of the time but obviously can think, we tink he puts the silly on cuz at skewl he cant
Has lotsa friends haha! we no....(somehow!!!:P)
Hes been doing Gangshow the last 2 years and loves it!
Goes to  youth group and loves it! apparntly our rep now whoop whoop
LOVES his coffee!!! icecream is good too he says....if its coffee
Loves the big man up top, good prayer really
Hockey player, was left wing, then fulback then mid now going onto the right so we dont no what he plays.
Hes a debater, hes onli in their 2nd team but seems to be trying to get better.
Good at acting had an ajent before he quit thn couldnt be bothered getting a new one...lazy bugger
Has a good sence of humour, always laughing or making us laugh.
Plays the violin!! dont even ask why he does he just does for some reason...apparntly he likes it and is quite good after a year and a half.
Has bebo..and msn...and a cell so if he nt talking physicly he does it digitaly
Hes single now..................................(whoop whoop! but nt 4 him apparently)
Cares alot 4 pple. he prays bout pple hu r mean to him at youth...crazy person he is lols
Wants to b a pilot or psychologist.....we tink its the latter now though. we tink hed be great at it!!!
Us the youth ministry,as in the kids:P or hs hockey team..... we mite hv gone to GS with him or skewl!!
The Scunny Skaters