Google Street View displays images taken from a fleet of specially adapted cars. Areas not accessible by car, like pedestrian areas, narrow streets, alleys and ski resorts, are sometimes covered by ''Google Trikes'' (tricycles) or a snowmobile. On each of these vehicles there are nine directional cameras for 360   views at a height of about 8.2 feet, or 2.5 meters, GPS units for positioning and three laser range scanners for the measuring of up to 50 meters 180   in the front of the vehicle. There are also 3G/GSM/Wi-Fi antennas for scanning 3G/GSM and Wi-Fi hotspots.  Recently, 'high quality' images are based on open source hardware cameras from Elphel.
Where available, street view images appear after zooming in beyond the highest zooming level in maps and satellite images, and also by dragging a "pegman" icon onto a location on a map. Using the keyboard or mouse the horizontal and vertical viewing direction and the zoom level can be selected. A solid or broken line in the photo shows the approximate path followed by the camera car, and arrows link to the next photo in each direction. At junctions and crossings of camera car routes, more arrows are shown.
On November 21, 2008, Street View was added to the Maps application installed on the Apple iPhone. On December 10, 2008, Street View was added to the Maps application for S60 3rd Edition. Street View has now also been added to the Windows Mobile and BlackBerry versions of Google Maps. All versions of Google Maps for the Android OS feature Street View, and the digital compass can be used to look around the locations.
Google Street View was first introduced in the United States on May 25, 2007, and only covered areas of the United States until July 2, 2008. Currently, images can be seen in at least nine countries (although parts of other countries can be seen from locations located near national borders; for example, large portions of Vatican City can be viewed from Rome's streetview). Introductions have generally occurred every 2 days to 100 days. Up until November 26, 2008, major cities (and early on, the only cities) were marked by camera icons, more of which were added each time. Then, all camera icons were discontinued in favor simply of "blue" coverage, while other features have been added to make access to and use of the feature more user-friendly.
The United States was the first country to have Street View images and was the only country with images for over a year following introduction. Early on, most locations had a limited number of views, usually constrained to the city limits and only including major streets, and they only showed the buildings up to a certain height. Few suburbs or other nearby cities were included.
After the first few sets of introductions, image collections from cities added were more detailed, often including every side street, especially in areas closer to the center of the city. More suburbs and other nearby cities were included.
The coverage of various cities has in many cases, subsequently been enlarged and improved, but not necessarily on the same date as new cities have been added. Improvements have included the additions of streets in neighborhoods where previously only main roads had been covered, expansions to more suburbs, and views to the sky where previously only views to a certain height were provided.
Initially when a group of cities were added, only those cities and their own suburbs would be a part of the image collection. However June 10, 2008 introductions also included cities in covered areas without camera icons and isolated from any other camera icons. Many more cities were added without icons on August 4, when the only U.S. city added with an icon was New Orleans.
On December 9, 2008, extensive coverage of the United States was added. This included full coverage of all large and most medium-sized urban areas and most major highways and connecting arteries throughout the 48 contiguous states.
On March 18, 2009, extensive coverage of the United States was added including most of the coverage of Delaware, North Dakota, Rhode Island, and South Dakota. For a period of time some coverage was deleted (such as in northern Minnesota.)
By January 21, 2010, more American landmarks appeared on Street View, including San Diego Zoo and Sesame Place.
On September 30, 2010, most of Alaska was replaced with high-resolution imagery, and more of Hawaii was added.
On February 1, 2011, Street Views were added of the Smithsonian's Freer Gallery of Art in Washington and of the Museum of Modern Art and the Metropolitan Museum of Art, both in New York.
In Canada, Google Street View cars had been spotted as early as September 2007, in Montreal, though service for Canada was delayed while attempting to settle with the nation over its privacy laws. The first images of Canada were made available on October 7, 2009. Currently, most of Canada can be seen on Street View.
On February 10, 2010, many more areas of Canada (barring extremely northern and rural areas) were added. Of note, ski runs on Whistler Blackcomb Resort is also covered in this update. Using Street View, it is now possible to "drive" almost to the shore of the Arctic Ocean in Alaska along the Dalton Highway; in Canada, the northernmost community currently imaged is Inuvik, Northwest Territories off the Dempster Highway.
In Mexico, first reports of sightings came in from Mexico City as early as April 2009 and now Google Street View cars are being spotted in many Mexican states. On November 9, 2009, Street View was made available in the main cities of Mexico, including Mexico City, Guadalajara, Monterrey, Puebla, Cancun and Puerto Vallarta.
On February 10, 2010, more places were added.
On April 15, 2010, more areas of Mexico were uploaded. Although complete coverage has not yet occurred (in some cities only main streets are imaged), numerous locations including communities in Baja California and Ciudad Juarez now had extensive street-level coverage with this update.
In Europe, coverage is currently available in 15 countries, with several more planned. Coverage began in Europe on July 2, 2008, with the Tour de France route in parts of France and Italy, and other parts followed.
Japan was also introduced on August 4, 2008. Japan's coverage is currently concentrated in five areas with a total of 10 camera icons. The service has faced criticisms from bloggers in Japan of cultural insensitivity.
Google Street View camera cars were spotted in the streets of Singapore in October 2008. On December 2, 2009 Street View imagery of Singapore was made available.
In early 2009, camera cars with the Google Street View labels were spotted in Hong Kong's streets. On August 18, 2009, Taipei, Taiwan was added. On October 7, and December 2, 2009, more locations in Japan were added. On January 21, 2010, more Taiwan locations are added. At the same time, more Japanese locations are added. Unusually, while Street View images are, at present, primarily collected during daylight hours, a number of Taipei streets were imaged at night.
On March 11, 2010, Google Street View for Hong Kong, Macau, and more locations in Japan was launched.
On December 8, 2010, Google updated some of Japan's imagery with HD photographs.
On May 26, 2011, Google started Street View mapping in Bangalore and New Delhi in India.
On August 4, 2008, the long-anticipated image collection of Australia was introduced. At this time, 18 camera icons were added. Extensive mapping of New Zealand was included on December 1, 2008. On December 9, 2008, Darwin, Australia, and other locations were included.
On October 30, 2009, Google Australia announced that they would be sending its fleet of cars back on the road from November 2009 to update Street View Australia with new images. Google said that the imagery would be available online sometime during 2010, but never provided a specific timetable. In October 2010, Google Street View ceased operations in Australia, so the new images were never released.
In May 2011, Google Australia stated that they have removed all the Wifi sniffing equipment and stated that they plan to shoot Australian roads again, but did not provide a specific timetable.
Presently, South Africa is the only African country with Street View. It has not been planned for any other countries as of this day.
On September 1, 2009, Google announced that it started collecting images in South Africa for Google Maps Street View. Google is currently driving around South Africa in Toyota Prius, taking photographs of locations in the cities of Johannesburg, Pretoria, Cape Town, Port Elizabeth, Durban and East London. Google Trikes are also being used for the first time to map popular tourist destinations, such as the scenic Chapman's Peak Drive and Table Mountain in Cape Town, Soccer City in Johannesburg, and the new Moses Mabhida Stadium in Durban.
Images of South Africa were made available on Google Street View on June 8, 2010.
On December 8, 2010, more locations in South Africa were added. These were mostly rural and main roads, as well as a much larger coverage of the Limpopo province. After the update, the borders of South Africa's neighboring countries could be reached.
In September 2010, views of Half Moon Island in the South Shetland Islands were added.
A list of the places Google Street View vehicles are currently driving or where Google Street View is officially planned is available:
Also unofficial announcements were made about Google Street View becoming available in , , , ,  and 
In addition, on August 20, 2009, The manager of Google Maps Chinese, Lin Yukuan said the Google Street View in China Mainland would launch. He said people in China Mainland would see Google Street View in China Mainland in a few years, but some policies had not been resolved.
1st June 2011 Google Street View announced they are going to shoot photos for Street View in Estonia during the next couple of weeks. http://www.streetviewfun.com/2011/street-view-in-estonia/
A list of the places Google Street View vehicles are currently driving is available.
19 June 2011 Google Street View. started make photos in Estonia. http://rus.delfi.ee/daily/estonia/v-estonii-vse-leto-budut-snimat-fotografii-dlya-google-street-view.d?id=48110035&l=fplead
Google has used three types of car-mounted cameras in the past to take Street View photographs. Generations 1   3 were used to take photographs in the United States. The first generation was quickly superseded and images were replaced with images taken with 2nd and 3rd generation cameras. Second generation cameras were used to take photographs in Australia. The shadows caused by the 1st, 2nd and 4th generation cameras are occasionally viewable in images taken in mornings and evenings. The new 4th generation cameras will be used to completely replace all images taken with earlier generation cameras. 4th generation cameras take near-HD images and deliver much better quality than earlier cameras.
In October 2009, Google introduced the Street View Trike, a pedal tricycle with a 4th generation camera mounted to take images where cars cannot reach. All streetview images taken now will be taken with the 4th Generation streetview cameras.
In February 2010, Google introduced the Street View Snowmobile, a snowmobile with a 4th generation camera mounted to take images on the Whistler Blackcomb Ski Slopes in preparation for the winter olympics in Vancouver, Canada.
Google plans to re shoot areas with pre-4th generation cameras with 4th generation cameras.
From left to right. 1st, 2nd, and 4th Generation Streetview cameras.
Comparison of streetview cameras. The first image was taken with either the first, second, or third generation street view camera; and the second image was taken with the fourth generation street view camera. As you can see, the fourth generation street view camera provides clear, sharp, and vivid images. In most of Europe, for example, all images were taken with the 4th generation camera, although some cities in France were not. All older images where street view was first made available, such as America, Australia, and Japan, will be phased out and replaced with newer imagery taken with the fourth generation street view cameras.
Privacy advocates have objected to this Google feature, pointing to views found to show men leaving strip clubs, protesters at an abortion clinic, sunbathers in bikinis, and people engaging in activities visible from public property in which they do not wish to be seen publicly. Google maintains that the photos were taken from public property. The service also allows users to flag inappropriate or sensitive imagery for Google to review and remove.
In May 2010, it was revealed that Google had collected and stored payload data from unencrypted wi-fi connections as part of Street View. German authorities are considering legal action while the Foreign Minister said "I will do all I can to prevent it." Australian police have also been ordered to investigate.
Google Street View has been banned temporarily from taking photos in Austria due to privacy concerns, although the Romanian company NORC already features Austrian cities in a similar product.
Google Street View was banned temporarily from taking any new images in Czech Republic but ban was lifted in May 2011.
In 2010, Google announced that it might cancel Google Street View service in the European Union due to unmanageable requests of the European Commission.
In October 2010, Google Street View ceased operations in Australia, following months of investigations from Australian authorities.
In April 2011, Google decided to discontinue Street View in Germany.