The 2007 World Series of Poker was the 38th annual World Series of Poker (WSOP).  Held in Las Vegas, Nevada at the Rio All Suite Hotel and Casino, the series featured 55 poker championships in several variants.  As a WSOP custom since 1976, each of the event winners receive a championship bracelet in addition to that event's prize money.  The series culminates with the $10,000&nbsp;No-Limit hold'em "Main Event", which has attracted thousands of entrants since 2004.  The winner of the WSOP Main Event, who wins a multi-million dollar prize, is considered to be the World Champion of Poker.
Most of the tournaments played at the WSOP are variants of Texas hold'em, a game where each player may use a combination of the five community cards and two hole cards to make the best hand.  Another poker variant with community cards is Omaha,  in which each player is dealt four hole cards and must use two of them in conjunction with three of the five community cards to make the best possible five-card hand.  In contrast to games with community cards, some variants, such as stud or draw, deal each player separate hands with no common cards.  Seven-card stud deals each player two hole cards, followed by four face-up cards one at a time, and then another hidden card, with betting after each round. Other games played at the 2007 tournament included Razz, H.O.R.S.E., and Deuce-to-Seven.  Prior to 2000, seven-card stud was the most common game in U.S. casinos, but today hold'em has almost totally eclipsed the once popular game.
Within each of these poker variants, a myriad of options exist.  For example, depending on the betting structure, a tournament might be described as no-limit, limit, or pot-limit. Games may include other variations on the rules governing the execution of the specific game such as shootout, eight or better, or heads up. 
With 54,288 total entries and a combined prize pool of $159,796,918, the 2007 WSOP was the largest poker tournament ever.  For many, winning a share of the prize pool was all that mattered, while others sought the glory associated with winning a bracelet.  This dichotomy could not have been illustrated better than a deal negotiated at the Senior Championship event. Tony Korfman wanted the money while Ernest Bennett wanted the glory.  Rather than leave their fates to chance, the two of them ensured they got what they wanted. In exchange for splitting the prize money, Korfman agreed to let Bennett win the bracelet.   After winning $8.25&nbsp;million in the Main Event, Jerry Yang and his wife retired. "My winning today also means a lot to me, because I know that I can use this money to do a lot of good for other people out there," Yang said before donating over a million dollars to charity.  Upon winning his record eleventh bracelet, Phil Hellmuth said, "the bracelets have always been a really huge deal, to me more than the other guys, because I knew that they represented history."  
Age and disability was another story line of the 2007 WSOP.  At 21 years and 10 days old, Steve Billirakis became the youngest person to ever win a WSOP bracelet.   At the other end of the spectrum, 94 year old Jack Ury was the oldest person to ever participate in the Main Event.  Hal Lubarsky, a blind man, finished in 197th place at the Main Event.  
This event kicked off the 2007 WSOP. It was a $ buy-in Mixed (alternating between limit and no-limit) Texas Hold'em tournament.
This was a $ buy-in no-limit Texas Hold'em tournament reserved for casino employees that work in Nevada.
Event 3 was the largest non-Main Event live tournament in history.  This record, however, would be short lived as event 49 would break that record.
Ninth-place finisher Richard Ashby was eliminated simultaneously along with Ron Ware (10th place) on the final hand of day, 2 by Jordan Morgan.  Therefore he never appeared at the official final table.
This event was played in a shorthanded format, no more than six players per table, with no more than six players occupying a table at any time during the tournament.
Phil Hellmuth won his eleventh WSOP bracelet, the most of any player. He was previously one of three players with ten bracelets the others being Johnny Chan and Doyle Brunson.
Razz is a form of stud poker that is normally played for ace-to-five low (lowball poker).  The object of Razz is to make the lowest five-card possible hand from the seven cards you are dealt.  In Razz, straights and flushes do not count against you for low, and the ace always plays low.  The best possible Razz hand is 5-4-3-2-A, or 5 high, also known as "the wheel" or "the bicycle". Deuce-to-seven Razz is also sometimes played.
The 1,286 entrants made this the largest ladies only tournament ever.
Like David Williams, Gabriel Nassif was first known for competing     .
The $7.1 million prize pool and $2.2 million prize were the largest prizes in poker history for a non-Main WSOP event.
Bennett and Korfman made a deal before heads-up play began. Korfman agreed to let Bennett win the title uncontested if Bennett agreed to split the prize money.  They split the cash evenly with each taking home roughly $293,000.  With 1,882 entrants over the age of 55, this was the largest Senior's event ever.
This event set a World Series of Poker non-main event and live poker attendance record with 3,151 entries breaking the previous record of 2,998 set earlier in the third event of the 2007 WSOP.  At the time it was also the third-highest entry total in all live Poker events behind just the 2006 and 2005 main events which had 8,773 and 5,619 entrants respectively.
As the final event, in which the "World Champion of Poker" is crowned, this is considered the "Main Event".