Captain William Reynolds of the USS Lackawanna formally took possession of the Midway Atoll for the United States.
The 1898 Treaty of Paris came in to effect, transferring Guam, the Philippines, and Porto Rico from Spain to the United States, all three becoming unorganized, unincorporated territories.
The Foraker Act organized Porto Rico.
The United States took control of the portion of the Samoan Islands given to it by the Treaty of Berlin of 1899, creating the unorganized, unincorporated territory of American Samoa.
Emilio Aguinaldo, the Filipino leader in the Philippine-American War, surrendered, allowing the United States to form a civilian government.
Under the terms of a 1903 lease agreement, the United States came to exercise complete control over Guantanamo Bay in Cuba, while Cuba retained ultimate sovereignty over the territory.
The Philippine Autonomy Act or Jones Law was signed, promising the Philippines independence.
Jones-Shafroth Act reorganized Porto Rico.  This act conferred United States citizenship on all citizens of Puerto Rico.
The United States purchased the U.S. Virgin Islands under the terms of a treaty with Denmark.
The name of Porto Rico was changed to Puerto Rico.
The Tydings-McDuffie Act was signed allowing the creation of the Commonwealth of the Philippines.
The United States recognized Philippine independence.  
The United Nations granted the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands to the United States, consisting primarily of many islands fought over during World War II, and including what is now the Marshall Islands, Federated States of Micronesia, Northern Mariana Islands, and Palau. It was a trusteeship, and not a territory of the United States.
The Guam Organic Act came into effect, organizing Guam as an unincorporated territory.
Puerto Rico became a Commonwealth of the United States, an unincorporated organized territory, with the ratification of its constitution.
The Organic Act for the United States Virgin Islands went into effect, making them an unincorporated, organized territory.
American Samoa's constitution became effective. Even though no Organic Act was passed, this move to self-government made American Samoa similar to an organized territory.
The Northern Mariana Islands left the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands to become a commonwealth of the United States, making it unincorporated and organized.
The Marshall Islands attained independence from the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, though the trusteeship granted by the United Nations technically did not end until December 22, 1990. The Marshall Islands remained in free association with the United States.
The Federated States of Micronesia attained independence from the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, and remained in free association with the United States.
The United Nations terminated the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands for all but the Palau district.
The United Nations terminated the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands for the Palau district, ending the territory, making Palau ''de facto'' independent, as it was not a territory of the United States.
Palau attained ''de jure'' independence, but remained in free association with the United States.