The term '''liberal elite''' is a political phrase to describe affluent, politically liberal-leaning people.  It is commonly used with the pejorative implication that the people who claim to support the rights of the working class are themselves members of the upper class, or upper middle class, and are therefore out of touch with the real needs of the people they claim to support and protect.  The phrase "liberal elite" should not be confused with the term "elite" as used by writers such as Vilfredo Pareto and C. Wright Mills.  They use the term to mean those who exercise the most political power.
The label is essentially a rhetorical device with  flexible meaning depending on where in the English speaking world it is used. As a polemical term it has been used to refer to political positions as diverse as secularism, environmentalism, feminism, and other positions associated with the left.
The originating usage in the United States is applied with various changes to other English speaking countries and by extension to left-leaning elites in other countries.
Have a Captain Cook at this new Strine book|date = 25 January 2003| accessdate = 2008-09-11|publisher = The Age|last = AAP: Australian Associated Press | location=Melbourne}} For example, Australian left-wing "true believers" leveled it at supporters of the failed republic referendum of 1999 (where the vote was split not along conventional party lines but very much along socio-economic divides, with the rich overwhelmingly supporting the change while the less well-off were opposed &ndash; a superficially bizarre pattern for a non-economic issue). Staunch Australian right-wingers, on the other hand, level it at those who support such things as government funding for the arts, free tertiary education, and the ABC &ndash; all causes which are described by critics as "middle-class welfare".
The ad hominem argument was particularly used by the Howard Government against members of the Australian Labor Party.
The term "liberal" has the opposite connotation in mainstream media to that which it enjoys in the US.  It is associated with the Liberal Party, a conservative and powerful party whose name is based on their objective to liberalise the market economy within Australia.
In the United States, the lifestyle of the liberal elite is often considered noteworthy. The term "liberal elite" often carries the implicit connotation that the individuals described by the term are hypocritical. For instance, they may support busing and oppose school choice and vouchers, but send their children to private or parochial schools.  The liberal elite are often characterized as having an affinity for European culture, especially the culture of France  and foreign films.  Thus the phrase liberal elite suggests that liberals are unpatriotic, because they like other cultures and are disdainful of American life and culture.   Columnist Dave Barry drew attention to these stereotypes when he commented, "Do we truly believe that ALL red-state residents are ignorant racist fascist knuckle-dragging NASCAR-obsessed cousin-marrying roadkill-eating tobacco-juice-dribbling gun-fondling religious fanatic rednecks; or that ALL blue-state residents are godless unpatriotic pierced-nose Volvo-driving France-loving left-wing communist latte-sucking tofu-chomping holistic-wacko neurotic vegan weenie perverts"?  South Park's creators Trey Parker and Matt Stone use the stereotypes attributed to the liberal elite for comic effect.  In the episode Chef's Chocolate Salty Balls, they portrayed members of Hollywood's movie industry as being hypocritical and self-serving and having an affinity for tofu, steamed celery, couscous and the products of organic markets.  In the episode Smug Alert, they portray San Francisco liberals as haughty and condescending towards people less progressive than themselves and poking fun at the large number of wine and cheese stores in San Francisco. The film   includes jokes about the liberal elite, specifically Hollywood celebrities, implying that they live in their own protected niche and are thus unaware of the dangers of internationalism.  During the 2008 U.S. Presidential Election, Republican candidate John McCain likened Democratic candidate Barack Obama's celebrity appeal to that of pop star Britney Spears and socialite Paris Hilton.
A political ad from the right wing organization Club for Growth attacked the Democratic presidential candidate Howard Dean by portraying him as part of the liberal elite: "Howard Dean should take his tax-hiking, government-expanding, latte-drinking, sushi-eating, Volvo-driving, ''New York Times''-reading, body-piercing, Hollywood-loving, left-wing freak show back to Vermont, where it belongs."
In Thomas Frank's ''What's the Matter with Kansas?'' the idea of a liberal elite is compared to George Orwell's character Emmanuel Goldstein in the book ''Nineteen Eighty-Four'', the fictional hated enemy of the people.  Frank argues that anger directed towards this perceived enemy is what keeps the conservative coalition together.
The concept of 'liberal elites' is a product of 'new class' discourse, which emerged in the United States in the 1970s.  Like the 'new class', liberal elites are often understood to be university/college educated professionals, often considered to wield immense cultural power in the media, academy, and school system. The label suggests that any such cultural power is used to gain influence in politics beyond the group's numerical significance. Further, any such influence tends to be characterised as (a) advocating the interests of 'fringe' groups to the detriment of 'mainstream' opinion; and (b) pursuing political goals that are self-serving and/or frivolous, with the effect of restricting public choice.