The exact definition of the requirements are in Title 22, Section 2656f of the United States Code.
The only complete print edition--indexed, updated, and supplemented with maps and tables, 1985-2005--was published by Berkshire Publishing Group in 2005. 
Each report includes a short numerical summary.  The table at right summarizes the number of international terrorism acts reported each year since 1995.  The numbers of those killed or wounded from those acts are also included in the table.
The following list consists of the report excerpts from which the table is based.  Note that some of the numbers are revised after initial publication of the report, which causes some of the numbers used in excerpted comparisons to differ from what was originally reported.
The 2003 report was released twice, in April and June 2004.  The release of the April 29th version led Deputy Secretary of State Richard Armitage to say 
On June 10, 2004, a few weeks after challenges from two professors (Alan Krueger of Princeton University and David Laitin of Stanford University) and Congressman Henry Waxman, the State Department announced that the report previously issued for 2003 was incomplete and incorrect in part.  The revisions issued twelve days later included significant changes, including a doubling of the number of killed and wounded mentioned in the April 2004 version.  Here are examples from the section "The Year in Review":
In November 2004, news leaked to the ''Los Angeles Times'' about an internal report from the State Department's Office of Inspector General.  The report found more errors in the 2003 report, and concluded that even the June version "cannot be viewed as reliable" because of questionable statistics on terrorist attacks and casualties, as well as other issues.  The inspectors cited some short-term problems from the transition to the government's new interagency Terrorist Threat Integration Center.  These included gaps in data entry, inadequate oversight, and personnel issues.  They also cited a long-standing failure by the State Department, CIA, and other agencies to use consistent standards for the identification and classification of terrorism-related events.
Maps of Patterns of Global Terrorism - http://www.gl.iit.edu/govdocs/maps/maps.htm