Williams was born in Arlington, Texas. He briefly attended Princeton University before switching to study economics at Southern Methodist University. Williams currently resides in Las Vegas, Nevada.
Williams's poker success was capped at the 2004 World Series of Poker. He won his buy-in through an online poker site and made it to the finals of the main event, ultimately finishing second to Greg Raymer, but still winning $3.5 million for the runner-up prize. Four months later, he finished second at the Borgata Open World Poker Tour where he collected $573,800.
As of 2010, his total live tournament winnings exceed $7,900,000. $4,317,983 of his live winnings have come at the WSOP, and most of the rest has come from the WPT.
Williams won his sole WSOP bracelet in 2006 in the $1,500 Seven-card stud event when his  () defeated John Hoang's  (). His mother Shirley Williams often attends poker events in which he plays, and even competed in the 2006 WSOP main event, outlasting her son in the process.
In March 2006, Williams made a second WPT final table, finishing 4th for $280,000. Two months later he made another WPT final table, again finishing 4th. In 2010, he won the WPT World Championship, defeating Eric Baldwin heads-up and winning over $1.5 million.
 In June 2010, Williams joined Team PokerStars as a sponsored pro.
In 2009, Williams, playing under the screen name "RugDoctor", defeated Alexander "joiso" Kostritsyn to capture Event #42 ($2,100 8-Game) of the World Championship of Online Poker (WCOOP).
Williams also appeared on the game show ''King of Vegas'', finishing in third place. He now has his own blog that offers an inside look at his personal and professional life. The webisodes air on the internet TV channel RawVegas.tv.
Williams admitted that the cards were marked but disputed the determination that he cheated by marking them intentionally. Williams was suspended by the DCI from sanctioned Magic: The Gathering tournaments for one year. During this suspension, Williams started to focus more on Texas hold 'em, especially on the Internet. He made a successful comeback after his suspension was finished, and won money at several more Magic events, though his focus was mainly on poker.
Even though there is more money that can be made in professional poker than in professional Magic, Williams has said he will continue to play both games, although poker will take precedence. Like many who play both, he has asserted that the two are for different purposes: he plays Magic to have fun, and poker to make money.