The novel begins with Paul,when he is nine years old. It describes how his life has been different from that of most freed slaves.  The book is narrated from Paul's perspective, and quickly introduces his three brothers, his sister, and Mitchell Thomas, a black boy whose father works for Paul's father and who becomes a vital member of the storyline. In the beginning, Mitchell continually bullies Paul for being bi-racial. Paul's father and brothers' only advice for Paul is to "use his Paul's head", and come up with a solution by himself. In "Childhood", Paul's parents are constant reminders of the trials and tribulations of being born biracial. After several months, Paul is able to strike a deal with Mitchell. If Paul teaches Mitchell to "read English, write English, and figure," then Mitchell will teach Paul how to fight and to fend for himself, but, as he reminded Paul, he "can't teach him Paul how to win." 
Eventually Paul and Mitchell become sick of dealing father. When Paul is fourteen, Paul and Mitchell find an opportunity to run away during a horse show in eastern Texas. Having gone against his father's word at the show by riding a man's horse and winning "four times a rider's pay," Paul has trouble collecting his pay. Mitchell uses violent force to ensure that the white man keeps his word and pays Paul the money he has earned. After this incident, the two flee.
The novel later tells what happens during the eleven year gap between part one and two.
Part 2 starts in the middle of Paul and Mitchell's contract with a lumber camp. Paul and Mitchell travel until they decide to separate to avoid drawing attention to themselves. While they are separated, Mitchell goes to more lumber camps, while Paul finds the land that he decides he will own one day in Vicksburg. The book then goes on to describe life in different types of work camps. The story follows Paul as he works at a general store and as a woodworker in a small town. The man he works for is named Luke Sawyer.
Eventually Paul and Mitchell meet a man by the name of Fillmore Granger and make a deal to work for the possession of . Though it is not the land Paul had seen earlier, it is to be the first step in getting . Granger told the two that if they could finish chopping down all the trees big enough for a lumber company within an allotted time, then the land would be theirs
After a few months of working hard at the , Paul realizes that he needs the help of some hired hands.  One hired hand is a man named Tom Bee, who Mitchell worked with before in a camp.  The other hired hands are a white boy Paul had met before, a young black boy, who later becomes Paul's brother-in-law, and a black man named Horace Avery. Also, for a while, a white boy named Wade Jamison helps. 
Mitchell marries Caroline, who soon becomes pregnant, while Paul continues to work for his land. To disrupt this happiness, Digger Wallace fulfills his promise to get Mitchell back for embarrassing him. One day while Mitchell is working on Filmore Granger's land, the drunken Digger shoots Mitchell from behind. When Paul gets to Mitchell, he is almost dead. Mitchell's last request of Paul is that he marry Caroline and take care of their unborn child. After Mitchell dies, Paul tries hunting down Digger...
Later that year, the forty is almost worked off and should soon be in Paul's possession, even with all of the extra conditions that Granger adds to the deal in a last-ditch attempt to keep his land. When Granger decides to not let Paul have the forty because Granger claims they cut trees outside the perimeter, Paul unexpectedly meets one of his brothers, Robert, who was looking for him. His brother tells Paul of how the rest of the family is doing, and gives Paul a letter from their sister. Enclosed in the letter is enough money to pay for the  that Paul originally wanted. Paul's sister explains in her letter that their mother owned the patch of land that they lived on as children, and that ten years after their mother's death, she sold the land to their father for $500, much more than it was worth. This combined with his sister's savings made more than enough money to pay for J.T. Hollenbeck's land, which Paul had originally set his eyes on. After burying Mitchell's body, Paul asks Caroline to marry him and she says yes. From this point in the story, Paul purchases the land, moves onto it, and lives the life he wants.
In the epilogue, Paul is older and has more children. Cassie sends him a letter saying that their father is very ill. When Paul goes to his father, he brings his children with him so his father can see the grandchildren. His father looks sick but happy and soon after dies in his sleep.
Mildred D. Taylor's novels are often based on stories that she read, heard, or was told about her family's history. "I remember my grandparents' house, the house my great-grandfather had built at the turn of the century, and I remember the adults talking about the past. As they talked, I began to visualize all the family who had once known ''The Land'' and I felt as if I knew them too," Taylor explained.
Mildred, Taylor. ''The Land''. Penguin: New York, 2001. ISBN 0-8037-1950-7