Development of the film started in the early 1980s with Tom Mankiewicz assigned to write the script. The project also went through directors Steven Spielberg, John Landis, Walter Hill, and Richard Benjamin before the arrival of Beatty. Filming was entirely at Universal Studios. Danny Elfman was hired to compose the film score, and the music was featured on three separate soundtrack albums.
At an illegal card game, a young street urchin witnesses the massacre of a group of mobsters named Shoulders, Stooge, the Rodent, the Brow and Little Face at the hands of Flattop and Itchy, two of the hoods on the payroll of Alphonse "Big Boy" Caprice. Big Boy's crime syndicate is aggressively taking over small businesses in the city. Detective Dick Tracy catches the urchin (who calls himself "Kid") in an act of petty theft. After rescuing him from a ruthless host, Tracy temporarily adopts him with the help of his girlfriend, Tess Truehart.
Meanwhile, Big Boy coerces club owner Lips Manlis into signing over the deed to ''Club Ritz''. He kills Lips and steals his girlfriend, the seductive and sultry singer, Breathless Mahoney. After Lips is reported missing, Tracy goes to the club to arrest Big Boy for Lips' murder. Breathless is the only witness. Instead of providing testimony, she unsuccessfully attempts to seduce Tracy. Big Boy cannot be convicted and he is released from jail. Big Boy's next move is to try to bring other criminals, including Spud Spaldoni, Pruneface, Influence, Ribs Mocca, Mumbles and Numbers, together under his leadership. Spaldoni refuses and meets an untimely demise that night. Next day, Big Boy and his henchmens kidnap Tracy and nearly kill him by tying him next to a boiler about to explode, but Tracy is saved by Kid.
Tracy tries again to get the testimony from Breathless he needs to put Big Boy away. She agrees to testify only if Tracy agrees to give in to her advances. He resists, despite his growing attraction. Tracy leads a seemingly unsuccessful raid on ''Club Ritz'', but one of his men plants a listening device so the police can hear in on Big Boy's criminal activities. The resultant raids all but wipe out Big Boy's criminal empire. A figure with no face (known as "The Blank") steps out of the shadows to save Tracy after he is taken prisoner. Meanwhile, Breathless shows up at Tracy's apartment, once again in an attempt to seduce him. Tracy shows he is only human by allowing her to kiss him. Tess witnesses this and leaves town. She eventually has a change of heart, but before she can tell Tracy, she is kidnapped by The Blank. Tracy falls victim to another trap. He is drugged by The Blank and framed for the murder of corrupt District Attorney John Fletcher.
Big Boy is back in business, but he, too, is framed, in this case for Tess' kidnapping. Sprung from jail by his colleagues on New Year's Eve, Tracy sets out to save his true love with the help of Kid, who now renamed himself as Dick Tracy Junior. He arrives at a shootout outside Big Boy's club where all of Big Boy's men are gunned down by the police and Tracy himself. Big Boy ties Tess to the mechanism of a drawbridge, but he is confronted by both the Blank and Tracy. Desperate to escape, he shoots the Blank. Enraged, Tracy knocks Big Boy and sends him falling to his death towards the drawbridge's gears. He then frees Tess and proceeds to learn the "Blank"s identity: beneath the faceless figure's mask, Tracy is shocked to find Breathless Mahoney, who kisses him, tells him her attempt to control the city, and breathes her last breath. With the truth brought out, his name is cleared from the murder of Fletcher. Later, in the middle of a marriage proposal to Tess, Tracy is interrupted by a robbery in progress, and takes off with Dick Tracy Jr.
Hamilton Camp appears as a store owner. Allen Garfield, John Schuck, and Charles Fleischer make cameos as reporters. Walker Edmiston, John Moschitta, Jr., and Neil Ross provide the voices of each radio announcer.
That same year, Mutrux and Linson eventually took the property to Paramount Pictures, who began developing screenplays, offered Steven Spielberg the director's position, and brought in Universal Pictures to co-finance. Universal put John Landis forward as a candidate for director, courted Clint Eastwood for the title role, and commissioned Jim Cash and Jack Epps, Jr. to write the screenplay. "Before we were brought on, there were several failed scripts at Universal," reflected Epps, "then it went dormant, but John Landis was interested in ''Dick Tracy'', and he brought us in to write it." Cash and Epps' simple orders from Landis were to write the script in a 1930s pulp magazine atmosphere and center it with Alphonse "Big Boy" Caprice as the primary villain. For research, Epps read every ''Dick Tracy'' comic strip from 1930 to 1957. The writers wrote two drafts for Landis; Max Allan Collins, then writer of the ''Dick Tracy'' comic strip, remembers reading one of them. "It was terrible. The only positive thing about it was a thirties setting and lots of great villains, but the story was paper-thin and it was uncomfortably campy."
 Landis left ''Dick Tracy'' following the controversial on-set accident on '' '' (1983),Hughes, pp. 51 in which actor Vic Morrow was killed. In an interview with fimmaker Pasquale Murena, John Landis stated that he brought Beatty in to play Tracy and that the script used by Beatty is the one he developed. Walter Hill then came on board to direct with Joel Silver as producer. Cash and Epps wrote another draft, and Hill approached Warren Beatty for the title role. Pre-production had progressed as far as set building, but the film was stalled when artistic control issues arose with Beatty, a fan of the ''Dick Tracy'' comic strip. Hill wanted to make the film violent and realistic, while Beatty envisioned a stylized homage to the 1930s comic strip. The actor also reportedly wanted $5 million plus fifteen percent of the box office gross, a deal which Universal refused to accept.
Hill and Beatty left the film, which Paramount began developing as a lower-budget project with Richard Benjamin directing. Cash and Epps continued to rewrite the script, but Universal was unsatisfied. The film rights eventually reverted to Tribune Media Services in 1985. However, Beatty decided to option the ''Dick Tracy'' rights himself, along with the Cash/Epps script. When Jeffrey Katzenberg moved from Paramount to the Walt Disney Motion Pictures Group, ''Dick Tracy'' resurfaced with Beatty as director, producer and leading man. He considered hiring Martin Scorsese to direct the film, but changed his mind. "It never occurred to me to direct the movie," Beatty admitted, "but finally, like most of the movies that I direct, when the time comes to do it, I just do it because it's easier than going through what I'd have to go through to get somebody else to do it."
 As a result, Beatty and Disney reached a contracted agreement whereby any budget overruns on ''Dick Tracy'' would be deducted from Beatty's fee as producer, director, and star. Beatty and regular collaborator Bo Goldman significantly rewrote the dialogue but lost a Writers Guild arbitration and did not receive screen credit.
 which began to rise once filming started. It quickly jumped to $30 million and then $47 million as its final production budget. Disney spent an additional $54 million on the marketing campaign, resulting in a total of $101 million spent overall. The financing for ''Dick Tracy'' came from Disney's Touchstone Pictures and Silver Screen Partners, as well as Beatty's own production company, Mulholland Productions.
Although Al Pacino was Warren Beatty's first choice for the role of Alphonse "Big Boy" Caprice, Robert De Niro was under consideration. Madonna, who was then in a relationship with Beatty, pursued the part of Breathless Mahoney, but offered to work for scale to avoid any appearance of nepotism. Her resulting paycheck for the film was just $35,000. Sean Young claims she was forced out of the role of Tess Truehart (which eventually went to Glenne Headly) after rebuffing sexual advances from Beatty. In a 1989 statement, Beatty said, "I made a mistake casting Sean Young in the part and I felt very badly about it."
 at Universal Studios in Universal City, California. Other filming took place at Warner Bros. Studios in Burbank. In total, 53 interior and 25 exterior sets were constructed. Beatty, being a perfectionist, often encompassed dozens of takes of every scene.
Early in the development of ''Dick Tracy'', Warren Beatty decided to make the film using a palette limited to just seven colors, primarily red, green, blue and yellow&mdash;to evoke the film's comic strip origins; furthermore each of the colors was to be exactly the same shade. Beatty's design team included production designer Richard Sylbert, set decorator Rick Simpson, cinematographer Vittorio Storaro, visual effects supervisors Michael Lloyd and Harrison Ellenshaw, prosthetic makeup designers John Caglione, Jr. and Doug Drexler, and costume designer Milena Canonero. Their main intention was to stay close to Chester Gould's original drawings from the 1930s. Other influences came from the Art Deco movement and German Expressionism. 
For Storaro, the limited color palette was the most challenging aspect of production. "These are not the kind of colors the audience is used to seeing," he noted. "These are much more dramatic in strength, in saturation. Comic strip art is usually done with very simple and primitive ideas and emotions," Storaro theorized. "One of the elements is that the story is usually told in vignette, so what we tried to do is never move the camera at all. ''Never''. Try to make everything work into the frame." For the matte paintings, Ellenshaw and Lloyd executed over 57 paintings on glass, which were then optically combined with the live action. For a brief sequence in which The Kid dashes in front of a speeding locomotive, only  feet of real track was laid; the train itself was a  scale model, and the surrounding train yard a matte painting. 
 with the exception of Al Pacino (Big Boy Caprice), who improvised his own designs, ignoring the rather overweight character of the strip. His makeup took 3.5 hours to apply.
Warren Beatty hired Danny Elfman to compose/write the film score based on his previous success with ''Batman'' (1989). Elfman enlisted the help of Oingo Boingo lead guitarist Steve Bartek and Shirley Walker to arrange compositions for the orchestra. "In a completely different way," Elfman commented, "''Dick Tracy'' has this unique quality that ''Batman'' had for me. It gives an incredible sense of non-reality." In addition, Beatty hired acclaimed songwriter Stephen Sondheim to write five original songs: "Sooner or Later," "More," "Back in Business," "Live Alone and Like It," and "What Can You Lose?". "Sooner or Later" and "More" were performed by Madonna, with "What Can You Lose?" being a duet with Mandy Patinkin. Mel Torme sang "Live Alone and Like It" as a disembodied voice-over.Hughes, pp. 56-58
Disney modeled its marketing campaign after the 1989 success of ''Batman'', which was based on high concept promotion. This included a McDonald's tie and a Warren Beatty interview conducted by Barbara Walters on ''20/20''. "I find the media's obsession with promotion and demographics upsetting," Beatty said. "I find all this anti-cultural." In attempting to market ''Dick Tracy'' to young children, Disney added a new ''Roger Rabbit'' cartoon short (''Roller Coaster Rabbit'') and made two specific television advertisements centered on The Kid (Charlie Korsmo). In total, Disney commissioned 28 TV advertisements. Playmates Toys manufactured a line of 14 ''Dick Tracy'' figures.
It was Madonna's idea to include the film as part of her Blond Ambition World Tour. Prior to the June 1990 theatrical release, Disney had already featured ''Dick Tracy'' in musical theatre stage shows in both Disneyland and the Walt Disney World Resort, using Stephen Sondheim and Danny Elfman's music. ''The New York Times'' also wrote in June 1990 of Disney Stores "selling nothing but ''Tracy''-related merchandise." Max Allan Collins lobbied to write the film's novelization long before Disney had even greenlighted ''Dick Tracy'' in 1988. "I hated the idea that anyone else would write a ''Tracy'' novel," Collins explained. After much conflict with Disney, leading to  seven different printings of the novelization, the book was released in May 1990, published by Bantam Books. It sold almost one million copies prior to the film's release. A graphic novel adaptation of the film was also released, written and illustrated by Kyle Baker.
Reruns of ''The Dick Tracy Show'' began airing to coincide with the release of the film, but stations in Los Angeles and New York pulled and edited the episodes when Asian and Hispanic groups protested that the characters Joe Jitsu and Go Go Gomez were offensive stereotypes.
As an advance marketing tool that tied into the film's June 15th release date, many movie theatres around the U.S. had sold T-shirts with the title and image of the lead character of them, and people who wore them could then attend midnight screenings of the film.
Although Disney was impressed by the opening weekend gross, studio chairman Jeffrey Katzenberg expressed disappointment. He suggested that ''Dick Tracy'' had cost about $100 million in total to produce, market and promote. "We made demands on our time, talent and treasury that, upon reflection, may not have been worth it," Katzenberg reported. Disney, in particular, was expecting the film's earnings to match ''Batman'' (1989). By 1997, ''Dick Tracy'' had made an additional $60.61 million in rental figures.
Based on 43 reviews collected by ''Rotten Tomatoes'', 65% of the critics enjoyed ''Dick Tracy''. The consensus reads: "''Dick Tracy'' is stylish, unique, and an undeniable technical triumph, but it ultimately struggles to rise above its two-dimensional artificiality." Roger Ebert believed Warren Beatty created a perfect tone of nostalgia for the film. Ebert mostly praised the matte paintings, art direction and prosthetic makeup design. "''Dick Tracy'' is one of the most original and visionary fantasies I've seen on a screen," he wrote.
Vincent Canby of ''The New York Times'' reviewed: "''Dick Tracy'' has just about everything required of an extravaganza: a smashing cast, some great Stephen Sondheim songs, all of the technical wizardry that money can buy, and a screenplay that observes the fine line separating true comedy from lesser camp."
 Owen Gleiberman from ''Entertainment Weekly'' gave a mixed review, but was impressed by Madonna's performance. "''Dick Tracy'' is an honest effort but finally a bit of a folly. It could have used a little less color and a little more flesh and blood," Gleiberman concluded.
In his heavily negative review for ''The Washington Post'', Desson Thomson criticized Disney's hyped marketing campaign, and the film in general. "''Dick Tracy'' is Hollywood's annual celebration of everything that's wrong with Hollywood," he stated. Peter Travers of ''Rolling Stone'' magazine cited that Warren Beatty, at 52 years old, was too old for the part. He also found similarities with ''Batman'' (1989), in which both films involve "a loner hero, a grotesque villain, a blond bombshell, a marketable pop soundtrack and a no-mercy merchandising campaign," Travers continued. "But ''Batman'' possesses something else: a psychological depth that gives the audience a stake in the characters. ''Tracy'' sticks to its eye-poppingly brilliant surface. Though the film is a visual knockout, it's emotionally impoverished."
Although Max Allan Collins (then a ''Dick Tracy'' comic-strip writer) had conflicts with Disney concerning the novelization, he gave a positive review for the finished film. He praised Beatty for hiring an elaborate design team and his decision to mimic the strip's limited color palette. Collins also enjoyed Beatty's performance, both the prosthetic makeup and characterization of the rogues gallery, as well as the Stephen Sondheim music. However, he believed the filmmakers still sacrificed the storyline in favor of the visual design.
At the 63rd Academy Awards, production designer Richard Sylbert and set decorator Rick Simpson won Best Art Direction, while John Caglione, Jr. and Doug Drexler won Best Makeup. Stephen Sondheim was also awarded with Best Original Song for "Sooner or Later", which Madonna sang live at the awards ceremony. ''Dick Tracy'', with three Oscars, is the comic book film with the most wins, followed by ''The Dark Knight'' (2008) with two. Nominations included Al Pacino for Best Supporting Actor, Vittorio Storaro (Cinematography), Milena Canonero (Costume Design), and the sound designers (Sound). Storaro was also honored for his work by both the American Society of Cinematographers and British Society of Cinematographers.
The British Academy of Film and Television Arts gave awards to Sylbert, Caglione and Drexler at the 44th British Academy Film Awards. Pacino, Canonero, editor Richard Marks, and both the sound design and visual effects departments received nominations. At the 48th Golden Globe Awards, Pacino and Sondheim (for both "Sooner of Later and "What Can You Lose") were nominated for their work, while ''Dick Tracy'' lost the Best Motion Picture (Musical or Comedy) to ''Green Card'' (1990) and the Saturn Award for Best Fantasy Film to ''Ghost'' (1990). Cagilione and Drexler ended up winning Best Make-up, while Warren Beatty (Best Actor), Madonna (Best Actress), Pacino (Supporting Actor), and Charlie Korsmo (Performance by a Younger Actor) received nominations. Canonero was also nominated once more for her costume design. Film score composer Danny Elfman and Sondheim ("More") received individual nominations at the Grammy Awards.
The movie was released on VHS on December 19, 1990, and was first released on DVD in Europe in 2000, but domestic release in the US was delayed until April 2, 2002, and without any special features. Rumors circulated over the web shortly after the US DVD release that Warren Beatty had planned to release a director's cut under Disney's "Vista Series" label; including at least ten extra minutes of footage. A Blu-ray release is in the works.
Disney had hoped ''Dick Tracy'' would carry a vein similar to the ''Indiana Jones'' franchise, but the studio expressed box office disappointment and halted their plans.Stewart, pp. 111-115 In addition, executive producers Art Linson and Floyd Mutrux sued Beatty shortly after the release of the film, alleging that they were owed profit participation from the film.
Beatty purchased the ''Dick Tracy'' film and television rights in 1985 from Tribune Media Services. He then took the property to the Walt Disney Motion Pictures Group, who optioned the rights in 1988. According to Beatty, in 2002, the Tribune attempted to reclaim the rights and notified Disney     but not through the process outlined in the 1985 agreement. Beatty, who commented he had "a very good idea" for a sequel, believed the Tribune violated various notification procedures that "clouded the title" to the rights and made it "commercially impossible" for him to produce a sequel. He approached the Tribune in 2004 to settle the situation, but the company said they had met the conditions to get back the rights. 
Disney, which had no intention of producing a sequel, rejected Tribune's claim and gave Beatty back most of the rights in May 2005. That same month, Beatty filed a lawsuit in the Los Angeles, California Superior Court seeking $30 million in damages against the Tribune and a declaration over the rights. Bertram Fields, Beatty's lawyer, said the original 1985 agreement with the Tribune was negotiated specifically to allow Beatty a chance to make another ''Dick Tracy'' film. "It was very carefully done and they just ignored it," he stated. "The Tribune is a big, powerful company and they think they can just run roughshod over people. They picked the wrong guy." 
The Tribune believed the situation would be settled quickly and was confident enough to begin developing a ''Dick Tracy'' live action television series with Lorenzo di Bonaventura, Robert Newmyer and Outlaw Productions. The TV show was to have a contemporary setting, comparable to ''Smallville'', and Di Bonaventura commented that if the TV show was successful, a feature film would likely follow. However, an August 2005 ruling by federal judge Dean D. Pregerson cleared the way for Beatty to sue the Tribune. The April 2006 hearing ended without a ruling, but in July 2006, a Los Angeles judge ruled that the case can go to trial; Tribune's request to end the suit in their favor was rejected. The legal battle between Beatty and the Tribune continued to ensue.
By March 2009, the Tribune was in Chapter 11 bankruptcy and lawyers for the company began to declare their ownership of television and film rights to ''Dick Tracy''. "Mr. Beatty's conduct and wrongful claims have effectively locked away certain motion picture and television rights to the ''Dick Tracy'' property," lawyers for Tribune wrote in a filing. Fields responded that it was "a nuisance lawsuit by a bankrupt company and they should be ashamed of themselves."
On March 25, 2011, U.S. District Court Judge Dean D. Pregerson granted Beatty's request for a summary judgment and ruled in the actor's favor.  Judge Pregerson wrote in his order that "Beatty's commencement of principal photography of his television special on November 8, 2008 was sufficient for him to retain the Dick Tracy rights."
In June 2011, Beatty confirmed his intention to make a sequel to ''Dick Tracy'', but he refused to discuss details. He said: "I'm gonna make another one  I think it's dumb talking about movies before you make them. I just don't do it. It gives you the perfect excuse to avoid making them." When asked when the sequel would get made, he replied: "I take so long to get around to making a movie that I don   t know when it starts." - Ain't It Cool News, June 10, 2011
While there have not been any sequels in either television or motion picture form, there have been sequels in novel form. Shortly after the release of the 1990 film, Max Allan Collins wrote ''Dick Tracy Goes To War''. The story is set after the opening of World War II and involves Dick Tracy's enlistment into the U.S. Navy, working for their Military Intelligence Division (as he did in the comic strip). In the story, Nazi sabotouers Black Pearl and Mrs. Pruneface (Pruneface's widow) set up a sabotage/espionage operation out of Caprice's old headquarters in the Club Ritz. For their activities, they recruit B.B. Eyes, The Mole, and Shakey. Their reign of terror, culminating in an attempt to bomb a weapons plant, is averted by Tracy. A year after "War" was released, Collins wrote a third novel entitled ''Dick Tracy Meets His Match'', in which Dick Tracy finally follows through in his marriage proposal to Tess Trueheart.