A native of Hazleton, Pennsylvania, of German, Italian, Swedish and Irish ancestry, Ettinger moved to New York City to attend the Fashion Institute of Technology to study fashion and clothing design, having expressed hopes to create her own clothing line and other business ventures.Tribune, Cosmic  November 16, 2006 at  Early in her career, Ettinger was crowned Miss NYC in the 2003 Miss Hawaiian Tropic pageant, later augmenting that title with a nod as Howard Stern's Miss Howard TV in June 2007. She has also appeared in a video for ''The Onion News Network'',The Onion News Network  as well as the music video for the John Popper Project song "Lapdance." She was also Hooters Miss Manhattan, representing them in the 2003 International Swimsuit Pageant. Accessed 22 January 2011.
Ettinger appeared in the "I Got a Crush... on Obama" viral video, which was posted by Barely Political to YouTube in June 2007. Later, she appeared in a new video called "Hillary! Stop the attacks! Love, Obama Girl" released on March 25, 2008. On May 7, 2008, Barely Political posted a YouTube video with Ettinger and former Democratic and Libertarian Party presidential candidate Mike Gravel, entitled "Mike Gravel Lobbies for the Obama Girl Vote." In the video, Gravel tries to persuade her to switch her support from Obama to him.
In late September 2008 Ettinger made a YouTube video with Independent candidate Ralph Nader in which he argues that he should be included in the debates. The video was a spoof of conventional sitcoms and was called "The Obama Girl and Ralph Nader Show." Also featuring former Governor of Minnesota Jesse Ventura, the video followed what would happen if Obama Girl and Ralph Nader shared an office.
In the Fall of 2008, Ettinger starred in a parody of "I Got a Crush on Obama" with a promotional video for EA's Red Alert 3. In it, she professes her allegiance to Howard Ackerman, a fictional presidential candidate played by actor J.K. Simmons.
Beyond her ''Barely Political'' and modeling career, in late 2008, Ettinger launched a music career. Staying true to her online roots, her first album, ''Queen of the Web'', was made available only online. The first single, "Second Time," was released in August 2008.
On March 10, 2010, she appeared on Shear Genius as one of the models to be styled for headshots. In mid 2010, Ettinger became a correspondent on fashion for the network WPIX in NYC.
Ettinger lives in West New York, New Jersey.