Uclue's researchers can provide answers spanning a broad and eclectic array of topics. Categories include Business, Genealogy, all the Sciences, Technology, Computer/Software Help, Health, and the Arts.  Questions range from high-level business research: "Research on the NGO sector," to locating equipment and other items: "Color NTSC video camera for low-light usage," to the quirky: "How to Amuse a cat."
The fee range is $10 to $400, and customers select the fee based on the complexity and/or obscurity of the requested information. Customers are encouraged to use the lower end of the fee scale only for relatively simple questions. Customers also have the option of tipping researchers.  Uclue customers pay via PayPal when they post a question. (There is no question listing fee.) If the question isn't answered within 14 days, the customer will receive a refund.  Customers also have 30 days to request a refund if dissatisfied with an answer; however, customers are encouraged to use the Clarification process to refine the answer to their satisfaction before seeking a refund.
Uclue's origins are rooted in the closing of Google Answers to new questions on November 30, 2006.  Shortly after Google announced that Google Answers was being retired, Tomi Poutanen, Yahoo's Product Manager for Social Search, set up a group discussion with Google Answers Researchers (GARs). Poutanen explained Yahoo! was considering augmenting Yahoo! Answers with a "Premium" paid research service to be staffed by displaced GARs. Poutanen sought GARs' input on the proposal, but discussions soon fizzled. (To date, Yahoo! Answers has not added a fee-based "Premium" tier to Yahoo! Answers.) 
Even before Yahoo's short-lived overture, ex-GARs were already focusing on plans to form their own fee-based Q&A service. Computer programmer and former GAR Roger Browne (known as eiffel-ga at Google Answers) announced he was starting a new Q&A service, Uclue.
Startup of Uclue in Beta began on February 28, 2007, and the launch was publicly announced on March 7, 2007. Browne explained, "We were all saddened at the demise of GA, but we know there is a terrific need for a place where users can get fast, professional, high-quality research at a surprisingly low cost. Uclue is that place, and we're thrilled to announce that we're now in business".
In Computerworld's March 8, 2007 feature article on Uclue, Emily Moore (Uclue researcher "journalist") expanded on Uclue's mission, which is "to assist people who don't have the time to search for themselves, or don't know how to search,  how to get into the deep Web. . .The niche that Uclue fills is for quality detailed, comprehensive information. People are quite willing to pay for that."
Uclue explained the differences in response to a question from Philipp Lenssen of Google Blogoscoped. (Lenssen is a former GAR known as j_philipp-ga):  Question: How does Uclue compare to Google Answers? 
Currently, only former Google Answers Researchers may apply to become Uclue Researchers.
Uclue founder Roger Browne explained Uclue's business model in his answer to the question "Uclue itself":