A nine-year-old girl (Maria Recinos) calls 911 stating that she is stuck in a room, hungry and she needs help. The call is then put through to Benson, and Maria tells her that the room doesn   t have any windows; all it has is a bed and a picture of a garden on the wall. She then says that the telephone belongs to her father Richard and that her mother, Beatrice, is deceased. Meanwhile, Cragen learns that the telephone Maria is calling from is registered to a cab driver named Ricardo Garcia, who was arrested for assaulting his wife.
Fin tracks down Garcia, who says that he lost his phone; then he learns that Garcia   s daughter is safe. While Munch and company are searching apartments, Morales suggests that Richard could have spoofed Garcia   s phone number with a DDI, thus finding a trace to Maria   s actual calling location is made more difficult. Maria tells Benson that there is a bag in the room filled with clothes she has to wear when she dresses up. She then says that Richard buys her food from "Felipe   s Burgers", which is twenty blocks away from the search area; Fin goes to the location and learns that it burned down three months ago. Benson then instructs Maria not to lie to her, and Maria hangs up.
Morales enhances the background of Maria   s previous call and reveals the sounds of traffic, bells and a car engine despite the phone signal not moving. After Novak brings in an expert (Julia Ortiz) to track Maria   s dialect, Maria calls back with a signal in the Holland Tunnel, but she insists that she didn   t move. Cragen orders Fin to the tunnel and shuts it down to search every vehicle for Maria; meanwhile, Julia confirms that Maria is from Honduras, and Novak goes to meet the Honduran consul to convince him to connect to the Honduran police.
A supposed call then comes in from another troubled girl, but it turns out to be Munch using a voice changer, suggesting that Maria might not really exist; then Cragen declines to arrange another search for her. While Fin reports that Maria   s mother Beatrice is alive, the FBI expert (Rachel Sorannis) discovers that a virus was programmed in the cell phone company   s switchboard, thus sending the signal to random cell towers. A photo of Maria from her ninth birthday comes in, and Maria describes exactly what she was wearing in the photo. Benson recognizes Maria from a notice sent from Montreal SVU about an unknown child pornographer; the accompanying photos also show the picture of the garden that Maria described earlier.
Maria describes Richard as having brown hair and silver glasses (which he folds up and puts into a blue case before he does    bad things   ). She then wants to hang up because she   s tired and also because the phone battery is going out. Sorannis then locates and removes the virus; Benson then instructs Maria to hang up and call back again. However, before Maria can do so, Richard arrives and hangs up himself. The detectives then look through photos of Maria for clues, and Munch observes a mug with the Felipe   s Burgers logo on it; Fin remembers that there is an electronics store across the street from where Felipe   s was and they guess the mug was the reason Maria thought Richard bought her food from Felipe's.
Benson and Fin go to where Felipe's Burgers once was. Benson notices a driver (Richard Dwyer) taking his folded glasses out of a blue case and putting them on; she and Fin stop him before he can drive off. In the basement of the electronics store, they find Richard   s child porn studio, but no sign of Maria. Richard says that he lives on Long Island and eventually asks for a lawyer; then Benson notices mud on his shoes. She and Fin find chips of burnt wood in the mud and trace it back to the empty lot at Felipe   s. They then dig through the earth and find Maria buried in a garbage bag with her "dress up" clothes; Benson is able to revive her with CPR and the two finally meet face to face.