Since the 1950s the company have been the major engine supplier to the Swedish Air Force. The Volvo Aero Group has 3,600 employees and in 2003 had total sales of 0.9 billion Euros. Today Volvo Aero is a partner in more than ten commercial engine programmes. Components from Volvo Aero are installed in more than 90% of all large commercial aircraft engines sold.
Since its foundation the company has built expertise as the main supplier of single-engine systems for military aircraft.  These have largely been in partnership with other engine manufacturers, like the RM1 (de Havilland Goblin) for the Saab 21R, RM2 (de Havilland Ghost) for the Saab J29, RM5 and RM6 (Rolls-Royce Avon) for the Saab 32 Lansen, the RM6B for the Saab 35 Draken, and RM8 (Pratt & Whitney JT8D) for the Saab 37 Viggen.  The Gripen's RM12 engine is a derivative of the General Electric F404.
Svenska Flygmotor also designed the B42, four-cylinder boxer-engine, intended for the SAAB Safir.  However, SAAB decided on using engines from de Havilland and Lycoming for the Safir.  In the end the B42 came to power the Infanterikanonvagn 103 assault gun.  A follow-up called B44 powered the Pansarbandvagn 301 armoured personnel carrier.
In order to be competitive, Volvo Aero has specialised in a few very advanced jet engine components, mainly complex engine structures like turbine exhaust casings, turbine mid frames, LPT cases, compressor housings, LPT shafts, vanes, and large rotating parts.
Volvo Aero also have in Trollhattan a facillity where they do maintenance on aircraft engines and stationary gas turbines. The aircraft engines are Pratt & Whitney Canada PW100 and TFE-731 engines. The Stationary gas turbines is General Electric LM1600 engine, and the DR990, which Volvo bought the OEM responsibility from Dresser Rand.
On the space propulsion side, Volvo Aero is the world   s largest manufacturer of combustion chambers and nozzles for commercial launch vehicles, and is the centre of excellence for rocket engine turbines in Europe.
On the service side, Volvo Aero offers an extensive range of products including 
The company have produced the F-series hydraulic motors under the ''Volvo Flygmotor'' and ''VOAC'' brands.
Volvo Aero subsidiaries are located in the United States and Norway, in addition to Volvo's home country, Sweden. The Norwegian plant, in Kongsberg, is the former Norsk Jetmotor (eng., "Norwegian Jet Engine"), itself formerly a part of Kongsberg Vapenfabrikk.