She was originally laid down as BDE-43 on 12 January 1943 by the Puget Sound Navy Yard for transfer to Great Britain upon completion. However, she was ordered retained for service in the U.S. Navy. She was reclassified DE-43 on 16 June; named ''Mitchell'' on 23 June; launched on 1 August 1943; sponsored by Mrs. Albert E. Mitchell, widow of Ensign Mitchell; and commissioned on 17 November 1943, Lieutenant Commander M. S. Erdahl in command.
After shakedown and training off San Diego, California, ''Mitchell'' sailed on 2 February 1944 as part of the escort of a convoy of eight liberty ships sailing to Hawaii. Arriving Pearl Harbor on 10 February, ''Mitchell'' spent the next four months operating with American submarines in Task Force 16, Service Force Pacific Fleet. These maneuvers were a valuable training aid to both ''Mitchell'' and the submarines.
On 3 June ''Mitchell'' sailed for the Pacific war zone in Task Group 16.6. In the following six months she sailed out of Kwajalein, Eniwetok, Seeadler Harbor (Admiralties), and Ulithi, screening underway replenishment operations, guarding harbor entrances, and destroying floating enemy mines. On 3 December she struck a whale, seriously damaging her underwater sound equipment and forcing her to retire to Ulithi for repairs in floating drydock auxiliary repair dock .
As part of Task Group 30.8, she then helped to protect convoys supplying the occupation of Japan during the months of August and September 1945. On 5 September ''Mitchell'' briefly joined American ships in Tokyo Harbor. She weighed anchor on the 18th for the United States via Eniwetok and Pearl Harbor, arriving San Francisco on 8 October.
Her last time underway as a commissioned naval vessel was on 6 November when she moved to Kaiser's Victory Yard, Richmond, California. ''Mitchell'' was decommissioned there and struck from the Navy List on 29 December 1945. She was sold for scrapping and delivered to the purchaser, Puget Sound Navigation Co., Seattle, Washington, on 11 December 1946.