The following is a list of '''Skype's features''':
Skype users can call traditional phone numbers and purchase online numbers to receive traditional calls using SkypeOut and SkypeIn.
SkypeOut calls to most toll-free numbers in France (+33 800, +33 805, +33 809) , Poland: (+48 800) , UK: (+44 500, +44 800, +44 808 ) and the United States and Canada: (+1 800, +1 866, +1 888 ) are free for all Skype users, even if they do not have the SkypeOut service. However, for many other countries SkypeOut doesn't support calls to toll-free or premium rate numbers, and SkypeOut doesn't support calling emergency numbers such as 1-1-2 in Europe or 911 in the United States.
Quality of service is not guaranteed, and drop-outs, broken connections, and compression distortion are frequently observed by users.
Skype advertises a feature on its Web site to allow users to set the caller ID for outgoing calls to normal telephone numbers.  Set-up verification involves sending an SMS text message to a selected mobile phone number, then typing that verification code into a Web form. Since most regular home and business telephones cannot receive text messages, this feature is only available to owners of cell phones.
However, according to discussions on Skype's user forums and other forums on the Internet, SMS messaging from Skype's system has not been working correctly in various locales since at least June 2008.  Although Skype maintains that the problem has been corrected, SMS continues to be inoperative as recently as July 2009 in the United States and Canada.  During the verification process, the Skype Web site makes it appear as if a text message has been sent to the user's mobile phone, and an appropriate fee is deducted from the user's Skype credit balance, but no text messages are actually received on the phone.  Since many individuals and business refuse incoming telephone calls whose Caller ID has been blocked, this hampers the utility of Skype in calling normal telephone numbers.
A service named ''Skype Number'' (until 2010 named ''SkypeIn'') allows Skype users to receive calls on their computers dialed by regular phone subscribers to a Skype-provided phone number. The number need not be in the same location as the user. For example, a user in San Francisco could create a local telephone number in Helsinki. Callers in Helsinki could then make a local call to reach that user.
Skype offers numbers in Australia, Chile, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Hong Kong, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Republic of Korea, Malta, Mexico, Netherlands, New Zealand, Poland, Romania, South Africa, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and the United States.
In Russia some third party companies, including SIP operators, provide direct numbers, redirecting calls to Skype.
On 19 December 2006, Skype announced that there would be a new pricing structure in 2007. Details on a new scheme were released 18 January 2007. The initial press release was vague about the new scheme, but it did reveal that there may be a new connection fee.
In January 2007, Skype launched a prepaid Unlimited call subscription service for North American customers. Skype's Unlimited calling offers a full year of Unlimited calls to anyone, on any phone, within the U.S. and Canada for a one-time (i.e., annual) fee. This plan which was called Skype Pro only allowed the unlimited calls that were made from inside North America. As of April 21, 2008, these plans were changed to the new calling subscription plans, which don't require the calls to start from a certain country. Under the current plans, there is a Unlimited US & Canada plan for $2.95 or    1.95 per month, an Unlimited Country plan for $5.95 or    3.95 per month, and an Unlimited World plan for $12.95 or    8.95 per month.
Skype offers several monthly plans that it calls ''unlimited''.  However, Skype limits these subscriptions to 10,000 minutes per month, 6 hours per day, and 50 telephone numbers per day.  If one of these limits is exceeded, any additional calls are billed at regular rates and connection fees.
Skype 2.0 and later, on Microsoft Windows (DirectX 9.0 or above required), Mac OS X, and Linux, supports video calling for Skype-to-Skype calls between two parties. Skype 3.6 and later on Windows supports high-definition video. Skype 3.0.0 on iOS allows iPhone, iPad and iPod Touch users to call each other, as well as Windows, Linux and Mac OS X. Skype 5 supports group video calls.
Like many other instant messaging services, Skype clients can send SMS text messages to mobile phone numbers. In the United States, China, and Taiwan, Skype uses a "generic, pre-defined number" as the sender ID. In other countries, the message can be set to appear coming from a verified mobile number, allowing recipients to reply, or else show the first 11 characters of the Skype username. However, as of March 2011, Skype users cannot receive SMS, despite a continuing series of requests and complaints. 
Costs are generally lower than standard SMS charges; for example Skype's UK rate per SMS message including VAT is 6.4p, compared to standard rates of 10p or 12p; for international SMS costs will be significantly cheaper using Skype. When the recipient of the message is roaming, the message may not be delivered. However modifying the cell numbers country code to the desired region can sometimes alleviate this problem.
Version 3.0 adds the ability to connect and talk to other users without actually being in a conference.  In this mode, the user can talk to multiple users without those users having the ability to communicate with each other.  Since there is no conference window, the user using invisible calling must have the user they are connected to end the call or exit Skype entirely to disconnect.
The ''Skype Web Toolbar'' recognizes phone and Skype numbers, and is available only for Internet Explorer and Mozilla Firefox on Windows.  Such numbers on web pages are replaced with an icon that can be clicked to call the number using Skype, or right-clicked to provide further options, such as adding the number to Skype's list of contacts. The toolbar detects phone numbers automatically, but a web site developer can override the detection algorithm using a Meta element and mark the valid numbers individually.
A log file is created for each contact on a user's contact list. Log files are stored locally, meaning they are not available if a user switches computers. By default, the option to log conversations is disabled, but can be enabled in the  tools / privacy panel.
On Windows, Skype can be run directly from a USB flash drive without being installed on the host computer.
Skype version 3.0 and above provides additional tools under the ''Do More'' submenu. The ''Skype Extras'' listing is also accessible at . Examples of third-party add-ons include the  call recorder for recording voice calls, Unyte desktop sharing, and games.
A service by fring enables Skype, ICQ, Windows Live Messenger, and Google Talk users to transparently use their respective programs with full access to contacts, chat, talk, and presence capabilities.
Web-based services like  allows Skype users to send faxes worldwide at a low cost per page.
PocketSkype is a freeware software that allows users to make Skype voice calls using their Wi-Fi-enabled Windows Mobile Pocket PC. PocketSkype is a thin version of Skype and developed specifically for PDA devices and any mobile software. It helps people to make free, unlimited, and unmetered calls. PocketSkype retains the same core of regular Skype software and it works on any PDA running Windows Mobile 2003 with a 400&nbsp;MHz processor and equipped with Wi-Fi.
Skype supports group text chat with an interface similar to IRC with 150 People.
The Macintosh version used to use the same message view style format as Adium, though with a different filename extension. Message view styles made for Adium could be installed for Skype, and they did not even need to be renamed. There were a couple of cosmetic bugs, but ignoring those, Adium styles worked without modification. This feature is not present in the Windows, Linux, and Pocket PC versions of Skype. This feature has been discontinued starting with Skype 2.7.0.49.
Skype let users set their presence indicator to "Skype Me!" in earlier versions of Skype software. It invited calls from strangers. Setting one's status to Skype Me attracts a number of callers who want to practice a foreign language (usually English), in addition to the expected scammers and spammers. This feature has been hidden from being selectable starting with Skype version 4.x.
On August 26, 2008, Peter Parkes announced that Skypecasts will be discontinued at 12 noon BST on Monday September 1, 2008 .  Parkes, a Cambridge economics graduate who works for 'we are social', a conversation agency in London, also writes to the Skype blog.  On August 27 he added detail to this announcement in another blog posting .  
The discontinuation announcement was revealed only on these two blog postings and not on Skype.com, the Skypecasts directory page  nor other sources.  Therefore the end to Skypecasts were thought by some to be an elaborate hoax.  At 12 noon BST, Skypecasts were still running  but after around 2 hours they ended and on Skypecasts Directory  it says 'Skypecasts unavailable'.
In Skype 4.0 Beta, Skypecasts did not work even before the discontinuation announcement.  There is no 'Live' Tab and when you could access the listings in the directory and tried to enter a Skypecasts a message came up after a dialing tone was heard say: 'Failed' (or a similar message).
In late 2009 the company, Skype for Power Gamers (S4PG), announced that in Q2 2010 it would be releasing both a client and server Skype Add-on that will enable Skype end-users to host their own "Skypecast-like" auto-conference rooms.
Since Skype 4, the "Not Available" status is only partially supported.
Most Skype versions, including version 4, broadcast a status of "Not Available" after a configured idle time, but Skype 4 no longer allows the user edit this setting. The only way for the user to configure this idle time setting is to edit the IdleTimeForNA setting in the config.xml file.
Skype 4 displays other users' "Not Available" status as "Away".