As of the 2009-10 school year, the school had an enrollment of 1,682 students and 128 classroom teachers (on an FTE basis), for a student   teacher ratio of 13.14., National Center for Education Statistics. Accessed June 17, 2011.  The enrollment is about 90% African American
The school was the 292nd-ranked public high school in New Jersey out of 322 schools statewide, in ''New Jersey Monthly'' magazine's September 2010 cover story on the state's "Top Public High Schools", after being ranked 263rd in 2008 out of 316 schools. The school was ranked 286th in the magazine's September 2006 issue, which surveyed 316 schools across the state.
East Orange Campus High School was opened in 2002, resulting from the merging of the former Clifford Scott High School and East Orange High School. The school is located in the largest building of the refurbished campus of Upsala College and has been expanded to accommodate increased demand for enrollment. As a result of the merger, students now have access to new and much improved educational facilities. The former Clifford Scott High School facility is now home to East Orange Campus Nine High School, the home of all 9th grader high school students in the city of East Orange.
The East Orange Campus High School Jaguars compete in the Iron Hills Conference, an athletic conference made up of high schools located in Essex County, Morris County and Union County.
The girls basketball team won the 2003 North II, Group IV state sectional championship with a 74-55 win over Barringer High School.
On December 2, 2007, the team won the North I, Group IV state sectional championship with a 31-13 win over Montclair High School, in a game played at Giants Stadium. The win was the team's first sectional title since the playoff era began in 1974.
Core members of the school's administration are:
Image:East Orange Campus High School Back New.jpg|A look at the school from the back entrance.
Image:East Orange Campus High School Back Entrance.jpg|This is the actual entrance behind the school. An entrance to the Garden State Parkway is not far from there.
Image:East Orange Campus High School Side New.jpg|One of the many parking lots around the school.
Image:East Orange Campus High School Front 2.jpg|A different view of the bell tower and main courtyard.
Image:East Orange Campus High School Front 3.jpg|Another view of the main entrance.
Image:East Orange Campus High School E-Display.jpg|Electronic announcement board at East Orange Campus High.
Image:East Orange Campus High School Tower.jpg|The tower, which is the main architectural feature and the most recognizable landmark of the school.
Image:East Orange Campus High School Front 1.jpg|The main entrance to East Orange High School.