Between 1893 and 1903 20 Bouzaid relations came to New Zealand from Mt Lebanon. This included maried couples and children.
Author of Lagoonerville (2004), Lagoonerville, Back in the Swathe (2005), & Concert Drawings (2006).
Translated Paracelsus'  magnum opus Die Grosse Wundartznei (2003), Vom Holz Guaico (2003), & Prognostications (2004).
Gelsinger was involved with the Bohemian Grove  for many years, where he was a 'camp valet' with the notable Derelicts' and Moonshiner's Camps. 
He is quoted as saying "I was called a valet, but I've never parked someone else's automobile in my life...I ran a 24-hour a day restaurant and hotel-like facility in the grove for extremely nice people."
Gelsinger departed the grove and became a top student at UC Santa Barbara, before leaving in 2004.
Gelsinger is the cousin of Patrick Gelsinger,  and is the the Founder of World Vegans Club. 
Do you sometimes wonder why you can't get what you want? Do you wonder why people don't listen to you, or don't do things that you want them to do?
Do you wish you could be more assertive?
When you get angry, do you bite your tongue, think "calm blue ocean," count to ten and walk away?
Do you ask yourself, "why aren't they doing what I say?" "What do I have to do to be a success in this world?"
Is life PASSING YOU BY?
You need Anger Management.
You need to Let your Inner Anger out.
And I can help you get it. OPEN UP YOUR DUMB FUCKING EARS and hear what I'm saying. LET YOUR ANGER OUT! Don't wad it up into a shitty little ball and waste it playing sports or watching action movies. USE IT TO GET WHAT YOU WANT!!! LET IT OUT IN PUBLIC!!! PEOPLE WILL SURE AS FUCK PAY ATTENTION IF YOU'RE YELLING AND SPITTING ON THEM. YOU HEARD IT RIGHT HERE FIRST!!!!
So let me tell you a little about my New Anger Success Package ---
See!! ISN"T THAT EASY???!!
It'll be even easier after you've read my TWO FUCKING BOOKS and LISTENED TO TAPE AFTER TAPE OF ME YELLING AND SWEARING AT YOU!!!! Don't believe me? Order today!!!
It's all you need to Get What You Want by Getting Angry. It includes:
My video, Dances with Anger: the Wolf Hardeyk Rage-Power System. It contains Actual footage of myself and others Getting Angry and Getting What They Want.
My audiotape series, Open Up Your Fucking Ear and let the Angry In. That's SEVEN FUCKING TAPES of me SHOUTING AT YOUR WIMP ASS!!! All the best top hits, including pro-rage audio exercises and Angry warm-ups.
My book, Rageism: Get Angry and Get What You Want. This is the number-one all time RAGE MANAGEMENT TOP-FUCKING SELLER!!! MILLIONS OF PEOPLE HAVE GOTTEN FILTHY FUCKING RICH BY READING THIS BOOK AND THEN YELLING AT COCKSUCKERS WHO PISS THEM OFF!! YOU CAN TOO!!!!
You get all the Anger Management pamphlets I've ever sold or distributed. THAT'S ALMOST 150 LITTLE PAMPHLETS PACKED TO THE FUCKING GILLS WITH USEFUL, ANGRY ADVICE!!!
And, if you ACT NOW, I'LL GIVE AWAY MY SECOND FUCKING BOOK, LISTEN TO ME, I'M FUCKING SHOUTING AT YOU. IT'S NOT AVAILABLE IN ANY FUCKING STORE THIS SIDE OF GOD'S GREEN FUCKING EARTH!!! ONLY RIGHT HERE ON MY SKULL-FUCKING WEBSITE!!!!
HOW CAN YOU &%##$ SIT THERE ON YOUR PASTY ASS AND NOT ORDER ALL THIS FUCKING SHIT??????!!?! ACT NOW, AND GET THE WHOLE SHITLOAD FOR ONLY...
WHAT???!!! "ONLY $399?, YOU MANIAC??!?!" YOU FUCKING SAY?!! AAAAAAAHHHHH!!!!! THAT'S FUCKING RIGHT!!! I'M FUCKING NUTS!!!
But how about I throw in some MORE FREE FUCKING ADVICE. CHRIST, CAN I GET ANY MORE FUCKING GENEROUS WITH YOUR CRUSTY ASS?!?!?
You should have heard by now everything you need to convince you to get my NEW ANGER SUCCESS PACKAGE. But wait, HOLD THE FUCK ON, IF YOU FUCKING HAVEN'T, I'LL TOSS IN ONE LAST ITEM:
24/7 Phone contact service with Yours Truly, Wolf Hardeyk.
YEEEAHHH, THAT'S FUCKING RIGHT!!! You can call me at any fucking hour of day or night and get INSTANT Rage Power advice. Shit not working? Wife left you? HELL, I'LL YELL RIGHT IN YOUR FUCKING EARHOLE AND SET YOU STRAIGHT!! You better believe it, when you call me at 4 fucking AM, YOU'RE GOING TO GET A GOOD STIFF FUCKING OVER THE PHONE, AND I WILL SORT YOU RIGHT OUT. BELIEVE ME, IF I COULD BE KNEEING YOU IN THE NECK OR BACK AREA RIGHT NOW, I WOULD BE. I'M SO ANGRY I CAN FUCKING TASTE YOUR HEART!!!
Darcy Olsen is the President and CEO of the Goldwater Institute, a free market limited government think tank in Phoenix, AZ.  Prior to her executive position at Goldwater, Darcy served as the Director for Education and Child Policy at the Cato Institute in Washington D.C.  Early in her career she managed a halfway house for the Coalition for the Homeless in Washington D.C.
She has published numerous articles and columns in newspapers across the country, such as the National Review, USA Today and the Washington Times, and has appeared on local and national television shows such as NBC's "Today Show," public television's "NewsHour with Jim Lehrer," the "CBS Evening News with Dan Rather," NBC's "Nightly News," CNN's Inside Politics, Fox News Channel's "O'Reilly Factor" ABC's "Politically Incorrect with Bill Maher," and CBS's "The Early Show."
Darcy earned a bachelor's degree from the School of Foreign Service at Georgetown University and a master's degree in international education from New York University.
Well, at least this time there are more sources.  Unfortunately, none of them (and I checked them all, except one which gave me a 404 Not Found) fit our requirements here at AFC.
The majority of these links are links to articles that Olsen herself wrote.  These are, obviously, not '''third-party sources'''.
The majority of the remainder of the links are links to Olsen's biographies from various institutions with which she is affiliated.  These are also not '''third-party sources'''.
That leaves only a few others.  One is an article in which one of Olsen's works is quoted -- it's not about Olsen at all.  Another is the Jersey GOP's "Republican Babes" feature on Olsen, which ironically comes the closest to being a valid source.  Unfortunately, since the article doesn't rely on Olsen's status as "Beauty and Brains Competition Winner" as the source of her notability, the "Republican Babes" feature isn't sufficient to establish notability.
Surely, if Olsen truly is worthy of being profiled in an encyclopedia, someone with whom she has no affiliation has found it necessary to write a well-researched, verifiable article about her?  Somewhere?  Just ''one'' such source would be sufficient; even one hundred trivial references and non-third-party sources wouldn't make up for that one good source's absence.      12:28, 10 July 2007 (UTC)
Soft Technology is 
The Nexus Hawk    is a gateway/router linking Broadband Cellular Data, Wi-Fi and WAN networks providing enterprises with broadband wireless internet/network data services in mobile and remote environments. 
The Nexus Hawk   s original development was funded under a DOD prime contract. The technology was primarily designed for military use and supports public safety. The Nexus Hawk is currently in use by Law Enforcement agencies, Governmental data infrastructure, and limos in Washington DC.
The Nexus Hawk device provides secure access to public and private wired and wireless networks. 
The Nexus Hawk provides:
GPS for applications such as Automatic Vehicle Location (AVL), Geo-Based Dispatch and Navigation. 
Connectivity to multiple simultaneous WAN paths with user-selectable order for failover. 
Access to 4 simultaneous WANS and GPS. 
Automatic network connections with no user input required 
Incorporates a universal PCMCIA slot to accommodate future networks (i.e. WiMAX, Public Safety Band) 
Plug and play
Secure Remote Configuration / Management 
Built in and pass through security features (IPsec, OpenVPN, NAT with SPI)
The Hawk is utilized to provide mobile:
Realtime GPS 
Video 
Automated Field Reporting 
Field awareness for command and control 
Information to and from the field 
Access while roaming throughout the continental United States 
Rugged protective mounting brackets
U.S. Supreme Court
CURTNER et al. 
No. 258.
May 15, 1893 
This was a bill in equity filed by the United States in the circuit court of the United States for the northern district of California, July 23, 1883, against Henry Curtner and others, 
Page 149 U.S. 662, 663
The bill was demurred to, and amended, and to the amended bill a demurrer was interposed, which was overruled, Judge Sawyer delivering an opinion. 11 Sawy. 411, 26 Fed. Rep. 296. 
The bill averred that on July 1, 1862, congress passed an act by which the Union Pacific Railroad Company was incorporated for the purpose of constructing a railroad and telegraph line from the Missouri river to the Pacific ocean, and by which it was provided that 'there be, and is hereby, granted to the said company, for the purpose of aiding in the construction of said railroad, ... every alternate section of public land, designated by odd numbers, to the amount of five alternate sections per mile on each side of said railroad, on the line thereof, and within the limits of ten miles on each side of said road, not sold, reserved, or otherwise disposed of by the United States, and to which a pre-emption or homestead claim may not have attached, at the time the line of said road is definitely fixed. ... And all such lands, so granted by this section, which shall not be sold or disposed of by said company within three years after the entire road shall have been completed, shall be subject to settlement and pre-emption, like other lands, at a price not exceeding one dollar and twenty-five cents per acre, to be paid to said company.' 12 Stat. 489, 492. That the Central Pacific Railroad Company of California was by the act declared entitled to the benefit of this land grant, on the same terms and conditions as the Union Pacific Railroad Company. That on October 31, 1864, the Central Pacific Railroad Company of California assigned to the Western Pacific Railroad Company the right to earn the land grant along and through the location where the land in controversy is situated, and that this assignment 
Page 149 U.S. 662, 664
It was further alleged that by the act of July 1, 1862, the railroad company seeking the benefit of the grant therein provided for was required, within two years after its passage, to file a map of its general route in the department of the interior, and thereupon the secretary of that department should cause the lands within 15 miles of such general route to be withdrawn from pre-emption, private entry, and sale. That when any portion of said route was finally located the secretary of the interior should cause the said lands so granted to be surveyed and set 
That a map of the general route of the road was filed in the department of the interior on December 8, 1864, and that the secretary of that department, on January 30, 1865, caused the lands within 25 miles of such general route to be withdrawn from pre-emption, private entry, and sale. That the land in controversy was within those limits. That on February 1, 1870, the map of the line of the road, as definitely fixed, was filed with the secretary of the interior, and on that day the line of the road was definitely fixed. That on December 29, 1869, the road was completed in all respects as contemplated by said act of congress, and the Western Pacific Railroad Company was entitled to have and receive patents from the United States for the land in controversy, the same being within 10 miles of the road so completed, and not sold, reserved, or otherwise disposed of by the United States. 
And also that the Western Pacific Railroad Company and 
Page 149 U.S. 662, 665
The bill then averred that 'the commissioner of the general land office did, at the various and respective times hereinafter stated, without right and through error, inadvertence, and mistake, wrongfully list, by certified lists thereof, to the state of California, the said above-described lands;' and then follow four lists, covering the lands in controversy, dated September 8, 1870; March 11, 1871; November 15, 1871; and March 24, 1873. 
That on May 12, 1874, the railroad company, by its deputy land agent, presented to the register and receiver of the local land office a selection of lands claimed by it under its grant, numbered 13, including these lands; that the 'mistake, error, and inadvertence of the said commissioner of the general land office in listing by certified lists said land to the state of California was not discovered by complainants, or its officers of the said land department, or by said Central Pacific Railroad Company or its grantees, until the 12th of May, 1874, nor could the same by reasonable diligence have been discovered sooner; that thereupon said register and receiver wrongfully, and in violation of their duty, refused to certify said list as aforesaid requested, and refused to certify the same in any manner whatever.' 
It was further alleged 'that the state of California did at various times subsequent to said eighth (8th) day of September, A. D. 1870, by its land patents, purport to convey said lands mentioned in said list to divers and sundry persons other than 'the Western Pacific Railroad Company' or its successors, the Central Pacific Railroad Company, and against the will and without the consent of the said companies, or either of them, as follows, to wit.' And then follow the dates of the patents, the lands patented, and the names of the patentees, the dates being February 3, 1871; April 3, 1871; November 29, 1871 
Page 149 U.S. 662, 666
May 18, 1872; and March 4, 1878, respectively. And that the patentees subsequently to the issue of the patents by the state to them, respectively, and prior to the commencement of this action, 'did by valid mesne conveyances, duly executed and acknowledged, convey all their right, title, and interest in and to said lands to the defendants herein.' 
The bill further averred that the lands so patented by the state were on July 1, 1862, November 30, 1862, July 2, 1864, October 5, 1864, January 30, 1865, and December 29, 1869, alternate sections of the public lands of the United States, and were within the limits of the railroad grant, and had not been sold or reserved or otherwise disposed of by the United States, and that no pre-emption or homestead claim had attached thereto at the time the line of the road was definitely fixed; that the president of the United States refused to issue patents to the railroad company for said lands, 'not because the said the Western Pacific Railroad Company and its successors had not complleo with the said acts of congress, nor because it was not the kind and description of land granted, but solely because said land had previously been, by mistake, wrongfully and inadvertently listed to the state of California, as hereinbefore set forth,' and that the defendants and their grantors at the time mentioned in the bill 'had actual notice of the said grant of said lands to said company, the said withdrawal thereof, the said erroneous and unlawful listing thereof by the said error, inadvertence, and mistake of the said commissioner, and of each and all of the matters and things hereinbefore set forth.' 
The bill then set forth various steps taken by the railroad company to procure patents from the interior department notwithstanding the listings to the state, and among other things that on March 18, 1879, the register and receiver at San Francisco reported that in accordance with instructions of January 24, 1878, they had on February 25, 1878, made demand on the state of California for the surrender of the certification of the lands hereinbefore described, and that no surrender had been made; that they also reported on the same day that in accordance with instructions of March 9, 
Page 149 U.S. 662, 667
1878, they furnished the state surveyor general, on March 26, 1878, with a copy of said instructions, and made demand on the state of California to surrender her title and listing of said lands, but that up to that date she had failed to surrender as requested; that on April 2, 1879, the reports were submitted to the secretary of the interior, and on the 26th of June the secretary affirmed the commissioner's decision of March 9, 1878, awarding the land to said company, but refusing to issue patents for the reason that said land had been wrongfully listed to the state of California. On December 8, 1879, the secretary of the interior transmitted to the commissioner a letter from the attorney general of California, dated April 1, 1878, refusing to relinquish the certification and listings of said lands theretofore listed and certified to the state by the commissioner; that afterwards a petition was filed in the general land office for a reconsideration of so much of the secretary's decision of June 26, 1879, as declined to issue to the railroad company patents for the lands that by mistake were wrongfully listed and certified to the state of California, and thereafterwards the papers were sent to the secretary, who on July 1, 1882, requested the opinion of the attorney general of the United States whether patents could then be issued for the lands, or whether the certification to the state must be first judicially vacated; that on October 18, 1882, the secretary of the interior wrote to the commissioner of the general land office, inclosing a copy of the attorney general's opinion, and directing the papers to be prepared for a suit to set aside the listing and certification to the state, and thereafterwards, on December 6, 1882, the secretary requested the attorney general to commence suit in the proper court. 
The bill then charged that a demand was duly made by the United States upon the state, February 25, 1878, and refused, and that the United States were bound, in equity and good faith, to hold the Central Pacific Railroad Company, its grantees and assigns, harmless from the consequences of errors and mistakes, and particularly those relating to the mistake and inadvertence of the commissioner of the general 
Page 149 U.S. 662, 668
The prayer was that 'the said listings of said lands to the state of California as aforesaid be set aside, recalled, canceled, and annulled, and that all the defendants herein be forever estopped and forbidden from asserting any right or title to said lands, and that the same in said decree be declared to be public lands of the United States of America, subject to said rights of the Central Pacific Railroad Company, its grantees and assigns, as hereinbefore set forth,' and for general relief. 
Answers having been put in, evidence taken, and hearing had, a decree was rendered which annulled the listings and certifications to the state, adjudged the patents issued to the state to be void, and enjoined the defendants from asserting any title under them. 
H. F. Crane, E. R. Taylor, and Mich. Mullany, for appellants. 
Sol. Gen. Aldrich, A. T. Britton, and A. B. Browne, for appellees. 
Mr. Chief Justice FULLER, after stating the facts in the foregoing language, delivered the opinion of the court. 
The lands in question were odd sections lying within the 20-mile limit of the grant of lands made to the Central Pacific Railroad Company to aid in the construction of its road, and situated partly in township 3 S., range 3 
Page 149 U.S. 662, 669
E., Mount Diablo base and meridian, and partly in township 2 S., range 1 E. 
It is stated in the opinion of the circuit court rendered on the final hearing and reported in 38 Fed. Rep. 1, that 'between May 15, 1863, and May 16, 1864, after actual survey in the field, but before the survey had been officially adopted or recognized by the secretary of the interior, and before it had been approved by the surveyor general, and filed in the district land office, the state of California, by its locating agent, made selections and locations of all the lands now in controversy in township three, range three, in part satisfaction of the grant to the state of lands in lieu of sections 16 and 36, under the act of March 3, 1853, (10 Stat. 246.) Between February 17, 1864, and February 9, 1866, the state had issued its certificates of purchase to the several purchasers thereof, the first payments of the purchase money having been made. The selections, apparently, at their respective dates, were by the register of the land office entered in his office. A portion of these lands were certified over to the state by the land department at Washington, approved by the secretary of the interior on November 15, 1871, and the remainder on March 24, 1873, and they were afterwards patented to the purchasers by the state. The lands in controversy, situate in said township two, range one, were selected in advance of any survey in the field by the United States surveyor general, upon surveys made by the county surveyors of the state, between July 28, 1862, and July 20, 1863. Certificates of sale were issued to purchasers by the state for a part between March 2, 1863, and January 25, 1864, and for the remainder between February 20 and March 14, 1865. These selections were entered by the register of the land office on June 12, 1865. A part was certified over to the state by the secretary of the interior on September 8, 1870, and the rest on March 11, 1871. These lands were also afterwards patented to the purchasers by the state.' In the view which we take of the case, this summary of the evidence, in the particulars mentioned, may, for convenience, be accepted without restatement. 
The map of the general route of the railroad company was 
Page 149 U.S. 662, 670
The circuit court held that lands are not surveyed lands by the United States until a certified copy of the official plat of survey has been filed in the local land office; that this had not been done in respect of these lands, or, if done, that the filing was too late; that they were therefore unsurveyed; and that the selections, being made on unsurveyed lands, were 'utterly void.' These premises were denied by appellants, both as to the law and the fact. 
The circuit court also held that the state selections were void for the reason that the act of 1853, under which they were made, excepted from selection by the state, in lieu of school sections lost, 'lands reserved by competent authority,' and 'lands claimed under any foreign grant or title,' and 'mineral lands,' and that these lands were excepted because at the time of their selection, location, and sale by the state they were claimed under a Mexican grant known as 'Las Pocitas.' Appellants contended that this conclusion was based on a mistaken construction of the act of 1853, and an erroneous application of the act, if properly so construed, under the facts in the case. 
Page 149 U.S. 662, 671
Among the points raised upon the demurrer, and necessarily presented upon the final hearing, were these: First, whether the United States had such an interest in the subject-matter of the controversy as warranted their filing the bill; second, whether the claim set up was not barred by laches and limitations. 
The bill averred that the United States had granted the land to the railroad company; that the railroad company was entitled to a patent; that the lands had been wrongfully listed to the state, and for that reason the United States refused to grant a patent to the same; and therefore the bill was filed to enable the government to issue the patent. But it was also alleged that the Western Pacific Railroad Company and its successor, the Central Pacific Railroad Company, did, within three years of the completion of the road, sell and dispose of the land hereinbefore described to persons other than defendants. The road was completed December 29, 1869, so that the sale of the land by the railroad company to others than the defendants must have been before January, 1873, or 9 1/2 years before the original bill was filed. 
The rule in relation to the institution of suit by the attorney general of the United States to vacate a patent is thus stated by Mr. Justice Miller in U. S. v. San Jacinto Tin Co., 125 U.S. 273, 285, 8 S. Sup. Ct. Rep. 850: 
Page 149 U.S. 662, 672
And in U. S. v. Beebe, 127 U.S. 338, 342, 8 S. Sup. Ct. Rep. 1083, it was said by Mr. Justice Lamar, delivering the opinion of the court: 'If a patent is wrongfully issued to one individual which should have been issued to another, or if two patents for the same land have been issued to two different individuals, it may properly be left to the individuals to settle by personal litigation the question of right in which they alone are interested. But if it should come to the knowledge of the government that a patent has been fraudulently obtained, and that such fraudulent patent, if allowed to stand, would work prejudice to the interests or rights of the United States, or would prevent the government from fulfilling an obligation incurred by it, either to the public or to an individual, which personal litigation could not remedy, there would be an occasion which would make it the duty of the government to institute judicial proceedings to vacate such patent.' 
In the case before us the state of California and its grantees 
Page 149 U.S. 662, 673
Under the railroad grant acts themselves, nothing contained therein was to impair or defeat any valid claim existing at the time the line of road was definitely fixed; and upon the face of this record there can be no question that the claim of the state of California, based upon its making selections of the lands and presenting the same for approval, was a claim in good faith, and the obligation of the United States to the state was as much to be considered as the obligation of the railroad company, and its liability to make good the loss was to that one of the parties upon whom the loss might finally fall. 
We are of opinion that upon the case made the same principles must be applied as if the litigation were between private parties. 
In this regard the case of U. S. v. Beebe, 127 U.S. 338, 8 Sup. Ct. Rep. 1083, is exactly in point and of controlling weight. There a bona fide claimant had made a location under a New 
Page 149 U.S. 662, 674
Page 149 U.S. 662, 675
The decision of the circuit court in that case, dismissing the bill on the ground of laches, was sustained, because although Beebe had procured his patent by fraud and imposition upon the government or its officers, and the superior right to the land was originally in others, yet it was apparent that the suit was prosecuted in the name of the United States only on behalf of private persons, and therefore should be barred if they were. 
Tested by this rule, it is clear that the claim of the railroad company and its grantees cannot be sustained. 
The grant was in praesenti, and attached upon the filing of the map of definite location. When the identification of a granted section became so far complete as to authorize the grantee to take possession, the legal title of the granted land passed, and an action for possession could be maintained by the company or its grantees before the issue of a patent. The patent would have been evidence that the land named was granted, that the grantee had complied with the conditions of the grant, and that the grant was to that extent relieved from the possibility of forfeiture for breach of its conditions, but was not essential to transfer the legal right. Salt Co. v. Tarpey, 142 U.S. 241, 12 Sup. Ct. Rep. 158; Land Co. v. Griffey, 143 U.S. 32, 12 Sup. Ct. Rep. 362. 
The company had on February 1, 1870, whatever title it could obtain, and whatever rights belonged to it, and its cause of action then accrued. The land had already been certified to the state by the commissioner of the general land office and the secretary of the interior, and their action in that regard was, in law, the same as if patents had been issued to the state. Frasher v. O'Connor, 115 U.S. 102, 5 Sup. Ct. Rep. 1141. 
If that action was wholly void, then it was open to collateral attack, and the railroad company and its grantees could have brought suit to test the legal title at once. Doolan v. Carr, 125 U.S. 618, 8 Sup. Ct. Rep. 1228. 
If that action was not void, but the interior department had taken mistaken views of the law, or drawn erroneous con- 
Page 149 U.S. 662, 676
In either aspect the rights of the parties could have been determined by proceedings on behalf of the company or its grantees against the patentees of the state or their grantees; but instead of instituting such proceedings the railroad company besieged the principal officers of the land department to ignore the action of their predecessors in office, and to exercise a power that had become functus officio. Noble v. Railroad Co., 147 U.S. 175, 13 Sup. Ct. Rep. 271. If patents had been issued to the railroad company, then the case would have been presented of two patents for the same land issued to two different parties, and, as pointed out in U. S. v. Beebe, the matter might properly be left to those parties to settle by personal litigation. 
This bill was not filed until more than 13 years after the cause of action had accrued, and 12 years after the first patent, and over 5 years after the last patent, was issued, by the state, while the selections and purchases thereunder were made long before. 
Under the laws of California an action may be brought by any person against another, who claims an estate or interest in real property adverse to him for the purpose of determining such adverse claim; but no action can be brought for the recovery of real property, or for possession thereof, or arising out of the title thereto, unless such action is commenced within five years after the cause of action shall have accrued, and an action for relief not otherwise provided for must be commenced within four years. Code Civil Proc. Cal. 318, 319, 343, 738. 
Whether the statute be applied directly or by analogy, or the rule in equity founded upon lapse of time and staleness of claim, the delay and laches here are fatal to the maintenance of the suit. 
The ineffectual pressure of the company on the land de- 
Page 149 U.S. 662, 677
If, through erroneous action of its officers, the bounty of the government in the particular instance has not reached those for whom it was intended, but has reached beneficiaries who were not intended to have these particular lands, the government may be relied on to effectuate its own designs, and to make good any moral obligation that rests upon it; but it had not such pecuniary or other interest in this litigation as entitled it to ask the suspension of the beneficent rules applied by the courts in the administration of justice between individuals. 
The decree is reversed, and the cause remanded, with a direction to dismiss the bill. 
Mr. Justice FIELD dissented. 
Mr Justice FIELD, dissenting. 
I am not able to agree with the majority of the court in their decision of this case. The lands in controversy fall within the limits of the grant to the Central Pacific Railroad Company, but by mistake and inadvertence of the land department they were listed to the state of California. Discovering its mistake, the department refused to issue to the company a patent for the lands to which it was entitled until the erroneous listing to the state was set aside and annulled. The present bill was filed by the attorney general for that purpose, and because of this proceeding, and the delay of the company in waiting on its issue, instead of taking steps to enforce its rights at law for the lands, this court now holds that it has lost the right to them; and that, as the United States have no interest in the property, except to clear it of the cloud of the listing wrongly made, they cannot maintain the suit. The result, which produces simple injustice to the railroad company without wrong on its part, ought not, in my judgment, to be upheld. 
Page 149 U.S. 662, 678
In U. S. v. Hughes, 11 How. 568, a patent had been issued by mistake to Hughes in disregard of the prior rights of one Goodbee and of parties deriving title under him. The United States filed an information in the nature of a bill in equity against Hughes for the repeal and surrender of his patent, on the ground that its existence impaired the ability of the government to fulfill its engagements to Goodbee. The case was before this court originally on demurrer, and it was held that the court had jurisdiction to annul the patent thus improvidently issued. When here a second time, (4 Wall. 232,) the court, reaffirming its first decision, said: 'When this case was here on demurrer the patent was considered by the court to be a valid instrument, conveying the fee of the United States, and, until annulled, as rendering them incapable of complying with their engagement to Goodbee or his alienees Whether regarded in that aspect, or as a void instrument, issued without authority, it prima facie passed the title, and therefore it was the plain duty of the United States to seek to vacate and annul the instrument, to the end that their previous engagement might be fulfilled by the transfer of a clear title, the only one intended for the purchaser by the act of congress. The power of a court of equity by its decree to vacate and annul the patent, under the circumstances of this case, is undoubted. Relief, when deeds or other instruments are executed by mistake or inadvertence of agents, as well as upon false suggestions, is a common head of equity jurisprudence.' 
Upon this doctrine the court below proceeded in this case, in order that the government might discharge its obligation to the railroad company. It is a case where the government admits the error of its officers of the land department, acknowledges its obligation to correct it, and seeks to romove from its records the inadvertent and erroneous certification to the state of the lands so that it may be able to issue a clear title to the railroad company, the right of that company having been finally determined, and thus carry out the pledge of its grant. 
There was at no time an admission by the railroad company 
Page 149 U.S. 662, 679
The case is not, in my judgment, within the doctrine of U. S. v. Beebe, 127 U.S. 338, 8 Sup. Ct. Rep. 1083, which would exclude the interference of the United States, but is within the doctrine which there recognizes and upholds it. In that case the orginal claimant had rested on the action of the land department, and sought the assistance of the United States only after the lapse of nearly half a century, and it was held that the interference of the government, after such a lapse of time, was simply a proceeding to avoid the laches of the claimant, and to give to him the benefit of its exemption from them. But it declared that a suit of the United States would lie to set aside a patent where the government was under an obligation respecting the relief invoked. In this case the railroad company has not remained inactive, but, upon a decision in its favor by the department, asked for its promised patent, which was only withheld because of the previous inadvertent and mistaken action of the government's officers in issuing a certificate to the state. In such circumstances the government, it seems to me, ought not to be debarred the right to correct the mistake of its officers, by which alone the intention of the law was defeated. I think the decree below should be affirmed.
Page 149 U.S. 662, 669
Australian Rollingstock is rolling stock that is specific to Australia, a good exsample
Rolling stock:'''QLX Wagon''' - An louvred wagon with bracing rails that is used by Queensland Rail for express freight, there were 450 produced from 1969 to 1973. There are fast becomming obsolute by flat bed cars and containers.
Queensland Rail (QR)
Shae Benjamin Jakeman, born Septmeber 16t 1990, is perhaps one of the msot important figures of our time today. He is a Musician, Philosopher, Writer, and an outspoken Humanitarian.
He is known for odd style of acoustic writing, and profoundf views of ideas, and theories such as religon, war, politics, and many other controversal items among this time.
Shae Jakeman was born in the community of Oakville. He lived with both his Mom and Dad, and attended the local high school. By the time he was around 8, he moved to London, England where he lived with his family. He lived only blocks away from Wimbledon Stadium, so during the games would often meet the players. By the time he was 12, he moved back to Oakville. He attended a number of high schools such as Oakville Trafalgar, and Robert Land Academy, a military school. When Shae was 16, He moved to China with his family, where he stayed in Shanghai.
Please note it's very bad form to create an article on oneself.  Please see  .
Eddie Raven was born Edward Garvin Futch, his name was changed on his very first single released on the tiny label Cosmos Records in the late 1960   s. Raven made the first of many trips to Nashville in 1970, but didn   t actually move there until two years later. Signed to a publishing deal he wrote songs for Don Gibson and Roy Acuff,  as well as other notable artists and started making records himself in 1974. Raven released  his first album titled    Desperate Dreams    in 1981 but lost his record deal in a merger involving Elecktra and Warner. During a year of business realignment ,The Oak ridge Boys earned a hit with Raven   s    Thank God for Kids. Raven made a strong comeback signing with RCA and gaining his first number one single with    I got Mexico    The remainder of the decade he had a string of top ten hits for RCA. Raven left RCA for Universal in 1989 and scored two number one singles for that label.
Luiz Fernando Rohenkohl also known as  is a computer artist, notable for beeing the first to reproduce monalisa in 3d.
Reptu also reffers to a nasa experiment.
Christopher Barrios Jr. was a 6-year-old Georgia boy who was molested and murdered by a registered sex offender and his parents in Brunswick. He disappeared while playing in his mobile home park, where he lived with his family, on 
March 8, 2007 and his body was discovered on March 15th, 2007. George Edenfield, David Edenfield and Peggy Edenfield are all accused of Christopher's abduction and murder, and are awaiting trial on capital murder charges. A fourth person, Donald Dale, is accused of concealing the death of another person and tampering with evidence.
The Justice For Christopher foundation has been set up in Christopher's honor to help push for tougher laws against sex offenders.
Your ultimate source for Soccer Cleats, Indoor and Turf Soccer Shoes, Soccer Balls, Soccer Bags and Backpacks, Goalkeeper Gloves and all your other soccer equipment needs. SoccerGarage.com carries all the major soccer brands such as Adidas, Nike, Diadora, Kelme, Puma, Vizari, Admiral, Brine, Reusch, Xara, Lotto, High Five and many more.
Our friendly and knowledgeable employees are dedicated to serving the needs of our customers. www.Soccer Garage is headquartered in one of the largest soccer specialty showrooms in the country, equipped with a state-of-the-art warehouse operation in Lake Forest, California. If you have a question about any Soccer Apparel or Soccer Equipment feel free to contact our customer service department.
Aside from supplying soccer equipment internationally, www.SoccerGarage.com maintains a humanitarian program designed to spread the love of soccer to people and places less fortunate. During our military occupations abroad, Soccer Garage has supplied our troops with thousands of soccer balls, uniforms, socks, cleats and field equipment to help spread peace through sport.  Each year, Soccer Garage donates uniforms and balls to poverty-stricken countries in Africa and South America in hopes of providing those in need with the enjoyment of the beatiful game of soccer.
Currently he is a Visiting Fellow of the Saban Centre for Middle East Policy at the Brookings Institution (USA) where he is currently writing a monograph on European Muslim youth. In 2005, Dr. Hellyer was nominated as Deputy Convenor of the UK Government   s Home Office working group on    Tackling Extremism and Radicalisation     in the aftermath of the 7th July bombings in London. In that capacity, he engaged with different parts of the UK and US administrations and security agencies.
H.A. Hellyer is an Associate Fellow of the Centre for Research in Ethnic Relations  at the University of Warwick (UK)  where he recently finished a 4 year research project on Muslims in Europe. Until recently, Dr. Hellyer was also Visiting Professor at the Law Department at the American University in Cairo (Egypt), where he taught graduate courses on law and policy on Muslim European populations and researched Islamic law. He is also a Demos Associate at   (UK), as a regular research associate on political philosophy.
He has a BA in Law (where he also read Politics, Criminology and Biblical Studies), and a Masters in International Political Economy from the University of Sheffield (UK). He has a PhD in Ethnic Relations from the University of Warwick (UK) under Professor Muhammad Anwar, one of Europe   s most prolific academics on race. His doctorate concentrated on European law, history, sociology and classical jurisprudence. 
Professor Hellyer has been asked to speak on various issues by fora in the US, the UK, Denmark, Egypt, Nigeria, Qatar, Germany and the UAE to speak on various issues. In November 2006, he was one of the few specialists on Islam and European identity to be invited as a guest speaker at the UK   s quasi-governmental organisation    Commission for Racial Equality    30th anniversary conference, and recently the US-Islamic World Forum  arranged by the Qatari Foreign Ministry requested he speak on Muslims in Europe to a broad selection of policy makers & intellectuals from the West and the Arab world. In July 2007, he was invited by the    Muslim Leaders of Tomorrow    conference  in Copenhagen funded by the World Economic Forum to speak on the integration of Islam in Europe, while earlier in the year a multi-national conference arranged on Capitol Hill in Washington, D.C. requested he speak on European identity and Islam. As a commentator, he has written for and engaged with different parts of the media including The Guardian, Open-Democracy.Net, The Daily Star (Egypt),  Islam-Online.Net, the BBC World Service, the Independent, Q-News, and Emel. 
In mediums from academic journals to popular magazines, he writes on European Muslim communities, European law, European social policy, political philosophy (multiculturalism/integration/citizenship), and the interplay between Islam and modernity, including the rise of radical extremism. His academic publications include chapters to a number of books including a recent volume on Muslim radical extremism (due to be released in 2007 in a Edinburgh University Press publication) and a volume published by Amal Press called    The State We are In: Identity, Terror and the Law of Jihad   . In his latest book on European Muslims (due to be published in 2008 by Edinburgh University Press under the title of       Islam in Europe: Multiculturalism and the    Other    European), he argues that Europe must come to terms with all of her history, past and present, and that Muslim communities should work to be integral to, rather than simply 'integrated' parts of, Europe. In 2008, he hopes to complete work on a tentative anthology on    The Future of Europe: Muslim perspectives' with authors including the Mufti of Bosnia, also to be published by Edinburgh University Press.
XREP (Extended Range Electro-Muscular Projectile)
XREP is non-lethal stunning weapon that can be fired from standard shotgun.
Voodoochilli.net is an online portfolio for visual artists. It was established in 2001 as a simple web page to exhibit the artwork of a small group of illustrators. In 2003 it was re-developed using PHP and MYSQL to enable user submitted content. The site is not a profit making site and relies heavily on donations. There are currently around 5000 registered members from 80 countries.
The site is used primarily by artists as an online method of showcasing their work to potential clients, employers, schools and universities.
The name Voodoochilli was derived from the mispronunciation of a Jimi Hendrix song titled    Voodoo Child    which is sometimes titled "Voodoochile"
Computer Arts Magazine, Future Publishing Ltd, Issue 131 - January 2007
Advanced Photoshop Magazine, Imagine Publishing Ltd, Issue 19 - June 2006
Advanced Photoshop Magazine, Imagine Publishing Ltd, Issue 32 - July 2007
Nair saab is a Malayalam Movie starring Mammooty, Devan, Radeesh, Suresh Gopi etc.  The film was based  on Indian Army and the location of the film was in Jammu and kashmir.  The story of the film is based on the Military Intelligence.
Bluevesta - Delivering  Needs : Providing Features
A Summary Of The Faith.
In the begining there was Ret. Nothing else existed except ret, not light nor dark, not good nor evil. Only Ret. He first created time, then came light, darkness, rocks and trees, mountains and forests, planets, galaxys. The universe was born. Although Ret knew that something was missing, Free thought. Whole casts of creatures where set into motion around the universe. Over the billions upon billions of years the creatures grew, evolved, loved, hated, made homes civilizations, empires. Ret created one master race to safe guard the lesser races. They where know as the "The Tanks". The Tanks where not many in number, only 200 in all. However what they where not in number they made up for in there power, skill, and will. The Tanks ruled peacefully and fairly for over 10 billion years. But like all things that have been touched with great power they started to become arrogant and prideful. Eventually they broke there vow too never turn upon themselfs. One side was the side of good, the other, the side of evil. The great Tank war had began.
On the first battle, of the Universes first war, disaster struck, on both sides. As the tanks charged one another on the battle field, readly for war, readly for blood. Something terrible, yet great occurred. A tank can end something with one strike. But tanks are immortal. And can not die. Therefore if tanks where to fight each other the whole of existence would be destroyed in paradoxical confusion. Lord Retman seen this was about to happen and so he opened up 198 alternate dimensions, one for every tank. Except two. A swirling mass of portals riped open the very sky that day, and when they left only two tanks where left standing. Two from the side of good. Lord Retman spoke too the two remiaing tanks in the form of many many voices, and toled them a great many things. He said that in the distant future, he would call upon them in his time of need. But this would not be for a very long time, so they where commanded to travel to a far off world where the fate of the entire universe would one day be decided. The last of the tanks whose identities cannot be divulged for fear of their safety. The worlds name was Earth. When the tanks arive on Earth the world was still just an infant. The tanks traveled deep into the earths crust, and waited. Waited for the time when Lord Retman would need them. Waited untill the year 1999.
In the year 1999 Lord Retman came to the world, but not as a god, as a man. His two Archbishops where the last of the tanks. They were to be his vioce on earth. They were to tell the peoples of the world the truth. They were to point and guide them down the path of righteousness.
Lord Retman and his Archbishops traveled to the vatican city, Rome. But Pope John Paul the second would not hear Lord Retman out, and demanded he leave Rome, Or pay the price. Death. Lord Retman and his two Archbishops, ended up in Dublin Ireland. Where they met a young street musician named Kris Carlon. The fist apostle. Six years past in Ireland, but still the faith fell upon deaf ears. Just as they where starting to make some headway in the town of Tralee, a message came from the Pope John Paul the second. He said that he now understood Lord Retmans teachings and wanted to convert himself and his flock. The catholic church learned of Pope John Pauls plans, and because of there blind greed and lust for power could not let them be carried out, and so they paid off someone to assassinate the Pope John Paul. After the assassination the catholic church coverd up what really happened with there lies. The chruch arrested Lord Retman in secret and held him captive in a prison in the town of Dubrovnik, Croatia. Lord Retmans two Archbishops and Kirs Carlon learnd of his capture and rushed to Croatia. The Archbishops along with Kris Carlon instagated a prison break and in the chaos managed to get Lord Retman to the boat they had waiting for him. Lord Retman decided that they should all part ways untill the chruch had move on to other evil plots. The two Archbishops went to scotlandand awaited orders from Lord Retman in a town called Coatbridge. Kris Carlon went to the city of Glasgow where he preached the word of Ret for a year, untill he mysteriously disappeared without a trace. Lord Retman went to the Republic of Paraguay and hid out in the woodland of the country, thinking of his next move.
Two years past by. Untill one day when two Archbishops received the orders from Lord Retman that they had been waiting for. The orders came via a video the Lord Posted on the video site "youtube", people who do not know what they are looking for will only see the video as meaningless gibberish. But the Archbishops knew what they where looking for, they had there orders. On the 7th of May 2007, the cult of Retman went global. Word of the Lords presence and teachings spread like wild fire. The cult was also gaining more presence in world politics and was begining to convert people from all other religions and beliefs systems by the thousand. Three Grand Cardinals were appointed in the cult with five Cardinals under them, sixty-five Bishops under them, and an unlimited amount of Priests under them. The world sang there praises for The Cult Of Retman who had given the world hope, and a bright future. However all this changed. On the night god died.
In 2006 Kris Carlon had disappeared and despite constant effort from Lord Retman there was still no trace of him. Untill a message was sent to the lord, from Kris Carlon. The message said that Lord Retman should meet Carlon in the city of Vienna, alone, he would explain more when they met. Lord Retman had no idea what was about to happen. Betrayal, bitter, bitter betrayal. You see when Kris Carlon had disappeared in glasgow 2006, he was captured by the demi-god Darren Pilkington, the ultimate evil. Darren Pilkington warped Carlons mind into hating the good Lord Retman. When Lord Retman arrived in Vienna that night he did not met his old friend Kris Carlon. He met Darren Pilkington. He met his death. Kris Carlon and the ultimate evil brutally murdered Lord Retman, and Pilkington stole the Lords devine power for himself. That day was 22 May 2007. That day was the day god had died. The ultimate evil then cast Kris Carlon aside and allowed Carlon to regain control of him self and his thoughts again. The ultimate evil then perhaps did the crulest thing he could have done. He erased the worlds knowledge, memories, and love for Lord Retman. Lord Retman was dead, and forgotten.
There was hope however, The two Archbishops learned of and orb which was know only as the "orb of power" this holy artifact could bring anyone even a god, back from the dead but only once. There was still hope. Kris Carlon Traveled to Toulouse in France where he sought out the orb of power. Even if Lord Retman were to be brought back form the dead, the war with the ultimate evil would still be very hard to win. So as Carlon searched for the orb of power, the Archbishops searched for Allies. Because of the ultimate evil and his dark minions power only a certain type of ally would stand a chance in the coming battle. The Tanks would have to be found, and brought back. The two Archbishops traveled to each of the 198 dimensions and stayed a year in each, but due to the time vortex in theses places it was as if they where gone only a minute to the people on earth. In each dimension the Archbishops proved them selves through mortal combat with each dimensions "Tank Lord". Soon The two Archbishops had returned, and so had the tanks. The ultimate evil and his dark minions fought the Archbishops and the tanks on the plant Mars away from earth. The bettle raged on for a whole month of constant hand to hand combat. In the tanks prevailed. In the end the side of good prevailed. The ultimate evil and his dark minions where totaly destroyed.
When the Archbishops returned to earth they were greeted by Kris Carlon and Lord Retman. The tanks returned to there dimensional homes. The world was safe. The universe was safe. All was well. Except one thing, the world still had no memory of Lord Retman and the things he, his Archbishops and Kris Carlon had done for them.
But this my friends, is why i have wrote this. Go and spread the faith. Ret Is Good . Ret Is God.
This beach, situated in the coast zone of Lagoa, in the Algarve, is not only famous by its cliffs but also by the high quality of the water. Praia da Marinha has been very used by the advertising agencies and television for advertising campaigns.
Intex Solutions, Inc., is an independent financial modeling corporation.
The structured fixed income market has rapidly expanded over the years. Investors in this market use financial models for forcasting purposes.   One such company to provide these financial models is Intex Solutions Inc.
Intex Solutions was founded in 1985 and is headquartered in Boston (Needham), Massachusetts.
The company has offices in Asia, Europe, and North America.
Intex is in the business of providing customers with the cashflow models and related software for the structured fixed-income market.
Customers include the major underwriters, buy-side, and other participants of the CMO, ABS, CMBS, CDO finance markets, globally.
Intex supports the primary issuance and secondary trading markets, as well as bond administration and research.
Sources:
The second issue of '''''Constance''''', entitled ''Delicate Burdens'', is slated for publication in November, 2007. 
It is your job to find the perfect balance of your attention and make sure to be swift at discovering which part of your clan that needs to be worked on. Through different sections you can manage your players, finances, staff, tactics, matches and so much more!
Will you be on top of the game and advance to higher divisions or are the other clans too much of a challenge so you are forced to relegate to a lower division and try to work your way up again?
This all depends on you, as the manager of your own professional CS team and everything that comes along with it! 
TAPOICh is a Tashkent Aviation Production Association named after Chkalov (rus. <<                                                                                                                               >>). It is a leading high-technology company of Uzbekistan, which was originally moved from Russia to the rear of the Soviet Union, Uzbekistan during the World War II and since March 25, 1971 has been mainly involved in production of Ilyushin Il-76 (NATO reporting name: Candid), a 4-engined strategic airlifter, which is in a widespread use in eastern Europe, Asia and Africa. Until the collapse of the Soviet Union it has produced a minimum of 900 cargo and military airplanes. 
Tapoich has lacked financing and technical parts from Russian parthners and since 1991 has produced only 10 (or slightly more) Il-76MF cargo-planes for Chinese and Indian military. These planes are ecologically safe and are allowed in the European space. 
On the July 4, 2007 TAPOICh was absorbed by the Russian United Aviation Corporation, and as from 2010 to 2012 will start the production of 24 IL-76MF cargo planes for China, in the cooperation with JV AviaStar of Ulyanovsk, Russia.  
The Brain Game is a game that originates from Chelmsford in Essex. It was created by a St. John Payne student after being inspired by the film 'Waiting.' The student still attends the school.  
The whole point of the game is to display the male genitalia, (normally the testicles) to another male by cunning ways. However the prey must be aware of the rules of the Brain Game and look directly at the genitalia in order to be classed officially 'Brained!!!'or 'GAY!'. There after the victim receives powerful kicks to the backside. 
The amount of kicks received depends on the variation on how the person was 'Brained.' They are as follows:
The Brain - Is where you grasp around the testes and squeeze them outwards, therefore creating an image like a brain. = 2 kicks
The Bat wing - Is where you stretch the excess skin from the 'ball sack' thus creating a feature like a bat wing. = 3 kicks
The Goat - Is the combination of tucking the testicles and the penis between your legs, whilst holding a mooning position. = 5 kicks
The Full Monty - Pretty self explanatory. = 25 kicks
The Hot Dog - Is where the penis is placed between the sides of a bread roll = 30 kicks
The Candle or Flame thrower - Is the most dangerous but most rewarding variation. This involves standing side on of the victim, whilst lighting and holding a lighter beside the tip of the penis. This therefore resembles an image of a candle or a flame thrower.
The game can also be played by females but this is a rare event especially during the winter as the most easiest way to perform a certain variation is by wearing a skirt.
The game is also in good jester and can create quite a competition. Also please note this game is not an excuse for exhibitionists or homosexuals and excessive performance can cause a ban.         
Author and Artist, Gelsinger was involved in the Bohemian Grove  for several years, managing a camp. He is the Founder & President of the World Vegan Club.
The first link is a simple title search; it returns one result.  That doesn't provide any evidence of notability, nor support for the data in the article.  The second link is the web site of the organization which Gelsinger founded; that also doesn't provide any evidence of notability.  The third link is to a Wikipedia article, which isn't considered a reliable source for our purposes.
Please find a reliable, third-party source for the information in the article.
The Amigo Airsho, Inc. is a non-profit organization, which provides education in aviation and our armed forces, community service and contributes to charities
This year marks El Paso   s twenty fifth Amigo Airsho!  The Amigo Airsho is El Paso   s premier family event.  Through its acts and exhibits, the Airsho educates the public by allowing them to actually experience aviation   s history from its barnstorming days to the present.  
Established as a non-profit 501(c) 3 corporation, the Amigo Airsho expands it mission to contribute money to charities.  Over the last twenty five years, the Amigo Airsho has donated and contributed over $1,000,000 to over 220 local charities and service organizations.
The Amigo Airsho is grateful for the vision of the founding directors and generous business community in creating an event of this magnitude. As the largest combined effort of the military and community on behalf of the show, the show has grown with an entertainment value unequaled in El Paso.  The event provides nine hours of daily entertainment including a WheelSho, KidSho, TradeSho displays, interactive amusements, Ft. Bliss military displays and over 100 military, Warbird, and civilian static aircraft, and of course, a top-rated air show.
Year after year, the Amigo Airsho is an outstanding success and proves to be a perfect marriage for aviation enthusiasts and the Amigo Airsho organization. With the ongoing support of the business community, Ft. Bliss, the enthusiasm of our spectators, and equally invaluable the dedication of nearly 1000 volunteers, the Amigo Airsho will continue to grow and bring recognition to the greater El Paso Metroplex.  
The 2006 Amigo Airsho had attendance over 65,000.  The estimated attendance of out-of- town visitors was 2200.  The average airshow spectator would remain in the city for four days and two nights spending an average of $110.00 a day, including room and rent-a-car. In 2006, Amigo Airsho spectators brought almost $500,000 into the city of El Paso.
In addition to the spectators the Amigo Airsho also brings in performers and static display crews, grounds performers, vendors and more. The total number of individuals in these groups each year is about 250.  With an average stay of four days, the amount of dollars brought into the city by airshow performers, crews, and related groups is an estimated $100,000.
Total estimated dollars brought into El Paso in 2000 via the Amigo Airsho
Earl Howard (b. 1951) is an American avant-garde composer, arranger, saxophonist, synthesizer player and multi-instrumentalist.
Mr. Howard is one of the pioneers of what is called    new    music. He has been in the industry for over thirty years. Howard has performed with Anthony Davis, Gerry Hemingway, John Zorn, Georg Graewe, Mari Kimura, Mark Dresser, Yuko Fujiyama, Evan Parker, Thomas Buckner, George Lewis and many of the other most prominent musicians in his field. 
Howard has received numerous awards including, a grant from Harvard   s the Fromm Foundation, a Regents Fellowship at UCSD, and three New York Foundation for the Arts Fellowships. In 2004 Howard's first sound installation was commissioned for the Tiffany Collection at the Queens Museum of Art. 
Earl Howard has also produced soundtracks for some major film and video artists including Nam June Paik, Mary Lucier, Rii Kanzaki, Bob Harris, and Bill Brand.
Earl Howard was born January 12, 1951 in Los Angeles, CA. He was one of the smallest babies at the time to survive birth and lost his sight before leaving the hospital. Howard graduated from California Institute of the Arts in Music Composition in 1974.
Although Pentecostals consider themselves to be true Christians, there is a loud expression of opposition from those commonly known as "mainline Christianity" (Oriental Orthodoxy, Eastern Orthodoxy, Roman Catholicism, & mainline Protestants). Among the Pentecostals, however, there are many who respect how Pentecostalism energizes its followers (ie: "speaking in tongues") -- although it's ideas such as these that seem ridiculous to mainline Christianity. Speaking in tongues is thought to be one of many miracles by Pentecostals, but it proves to cause division as others point to the idea that you can't just randomly speak another language without learning it. Even so, there are attempts for unity by some, including the Vatican, despite major doctrinal differences. For the present, though -- especially for the more conservative churches (ie: Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria) -- there continues to be major and widespread criticism of Pentecostalism.
If you want to pursue this topic, I would start by adding a new "Criticism" section to the Pentacostalism article.  Then you can work with the editors of that article on expanding that section to the point where it needs an article of its own.
The Ferengi D'kora-class starship (also sometimes referred to as a Ferengi Marauder, Ferengi warship or Ferengi trader) was a type of vessel operated by the Ferengi Alliance in the 24th century. The D'kora was an advanced vessel, comparable in power to a Federation Galaxy-class starship and almost as fast. (TNG: "The Last Outpost", "Menage a Troi") 
Ships of this type were first encountered by Starfleet in 2364, when a ship commanded by DaiMon Tarr stole a T-9 energy converter from an unmanned outpost on Gamma Tauri IV. (TNG: "The Last Outpost") 
Ron Sun is a cognitive scientist, and currently Professor of Cognitive Science at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, and formerly the James C. Dowell Professor of Engineering and Professor of Computer Science at University of Missouri-Columbia. He received his Ph.D in 1992 from Brandeis University.
His research interest centers around the study of cognition, especially in the areas of cognitive architectures, human reasoning and learning, cognitive social simulation, and hybrid connectionist-symbolic models. For his paper on integrating rule-based and connectionist models for accounting for human everyday reasoning, he received the 1991 David Marr Award from Cognitive Science Society. For his work on human skill learning, he received the 2008 Hebb Award from the International Neural Network Society.
Throughout the past two decades, he has been conducting research in the fields of psychological learning and hybrid neural networks (by applying these models to research on human skill acquisition). Specifically, he has worked on the integrated effect of top-down and bottom-up learning in human skill acquisition in a variety of task domains, for example, navigation tasks (Sun, Merrill, & Peterson, 2001), reasoning tasks, and implicit learning tasks (Sun, Slusarz, & Terry, 2005). This inclusion of bottom-up learning processes has been revolutionary in cognitive psychology, because most previous models of learning have focused exclusively on top-down learning (whereas human learning clearly happens in both directions). This research has culminated with the development of an integrated cognitive architecture that can be used to provide a quantitative explanation of empirical psychological learning data. The model, CLARION, is a hybrid neural network that can be used to simulate problem solving and social interactions as well. More importantly, CLARION was the first psychological model that proposed an explanation for the    bottom-up learning    mechanisms present in human skill acquisition: His numerous papers on the subject have brought attention to this neglected area in cognitive psychology.
He is the founding co-editor-in-chief of the journal Cognitive Systems Research, and also serves on the editorial boards of many other journals. He is the general chair and the program chair of CogSci 2006, and the program chair of IJCNN 2007. He is a member of the Governing Boards of Cognitive Science Society and International Neural Networks Society. His URL is: http://www.cogsci.rpi.edu/~rsun
Books:
R. Sun, Cognition and Multi-Agent Interaction: From Cognitive Mdoeling to Social Simulation. Cambridge University Press, New York. 2006.
R. Sun, Duality of the Mind. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Mahwah, NJ. 2002.
R. Sun and L. Giles, (eds.) Sequence Learning: Paradigms, Algorithms, and Applications. Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg. 2000.
S. Wermter and R. Sun, (eds.) Hybrid Neural Systems. Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg. 2000.
R. Sun and F. Alexandre, (eds.) Connectionist-Symbolic Integration. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Mahwah, NJ. 1997.
R. Sun, Integrating Rules and Connectionism for Robust Commonsense Reasoning. John Wiley and Sons, New York. 1994.
R. Sun & L. Bookman, (eds.), Computational Architectures Integrating Neural and Symbolic Processes. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Needham, MA. 1994.
Marquis Who's Who in America (53rd, 56th, 57th, 58th editions)
The listed sources aren't quite sufficient to prove notability within his field.  I don't have access to the Marquis Who's Who, but I also don't know how reliable it is.  The first link merely lists the subject's name and position.  The second link is a biography written for an event at which he was lecturing; that doesn't qualify as third-party since he probably provided that information himself.  The third link is to a book he himself wrote -- also not third-party.  The fourth link is just a list of publications, and the last link is a list of citations.  None of these are '''reliable, third-party''' sources that discuss the subject.
Steinar Heggland (26.03.1982-)translator. Born in Kristiansand, Norway. Now lives in Southampton, England. Will hopefully soon move back to Norway to make his girlfriend happy.
Grethe Lindekleiv, Steinar Heggland
The fund manager will typically receive a flat 2% of an investor's committed capital annually as a management fee.  This income is used to help run the day-to-day business functions of the fund, such as rent for the office, employee payroll, back-office services, etc.
In addition to the management fee, fund managers also typically receive 20% of any profit made on the investment (also known as the manager's "carry").  This is known as the performance fee.
There is a man who is living in Turkey called Betasus. 
In 1998, He took this name and nobody knows his real name. We see him on T.V. advertisements , Movies  , Websites and everywhere.
He is really good at special effects.So he became a good animator in Turkey.
He works at different companies as freelance.
He has worked in Czech Repuplic , England and Turkey for now.
Laura May is 15 years old and is from County Sligo. She won the majority of the 30'000 public votes during the grand final on the 9th July 2007 at Castle Court in Belfast City Centre to win become the 'Young Star' in the senior age group in Ireland's Biggest ever kids talent search.
Young Star Search was hosted by Citybeat present Stuart Robinson. Judges on the show included Eurovision winner Dana, Hollyoaks actor Gerard McCarhty, X Factor singer Shaun Rodgerson and CITV stars 'Belles Boys'.
Laura May is expected to record her first single in September 2007.
Both links are to Citybeat's own web site; we can't use those to validate the notability of persons who participated in a Citybeat contest.
Rachael is 10 years old and is from Newtownards County Down . She won the majority of the 30'000 public votes during the grand final on the 9th July 2007 at Castle Court in Belfast City Centre to win become the 'Young Star' in the junior age group in Ireland's Biggest ever kids talent search.
Young Star Search was hosted by Citybeat present Stuart Robinson. Judges on the show included Eurovision winner Dana, Hollyoaks actor Gerard McCarhty, X Factor singer Shaun Rodgerson and CITV stars 'Belles Boys'.
Rachael is expected to record her first single in September 2007. The winner of the senior age group was Sligo's Laura May Lenahan.
The link is to Citybeat's own web site; we can't use that to validate the notability of persons who participated in a Citybeat contest.
Handheld Ferengi weapon used to fire high energy plasma discharges at a target.  (The Last Outpost) (TNG)  The Ferengi Whip fell into disuse after The Last Outpost, and later episodes showed them armed with a variety of phaser like handheld pistol weapons.
Heinrich Joseph Dominicus Denzinger#The_Enchiridion_Symbolorum_et_Definitionum
The "DS" numbering scheme is something which is difficult to find information on, this article contains the answer.
Heinrich Joseph Dominicus Denzinger#The_Enchiridion_Symbolorum_et_Definitionum
The "DS" numbering scheme is something which is difficult to find information on, this article contains the answer.
Before We Move On got together in the winter of 2006. The former members from Elliot Lake super bands: Danse Macabre, April Silenced and Blackout decided to get together to form BWMO. They released a self-titled 4 song demo in the spring of 2007 that gained a great deal of positive attention from listeners all over. 
Vocals - Jesse Menard
Guitar - Mike Wilson
Guitar - Scott Lehman
Bass   - John Earl
Drums  - Gregory Dakins
Self-titled 4 song demo - 
Mr. Garfinkle has also been chairman of the George Washington University Institute for Communitarian Policy Studies, the National Hospice Foundation, the Lamaze Institute for Family Education, and the New York Landmarks Conservancy.  He taught economics and economic history at Amherst College and was editor of the ''Journal of Economic History''.
Norton Garfinkle received a BA with honors and a Phi Beta Kappa from Columbia University, and did graduate work at Columbia and Princeton University.
This book has garnered high praise from Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton, who said "Norton Garfinkle addresses these important economic issues, issues that should be addressed at all levels of government and our society if we expect to maintain the American Dream for future generations"; and also from Bill Moyers, who called it "the most important book I've read in years."
The first link (Yale Press) is simply a brief review/overview of one of his own books, and thus not a third-party source.  The second and third are both bios from organizations to which he belongs, and thus also not third-party sources.  Please find references from people or organizations who have ''no affiliation'' to Garfinkle.
Discovered 1984 Sept. 28 by B. A. Skiff at the Anderson Mesa Station of the Lowell Observatory.
Christian B. Luginbuhl (b. 1955), of the U.S. Naval Observatory's Flagstaff Station, is largely responsible for the enactment and continued enforcement of ordinances preserving the dark skies of northern Arizona. With the discoverer, he co-authored the Observing Handbook and Catalogue of Deep-Sky Objects.
Observing Handbook and Catalogue of Deep-Sky Objects
College Colosseum is a student-run website which provides forums, user content, college related news, and more.  The site was launched on May 29th, 2007.  College Colosseumis based around a collection of forums which have been set up for the majority of colleges and universities in the United States.  The forums allows students to interact with one another and discuss topics specific to a school, as well as more general topics open to anyone.  
College Colosseum also has a sub site collegecolosseumcontent.com which allows its users to share and upload games, videos, pictures, etc.  CollegeColosseumContent.com was launched after CollegeColosseum.com
The only sources given in this article are in the "External links" section, and those are all official sites.  Obviously, no official site could ever qualify as "third-party."
If you resubmit this article with better sourcing, please make sure you follow the AfC instructions and make sure your templates are well-formed.      18:46, 11 July 2007 (UTC)
The Orange County Business Journal covers the technology, medical device, aerospace, defense, surfwear, real estate, finance and other industries that make up the county   s economy. 
Walt Disney, Boeing, Ford and IBM have major operations in Orange County.  Taco Bell, Quiksilver, Broadcom, Allergan, St. John, Pimco, Oakley, Gateway and Pacific Sunwear are headquartered here.  Many foreign companies have their North American operations in Orange County, such as, Mitsubishi, Toshiba, Mazda, Yamaha and Experian.
The paper recently interviewed and ran a series of stories on Donald Bren, chairman of The Irvine Company, who is the wealthiest real estate figure in the country. The paper   s OC Insider Column is the most chatted about source of buzz among business and community leaders in the market. The Business Journal also wrote exclusive accounts of what precipitated changes in management at leading chipmaker, Broadcom, and fashion house, St. John. Recently, The Business Journal incisively covered the meltdown of the subprime mortgage industry, including an insightful perspective on locally-based New Century Financial.
Standing
Events
The Orange County Business Journal produces four events per year:
Special Publications
The editorial department of the Orange County Business Journal each year publishes a list of the most influential business people in the county, the OC50, and a list of the wealthiest people, OC   s Wealthiest. At the end of each year, the Business Journal publishes a Book of Lists, identifying the top firms in Orange County in over 50 industry groups.
Affiliations
The Orange County Business Journal is owned by CBJ, LP which also owns Business Journals in Los Angeles, San Diego and the San Fernando Valley. 
Online media
The Orange County Business Journal has a website (www.ocbj.com) which includes updated content on a real time basis. It also contains the weekly paper and an archive of prior issues, available for a modest fee or free to paid subscribers. It also contains over a dozen video interviews of leading Orange County Business Executives, which is available for free.  Finally, the OCBJ makes available daily enews updates for free. 
History
In 1978, Marsha Feldman (later Marengo) started the paper as the Business Community Journal. In 1980, she changed the name to the Orange County Business Journal. In 1989, current owner CBJ LP bought the paper. Publisher Richard Reisman and Editor Rick Reiff, now the paper   s executive editor and a Pulitzer Prize recipient, joined soon after, leading a period of rapid growth for the paper. In 2000, Michael Lyster, the paper   s former technology reporter, returned from Investor Business Daily when he was a technology editor to become the editor of the Orange County Business Journal. 
Sources:  
1.	Chapman University Center for Economic Research, Chapman University
2.	Audit Bureau of Circulations
3.	EDD Labor Market Division, California Department of Finance, US Bureau of the Census, Chapman University Center for Economic Research
4.	US Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics
The sources listed may indeed validate the data in the article, but I can't tell.  Please cite '''specific''' sources, not just the name of an organization, bureau, or company.
For example -- if I need to validate that "the Orange County Business Journal is among the largest and most successful Business Journals in the country", a datum for which you provided "Audit Bureau of Circulations" as a reference, how would I do that?  I went to the ABC web site but it was not clear at all a) what exactly ABC is, b) what its relationship to the OCBJ is, and c) how to find the datum referenced in this article.  That's what I mean by being specific -- tell us ''exactly'' where the information can be found.
Born 15th November 1953 Natchez, Mississippi, USA.
Now lives in Minneapolis although main work and fan base is in the UK, which is a second home.
O'Neil began singing during the 70's when touring with his band in the US. 1978 saw him link with Flyte Tyme aka Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis, but after working together for two years they parted. (Flyte Tyme later became the backing band for Prince). 
Then Solo, his first recording in 1984, his self titled debut solo album, was released by a local label Tabu. This produced a large amount of success in the UK including the top 10 Hit 'Saturday Love'. This was followed by 'A Broken Heart Could Mend' and 'If You Were Here Tonight'.
The follow up album in 1987,'Hearsay', sold close to 1M albums in the UK with tracks such as 'Fake' and 'Criticise'.
Araceli Rosas (1989-September 3, 2004) was an amateur race car driver who died during a school-sanctioned race. Sources speculate the reason her crash was a result of Rosas answering a text message from her "friend" Edith Racanac. The nature of their "friendship" was still uncertain at the time, although sources stated the two had planned to move in together after graduation.