Van Dyke was born in Danville, Illinois in 1931 to Loren (nickname    Cookie   ) and Hazel (nee McCord) Van Dyke. He is of Dutch descent on his father's side and of English and Scottish descent on his mother's side. His mother is a Mayflower descendant.
Van Dyke began his stand-up comedy career while still in high school in Danville, and was already a veteran of strip joints and nightclubs when he joined the Air Force Tops In Blue in 1952. During the mid-Fifties, Van Dyke worked at WTHI-TV in Terre Haute, Indiana. The "Jerry Van Dyke Show," which included future CBS News Today Show news anchor Joseph Benti, Nancee South and Ben Falber, was popular fare. In the service he performed at military bases around the world, twice winning the ''All Air Force Talent Show''.  Following his first guest appearances on ''The Dick Van Dyke Show'' and two appearances on ''The Ed Sullivan Show,'' CBS made him a regular on ''The Judy Garland Show''.  He was also given hosting chores on the 1963 game show ''Picture This''. In that same year, movie audiences saw him in supporting roles in the films ''McLintock!'', ''Palm Springs Weekend'' and ''The Courtship of Eddie's Father''.
Eager to capitalize on his exposure, CBS made plans to set him up in his own series.  After turning down the role of Gilligan in ''Gilligan's Island'', and also turning down the chance to replace Don Knotts on ''The Andy Griffith Show'', he accepted the lead role in the short-lived ''My Mother the Car'' (1965), the misadventures of a man whose deceased mother is for some unfathomable reason reincarnated into a restored antique car.  Although the series was a historic and spectacular failure, Van Dyke continued to work steadily in supporting roles in television and film throughout the rest of the decade. He starred in another situation comedy with a brief run, ''Accidental Family'' (1967), as widowed comedian Jerry Webster who bought a farm as a place to raise his son while he was not touring.
During the 1970s, Van Dyke returned to stand-up comedy virtually full time.  He spent much of the decade touring Playboy Clubs around the country, and headlining at venues in Las Vegas, Nevada, Reno and Atlantic City, returning to television for guest appearances on ''The Mary Tyler Moore Show'', ''Love, American Style'' and ''Fantasy Island'', and roles in ''The Amazing Cosmic Awareness of Duffy Moon'' (1976) and ''13 Queens Boulevard'' (1979).
In 1989 Jerry Van Dyke began entertaining a new generation of fans with his work as Luther Van Dam the beloved, yet befuddled assistant coach on the long running series ''Coach'' (1989   1997) for which he received four consecutive Emmy nominations for "Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Comedy Series" (1990, 1991, 1992, 1993).
Jerry Van Dyke continues to make frequent television appearances and performs stand up comedy in major venues around the country. In 1995 he appeared in a series of Hardee's commercials to promote the Big Hardee, then in the late 1990s acted as the spokesperson for Big Lots.  He appeared in the 2000s sitcom Yes, Dear as a recurring character, "Big Jimmy," the father of Jimmy Hughes. He made a guest appearance on a   of ''My Name Is Earl'' and in 2010, he made an appearance in a Christmas episode of the television show The Middle. He also made a guest appearance on the 18th episode of season one of Raising Hope.
Van Dyke has married twice, and has three children from the first - daughters Jerri Lynn and Kelly Jean, and son Ronald.  His daughter Kelly Jean Van Dyke, who worked in the adult film industry under the name Nancee Kelly, committed suicide in 1991, after an emotional phone call with her husband Jack Nance.  Van Dyke is the great uncle of Shane Van Dyke.
Along with his wife, Shirley, Jerry calls Malvern, Arkansas home. It is there where he lives on and owns 800 acres of land.
Van Dyke is an avid poker player and announced a number of poker tournaments for ESPN in the late 1990s and early 2000s.  He is also a 4-string banjo player with several performances on the ''Dick Van Dyke Show'' to his credit.