Could Rutan's method of lifiting spacecraft then launching them into space be used to achieve orbit? Does his engines, if scaled up, a bit meet the requirement for reaching orbit or would diffrent kind of engines be needed?  02:04, 5 July 2007 (UTC)
1.consumption according to a particular frequency generation.
2.minimal space requirement for specifc 20,000hz machine.
Why is it that we must swallow food to enjoy it? I tried "eating" ice cream by savoring the food, then spitting it out and chasing it with a spoonful of rice. My stomach picked up on the bait-and-switch and I was not satisfied. Why does swallowing the food complete the satisfaction effect? If this weren't the case, it would be much simpler for people to not gain wait brought on by heavy foods.   05:03, 5 July 2007 (UTC)
I have been discussing a question with a friend of mine for quite some time (~1 month). I have my ideas, he has his; I wanted to see what the Wikipedia Refernce Desk community could come up with. This is in no way a ultra-precise or "nit-picky" question.
The $1M would be best spent shipping them over to the UK, where we don't let people starve or go homeless. Plus they'd get free medical care.   23:51, 13 July 2007 (UTC)
What produces these charges? Does heat produce electron? If it does, then what does cold produce? How do you know if something is positively charged (protons) or negatively charged (electrons)? And secondly, does lightning come from the ground? Finally, if a car produces a large number of electrons, and the road produces an equal number of static charge, will the car be pushed away from the road? -   13:05, 5 July 2007 (UTC)
Okay. Thanks for that! Cheers!!! -   13:28, 5 July 2007 (UTC)
Well, the answers certainly had helped me. So..I would like to thank you all again. Cheers!! -   09:19, 9 July 2007 (UTC)
What is record of earl facial hair and late facial hair? --  07:29, 5 July 2007 (UTC)
I  meant early and late facial hair. --  10:03, 5 July 2007 (UTC)
I meant without disease. Howewer, by the way, what was the known historical period in which men had early facial hair and what n which they had late facial hair? --  14:47, 5 July 2007 (UTC)
In most metals (I assume all, but I know someone will find one counter-point) there are electrons that float on the surface of the metal, giving it the metallic luster.  Are these electrons called valence electrons or is there another more exact name for them?  The article claims that valence electrons are in the outer-most shell and the ones on metal are not really in any shell.  They just float on the surface - or is that just an apparent floating from outer shell of one atom to another? --    16:17, 5 July 2007 (UTC)
What happens to wild cows and goats (and the like) when their udders are full?  I know this is a dumb question but it has been torturing me for some time now.
Hi all,
The computer in my apartment is probably the most energy-consuming appliance have. I'd love to be able to hook up a solar panel to it and have it run off of green energy. However, obviously it isn't as simple as that.
I am renting, so have little ability to change the wiring in my apartment or sell back to the grid or anything. And if I just hooked up the panel to my computer, I might get a little power in the day (or I might not, this is Boston), and would certainly get nothing at night.
Is there any system I can use whereby the solar power just suppliments the energy I'm drawing from the grid? Ideally I'd like to be able to instal a solar panel on my roof and attach some kind of large battery (so that it's always charging even when I'm not consuming electricity), and then, when I start consuming electricity, it jumps in and supplies as much electricity it can and lets the grid take up the rest of the slack.
Is there any system remotely like that? And what kind of price would you figure would be on it?
Thanks! --Mike. 17:05, 5 July 2007 (UTC)
Ok, if you're doing this for environmental reasons, check out http://terrapass.com/ - it will help far more than a solar panel ever will. If you're doing it for cost reasons... it would be best to just buy cheaper appliances. The 200$ maximum your PC might possible cause you in costs if you run it constantly is not worth any solar panel powerful enough to offset it. --   02:05, 6 July 2007 (UTC)
Is there any links between Klinefelter's syndrome and homosexuality? Are there any scientific proof that Klinefelter's syndrome may cause homosexuality? Has there ever been any (non-scientific) speculation about the possible connections?        (         )        17:33, 5 July 2007 (UTC)
The UK government puts the figure at 6% (they wanted to asses the  "cost" of civil partnerhip as couples pay less tax) but they didnt do any original research, they just collated all the previous studies. Helpfully, they refuse to add the question in the census. Also, hasn't Kinsey been wildly discredited? I could perhaps accept that 10% of men have "done stuff" with other men but cleary the 10% gay figure is way off the mark. I like 5% - one in twenty. a nice round number...  11:10, 11 July 2007 (UTC)
Would it be even theoretically possible to use tack adhesive to hold a shelving unit full of books to a wall?    18:17, 5 July 2007 (UTC)
On the Terrapass.com site there is a list of FAQs about energy consumption.  (though it's a php page, so not certain if you'll see the FAQs without further navigation). The last FAQ is this:
Really? I had understood that combustion of wood releases all the carbon that was stored in the wood out as carbon dioxide into the air. Is that not correct? The wood and combustion articles don't help much, except that I see that CO2 is indeed often on the right side of the chemical equation.
Maybe by "''technically'' carbon neutral" they mean that no new CO2 got created, because it was in the air before the tree consumed it? If so it seems that the wording is a little silly -- after all, the carbon in fossil fuels may well have been CO2 before it went into the fossils...
Thanks! Mike. 18:53, 5 July 2007 (UTC)
I hope it's carbon neutral.  That means burning oil is carbon neutral, since it came from plant matter.   Points out the silliness of "carbon neutral" though.  --  17:22, 7 July 2007 (UTC)
I thought of this a few days ago but forgot to post it. Note that properly calculating carbon neutrality is not a simple matter and it's safe to say that in the current enviroment, you won't be carbon neutral by simply replacing all wood that is burnt. Producing and processing said wood from the seed to your final product almost definitely requires input of additional energy in the form of petrol/diesel (vehicles, chainsaws etc) and electricity (saw mill, perhaps irrigation systems, etc) and likely also in other means (fertilisers, pesticides). There's also the human labour to consider. I don't actually agree with tbeatty here, it is IMHO a useful concept but it needs to be properly considered to have any use   19:24, 15 July 2007 (UTC)
Hello, please does anyone know the term of "Terminaltrieb" (German) in English, it is the main shoot of a tree and determinates the direction of its growth (in contrary to the offshoots). Many thanks in advance, --    20:44, 5 July 2007 (UTC)
Try Apical Shoot.    00:02, 6 July 2007 (UTC)
I want to buy a dimmer switch for an incandescent, not cfl, bulb. I understand that modern dimmers are more efficient than old variable resistor style. My question is: Are some brands or models of dimmer more energy efficient than others? I notice that one manufacturer markets what looks like the same switch at the same price with two different styles of packaging, one of which says it is 1/4 more efficient (but does not specify what this means).
To answer the original question, all phase control dimmers are very efficient. The triac (the power switching element) drops less than a volt when switched "on" and dissipates no power when switched off, so even on a 120 volt circuit, less than 1% of the voltage is dropped in the switch; on a 230 volt circuit, less than 0.5% of the voltage is lost in the power switch. Because of this, I think we can safely call the efficiency of the dimmer >99%. Even a perfect dimmer would only improve that efficiency by 1% (120 vac) or 0.5% (230 vac).
The big improvement that's coming is sine wave dimming instead of phase-control dimming. By replacing the slow triacs with high-speed power MOSFETs, the dimmers will be able to preserve the sine wave shape of the power voltage. This, in turn, will eliminate the problem of lamps "singing" and fan motors "buzzing" when dimmed down.