However, fast-evolving mobile technology is on the threshold of turning dashtop mobile equipment into full-duplex multimedia gadgetry on the strength of fast-growing broadband infrastructure, including expanding WiMAX networks worldwide. of electronic vehicle gadgetry, with growing indications that convergence into an all-in-one dashtop mobile device is an ultimate destination.
Since the commercial debut of cellular phones in the early 1990s, Palm Inc took the lead in developing a generation of palmtop handheld personal computers that worked like an electronic personal organizer. Palmtops turned into Personal Digital Assistants (PDAs) with mobile phone functions.
As of 2007, PDA phones are preferred by some, due mainly to wider screens and easier texting plus mobile multimedia functions, such as audio video playback, mobile web and mobile TV. Apple's iPhone made a debut in late June 2007, featuring keypadless touchscreens with multi-touch.
Mobile technology is evolving fast, and in the 2007 NEXTcomm opening keynote in Chicago, Ed Zander, then CEO of Motorola, noted    Today it   s about fast,affordable broadband Internet. Tomorrow I believe it   s about wireless and broadband media platforms. And we as an industry have to work together, software and platforms, the content players and the carriers, as well as the equipment suppliers like ourselves, to bring this vision of this broadband media platform to a reality.   
At the same NXTcomm conference, Verizon Chairman and CEO Ivan Seidenberg also proclaimed,    We have barely begun to imagine all the ways that rich graphics, two-way broadband and virtual reality will transform medicine, education and creative industries. This surge in visual, interactive content     delivered to any screen, anytime, anywhere     has changed our industry forever,   
The recall of lithium ion battery for laptops in 2006, and the emerging safety issue concerning portable handheld devices, like iPOD.
Dashtop mobile equipment market will be led by GPS navigators for a while, but there will come a turning point when GPS navigation leans more toward tracking and will marry GPS data and mobile web to generate location-based services (LBS). In support of this view, location-based services are a "cornerstone" of Nokia's Internet strategy, Chief Executive Officer Olli-Pekka Kallasvuo said on October 1, 2007. 
Carmakers are also buying navigation displays from parts companies such as Denso Corp. and building them into the dashboard at the factory. More than 7 percent of new cars and light trucks sold in 2006 had built-in GPS, up from about 6 percent in 2005, according to Ward's Automotive Yearbook.
Mobile-phone makers are working with carmakers to turn cell phones into the focal point for providing functions such as navigation and music in the car, said Canalys's Jones. 
Nokia, Samsung Electronics, Motorola. and other handset makers will sell 162 million GPS phones in 2007, dwarfing the 20 million GPS units Garmin and TomTom have forecast they will sell combined, according to iSuppli,a leading market researcher in California. It shows a spatial shift of GPS navigation to mobile handsets, and the next spatial shift points to the dashtop centers due to the widespread legal bans of mobile handsets while driving.-->
Scientific research and market-based R&D endeavors are focused on harnessing vehicle traffic and wireless connections. MIT embarked on Real Time Rome, a project that is designed to create real-time maps of people moving around a city through mobile phone networks with the aim of beating traffic congestion. "Real Time Rome might also help with the better allocation of transport resources." 
UCLA researchers are working on a project to encourage installation of vehicle-to-vehicle mobile computer networks to ensure driving safety and deal with congestions.
Automakers challenges include: 
Topping the list of dashtop gadgetry issues are MP3 players, video streaming and playback, mega-bit-per-second downloads of multimedia, mobile TV formats, dashtop interfaces either for mobile phones or smartphones, choices of 4G technologies between LTE, UMB and mobile WiMAX.
Scope of applications, either on lab benches or in implementation stages, can be summarized as below: