On October 5, Ty introduced a new version of Sizzlin' Sue. She had the same outfit but curly, rainbow hair like on Cute Candy. She was only available at the Learning Express.
In October, the dolls were updated to allow them to be posed in different positions.  There were also changes to the facial features of all the dolls.
There is a chance Rockin' Ruby was made to look like Avril Lavigne, in both forms. It is unknown if Bubbly Britney was named after Britney Spears or if Lucky Lindsay was named after Lindsay Lohan. More recently, Precious Paris has been said to look like Paris Hilton and that Happy Hillary looks like Hilary Duff. Also that Dazzlin' Destiny looks like Miley Cyrus since her real name is Destiny. Lovely Lola may be connected to Emily Osment since in Hannah Montana Emily's Character Lily's alter ego is called Lola and the doll looks like Lily. Awesome Ashley has been said to maybe look like Ashley Tisdale. Sweet Sasha and Marvelous Malia are also said to be named after President Obama's daughters. Although Ty has denied this, they have since renamed the dolls, due to constant public scrutiny.
When the Ty Girlz were being debued at the Toy Fairs, Ty had many posters and cut-outs of the Girlz to promote them. Ty even had a billboard in Atlanta, Georgia showing Sizzlin' Sue saying "Who's that Girl?". That phrase soon became a popular tag for the line. 
In September 2007, the Ty Girlz got a MySpace and YouTube page. They even opened a new website where Punky Penny gives updates with 'what's hot'.
On page 81 of the December 3, 2007 issue of People Magazine, there was an ad for the Girlz. It showed Cute Candy and Bubbly Britney along with an unannounced Ty Girl (the Girl has now been identified as Precious Paris). It shows them saying "Pssst....We've got a secret" and then "We're shopping in PARIS...and you can too !"
In the Spring 2008 Ty retailer catalog, retailers were able to purchase clothing made exclusively for Ty Girlz. It is uncertain yet if the clothing will "retire" as most Ty products did in the past.
 Media reports linked the names to Sasha and Malia Obama, daughters of President Barack Obama. On January 21, a Ty spokesperson told the Chicago Sun-Times that the Obama daughters were indeed the inspiration to the Ty CEO to make the dolls. In response to the Beanie Babies, Michelle Obama's press secretary said that Ty did not ask permission to use the Obama daughters' first names, saying "It is inappropriate to use young private citizens for marketing purposes." On January 22, when asked whether the new Beanie Babies were inspired by Sasha and Malia Obama, Ty's Senior Vice President of Sales said that the dolls were not made to physically resemble either of the Obama daughters and that the names chosen "worked very well with the dolls". Ty said that the process of naming dolls is proprietary information and would not say how the names were given to the dolls. In February 2009, Ty decided to retire the original dolls and give them new names, Marvelous Mariah and Sweet Sydney. Warner says the original names were inspired by what he calls "this historic time in our nation's history," but the dolls weren't intended to bear the likeness of President Barack Obama's daughters. The CEO of Ty said the name change was due to Michelle Obama's disapproval of the original names. Ty stated that while the original names were inspired by "this historic time in our nation's history", they were not named after the Obama daughters. Ty promised to donate the profits from sales of the original dolls to a charity, the Andre Agassi Charitable Foundation for youth education.http://cbs5.com/watercooler/sasha.malia.dolls.2.915226.html
Following the recall, dolls that had already been shipped to the marketplace sold on EBay for $3000.
Ty is selling Totally Troy in Ty Stores online.
Totally troy is the only 'Guy Ty'.