The new technology development process leans on the development through to the use of a technology (e.g. by introducing products that are based on the new technology in market).
Life cycles of products and technologies also are different. However mostly, it is difficult  to see the difference between products and technologies and people often confound these two terms. Then, the New product development process equals the new technology development process.
Examples of technological development include:
As of April 2008, carbon nanotubes could fit to the size of a few millimeters. It's approaching its many other potential applications.
Artificial intelligence (AI) is a field in development. Currently, AI is superhuman in most board-games, but still Sub-human in Go and most everyday tasks performed by humans.
Examples of emerging technologies are Genetic engineering / Synthetic biology, Electric cars with range extenders and Personal rapid transit, Flash memory with smaller, faster, lower power consuming storage, Nanomaterials, CVD diamond, Scramjet, Wireless communication with ubiquitous network connectivity, Anti-aging drugs, Semantic Web or Answers Machine, more efficient bio fuels, OLEDs, Machine translation, Nuclear fusion power, 3D optical data storage or Holographic data storage, Metamaterials, 3D displays, Quantum computing, Nanowire batteries, Virtual retinal displays, WiTricity and WREL (Wireless energy transfer).
Communication changes in our society have advanced tremendously in the past ten years. With    Facebook    on the rise and cells phones becoming more and more like computers it is hard to keep up. However problems also come with the advances, such as the fear of public speaking or being unable to feel confident enough to speak on the phone instead of    texting    or e-mailing. Another aspect of communication advances involves a different community: the deaf. Cochlear implants have brought great change to many, which also cause the controversy over this new advancement to rise as well.
The National Institute on Deafness and other Communication Disorders offers a great deal of information on their website that gives a full description on the topic of cochlear implants. The cochlear implant requires surgery to place the cochlear implant into place however post surgery therapy is required in order to learn how to hear and for the person to understand this new sense that he or she has acquired. With how fast research and technology is moving on the subject, scientists hope to design a cochlear implant for different types of hearing loss, and maybe design a cochlear implant for one ear, which is what is offered right now, but then pair it with another cochlear implant or hearing aid in the other.
In chapter 8 of Born Digital by John Palfrey and Urs Gasser the authors discuss how much information is actually on the Internet. The chapter also discusses the idea of information overload and how it is a real problem. Internet addiction can be considered hazardous to health and the information on the Internet can sometimes tear apart families and friendships due to the harsh headlines that sometimes may and may not be true. Different headlines are offered as examples of men dying in various countries due to playing games on the Internet non-stop. Internet in this chapter is discussed in its unbelievable way, the way that answers can be at the click of a button, however there is the harsh and negative effects to becoming addicted to this form of technology.
In the Journal of Literacy one article focuses on social networking and how children today are changing the way they write because of the online    text.    The article discusses how most social networking sites have age limits, however most are pretty easy to pass if one is underage and would like to use it. Therefore Clare Dowdall finds from Ofcom,    almost 49% of children aged 8-17 who use the Internet have set up their own profile on a social networking site   (Ofcom, 2008). The author finds that social networking today in the UK, US and Japan have become a main source for communication, however the setback that this may cause is the new style of writing these sites are offering. The way that the participants in these sites are writing is beginning to effect how they are writing in schools and outside of the Internet. The big discussion of the article has to do with the idea of the world changing to accommodate new generations way of writing, or what educators plan to do to change it.
The Journal of Circuits, Systems and Computers offers and article that gives attention to the huge advancement in technology and mobile communication. The idea of the article is to offer information for those who are somewhat behind or just looking for extra information on the subject. Cell phone communication was a large part of this article; in the past five years 4th generation (4G) phones have impacted our society in a large way. Now, most phones have Internet, applications and quicker everything. Soon everything will be working towards being faster and faster than the leading company, everything will require 4G and you will have everything you need in the palm of your hand.
Works Cited
Chadwick, R. (2009, August). Cochlear Implants. Retrieved February 21, 2011, from National Institute on Deafness and other Communication Disorders: www.nidcd.nih.gov/health/hearing/coch.html
Palfrey, J., Urs, G. (2008). Born digital: understanding the first generation of digital natives. Retrieved March 2011, from Chester County library.
Dowdall, C. (2009, July). Impressions, improvisations and compositions: reframing children   s text production in social network sites. Retrieved March 2011, from Journal of Literacy vol. 43 issue 2.
Reaz, M., Akter, M., Mohd-Yasin, F. (2006).  Image compression system for mobile communication: advancement in the recent years. Retrieved March 2011, from Journal of circuits, systems and computers vol. 15 issue 5.