A man named Chris from Portland introduced the debate in a YouTube video. He challenged the candidates (Hillary Clinton, Barack Obama, Joe Biden, Mike Gravel, Chris Dodd, Dennis Kucinich, Bill Richardson and John Edwards)  to "actually answer the questions" instead of "beating around the bush." Moderator, Anderson Cooper, stepped in and discussed why many of the video questions were not selected, even showing the most popular video, made by Tony Huynh, a YouTube celebrity. After that, more video questions were shown and the candidates answered them.
Here are the video questions that were directed at each candidate. Sometimes, the questions were asked to one candidate, multiple candidates, or all candidates. Moderator Anderson Cooper opened questions directed at one candidate to specific additional candidates. Cooper also sometimes allowed candidates to respond if they were mentioned or addressed in another response.
After the debate ended, CNN interviewed their focus groups, and they thought that Barack Obama was the candidate who most understood their issues.
In an article published by Reuters, Nielsen Media Research indicated that the Democratic debate delivered the highest Nielsen ratings of any debate broadcasted on a cable news network among adults 18-34.
Senator Clinton and Senator Obama quarreled with one another in post-debate memos over whether it would be suitable for them to meet with world leaders considered by some hostile to the U.S., among them Fidel Castro, Kim Jong II, and Hugo Chavez. A memo issued by a Hillary Clinton presidential campaign spokesman stated that Obama said he would meet with some of the world's worst dictators during his first year of office without preconditions. Obama's campaign said that Obama's method "is exactly the kind of change and new thinking that excites voters about an Obama presidency."
On July 26, 2007, in a speech made in Concord, New Hampshire, Senator Obama stated that he did not want "Bush   Cheney Lite," referring to Senator Clinton.
Media following the event expressed mixed feelings about whether or not the questions were 'tough' or pertinent enough. Some analysts expressed criticism of the candidates responses, and the format itself pointing to the lack of follow up questions. During the debate, presidential candidate Mike Gravel questioned whether the debate was "fair" or not and complained due to a lack of airtime. In a Newsweek article written by Brian Braiker, he indicated that many YouTube users would have preferred that CNN select the most popular video questions.
Florida Republican Party Chairman Jim Greer introduced the governor of Florida, Charlie Crist.  The governor then gave a brief introduction before turning the debate over to moderator Anderson Cooper.
Soon after the debate several bloggers discovered that several questions to Republicans were asked by Democratic supporters, not by undecided voters, with some bloggers and commentators alleging that CNN purposely arranged this to embarrass Republican candidates. Also, there is controversy that many of the questions were used to boost certain candidates, but not others. The question absorbed in controversy is the one asked by retired general Keith Kerr (question 23, see above). He is an adviser to the Hillary Clinton campaign, and is also a supporter of her campaign. This has given rise to claims that he was planted by the Clinton campaign.