NOTE: Certain sections of this article have undergone active editing, including wholesale deletions. Please be both respectful and informative in your edits as we try to improve the quality of the article. All edits should be based on Wikipedia policies, and all information in the article should be fully sourced with reliable third party citations.
Saddleback's first public service was held on Easter Sunday, April 6, 1980, with two hundred people in attendance at the Laguna Hills High School Theater.  Warren's innovative church growth methods led to rapid growth and the church has used nearly eighty different facilities in its 30-year history.
Saddleback did not build its first permanent building until it had 10,000 weekly attenders.  When the current Lake Forest campus was purchased in the early 1990s, a 2,300 seat plastic tent was used for worship services for several years, with four services each weekend. In 1995, the current Worship Center was completed with a seating capacity of 3,500.  The Children's Ministry Center (housing the ''All Stars'' children's ministry) and staff office building were completed over the next few years.  In 2008, former Pastor of Life Development, Doug Fields, saw his dream of over 15 years come to fruition with the completion of the ''Refinery'', Saddleback's first permanent  student ministry facility. Costing $20 million, the state-of-the-art facility is considered the premier student ministry facility in the world. The ''Refinery'' houses Saddleback's middle school ministry (''Wildside''), high school ministry (''HSM''), college ministry (''Crave''), and young adults ministry, (''Fuel''). Since moving into the ''Refinery,'' all the student ministries have seen tremendous growth, with more than 2,500 young people attending services in the facility each week. The ''Refinery'' was built using the resources and voluntary giving raised through the "Extending the Vision" campaign.
Image:Saddleback2.jpg|Waterfall and Spire
Image:Saddleback3.jpg|Worship Center
Image:Saddleback4.jpg|Children's Ministry Center
Image:Saddleback5.jpg|Refinery
In November and December 2006, Saddleback Church played host to the second annual Global Summit on AIDS and the Church. The summit featured 60 speakers, including Senators Barack Obama and Sam Brownback. The appearance of Obama at the church was controversial because of his pro-choice stance, while Rick Warren and most evangelicals are pro-life. The controversy was reignited when Hillary Clinton spoke at the 2007 summit.
On August 16, 2008, Rick Warren arranged a meeting between Senators John McCain and Barack Obama at Saddleback called the Civil Forum on The Presidency. The format of the forum was structured such that Warren first asked Sen. Obama a series of questions; he then asked Sen. McCain very similar ones subsequently. Held inside Saddleback's Worship Center, the event is notable as the first time the two Presidential candidates met during the campaign. It was broadcast live on national news networks and streamed online. Tickets were distributed to church members through a raffle with seats listing as high as $1,000 and the event was sold out.
Fox News Channel has aired Saddleback's Christmas and Easter services nationally on its network.