The ATS may have been enacted in response to a number of international incidents caused by the unavailability of remedies for foreign citizens in the United States. For example, the peace treaty ending the American Revolution provided for the satisfaction of debts to British creditors. The refusal of some states to enforce the payment of such debts prompted Great Britain to threaten to retaliate. In 1784, French diplomat Francois Barbe-Marbois was assaulted, but no remedy was available to him. The incident was notorious internationally and prompted Congress to draft a resolution asking the states to allow suits in tort for the violation of the law of nations. However, few states enacted such a provision, and Congress subsequently included the ATS in the Judiciary Act of 1789.
Since ''Filartiga'', jurisdiction under the ATS has been upheld in dozens of cases. The only United States Supreme Court case directly addressing the ATS is the 2004 case ''Sosa v. Alvarez-Machain''.  The ''Sosa'' Court clarified that the ATS did not create a cause of action, but instead merely "furnish jurisdiction for a relatively modest set of actions alleging violations of the law of nations." Noting that it must take "great caution in adapting the law of nations to private rights," the Court nonetheless upheld the applicability of the ATS to actions committed abroad that violate contemporary customary international law, but held that the recognition of new causes of action should be subject to "vigilant doorkeeping."
In ''Filartiga'', two Paraguayan citizens resident in the United States, represented by the Center for Constitutional Rights, brought suit against a Paraguyan former police chief who was also living in the United States. The plaintiffs alleged that the defendant had tortured and murdered a member of their family and asserted jurisdiction under the ATS. The district court dismissed for lack of subject-matter jurisdiction, holding that the "law of nations" does not regulate a state's treatment of its own citizens. The United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit reversed, holding that the contemporary law of nations had expanded to prohibit state-sanctioned torture.  The court found that multilateral treaties and domestic prohibitions on torture evidenced a consistent state practice of proscribing official torture. The court similarly found that United Nations declarations such as the Universal Declaration on Human Rights manifested an expectation of adherence to the prohibition of official torture. The court therefore held that the right to be free from torture had become a principle of customary international law. However, one of the judges on the panel hearing the case later wrote that ''Filartiga'' "should not be misread or exaggerated to support sweeping assertions that all (or even most) international human rights norms found in the Universal Declaration or in international human rights treaties have ripened into customary international law enforceable in the domestic courts."
In ''Sosa,'' the Supreme Court held that the ATS does grant a cause of action, but only for any action "which violates definable, universal and obligatory norms" of international law.  The plaintiff in ''Sosa'', Alvarez, brought a claim under the ATS for arbitrary arrest and detention. Alvarez had been indicted in the United States for torturing and murdering a Drug Enforcement Agency officer. When the United States was unable to secure Alvarez's extradition, it paid Sosa, a Mexican national, to kidnap Alvarez and bring him into the United States. Alvarez claimed that his "arrest" by Sosa was arbitrary because the warrant for his arrest only authorized his arrest within the United States. The United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, applying the "specific, universal, and obligatory" test, held that Alvarez's abduction constituted arbitrary arrest in violation of international law.  The Supreme Court reversed, however, finding that the ATS only provides a cause of action for violations of those international norms "defined with a specificity comparable to the features of . . . 18th-century paradigms . . . ." The Court went on to hold, " single illegal detention of less than a day, followed by the transfer of custody to lawful authorities and a prompt arraignment, violates no norm of customary international law so well defined as to support the creation of a federal remedy." Finally, the Court held that future courts should also consider certain principles limiting the recognition of a cause of action under the ATS, including "case-specific deference" to the political branches on questions of foreign policy.
The Supreme Court held in ''Sosa v. Alvarez-Machain'' that the ATS provides a cause of action for violations of international norms that are as "specific, universal, and obligatory" as were the norms prohibiting violations of safe conducts, infringements of the rights of ambassadors, and piracy in the 18th century.  Courts have found torture; cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment; genocide; war crimes; crimes against humanity; summary execution; prolonged arbitrary detention; and forced disappearance to be actionable under the ATS.  
Since ''Sosa'', courts have struggled to define the level of specificity required for a norm to be actionable under the ATS.  For example, subsequent to ''Sosa'', the United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit overturned prior lower court decisions that had found cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment actionable, noting that ''Sosa'' repudiated the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights as a source of law under the ATS.  Similarly, courts have held that economic, social, and cultural rights are too indeterminate to satisfy ''Sosa'''s specificity requirement.  For example, in ''Flores v. Southern Peru Copper Corp.'', the Second Circuit stated that the rights to life and to health are too indeterminate to constitute a cause of action under the ATS.
The United States District Court for the Northern District of California, however, has held that the limits of a norm need not be defined with particularity to be actionable; rather, the norm need only be so defined that the particular acts upon which a claim is based certainly fall within the bounds of the norm.  In ''Doe v. Qi'', the court stated, "The fact that there may be doubt at the margins -- a fact that inheres in any definition -- does not negate the essence and application of that definition in clear cases." The court also described how to determine whether specific actions fall within the proscriptions of an international norm, holding that the actions alleged should be compared with actions that international adjudicatory bodies have found to be proscribed by the norm in question.  It therefore examined decisions by institutions such as the Human Rights Committee, the European Court of Human Rights, and the African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights to determine that pushing, hitting, and choking a plaintiff during one day of incarceration did not constitute cruel, unusual, or degrading treatment, whereas forcing a hand into a plaintiff's vagina did constitute cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment.
In a 2-1 decision issued on September 17, 2010, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit held that corporations cannot be held liable for violations of customary international law, finding that: (1) under both U.S. Supreme Court and Second Circuit precedents over the previous 30 years that address ATS suits alleging violations of customary international law, the scope of liability is determined by customary international law itself; (2) under Supreme Court precedent, the ATS requires courts to apply norms of international law   and not domestic law   to the scope of defendants    liabilities. Such norms must be    specific, universal and obligatory"; and (3) under international law,    corporate liability is not a discernible   much less a universally recognized   norm of customary international law,    that the court could apply to the ATS, and that the plaintiffs    ATS claims should indeed be dismissed for lack of subject matter jurisdiction.
In September 1997, thirteen Burmese villagers filed suit against Unocal and their parent company, the Union Oil Company of California under the ATCA
In April 2007, the World Organization for Human Rights USA filed a lawsuit against Yahoo! on behalf of Chinese dissident Wang Xiaoning, claiming jurisdiction under the ATS.
The mother of Shi Tao (Guao Quingsheng) joined the lawsuit on behalf of her son. Shi Tao, a Chinese journalist, was detained in 2004, and convicted for emailing a description of the Chinese government   s instructions to journalists for the upcoming anniversary of the 1989 Tiananmen Square Massacre (in which representatives of PRC warned journalists of instabilities that might arise from marking the Tiananmen Square anniversary) to a New York-based pro-democracy forum.
Both men were punished for speaking against the Chinese government after Yahoo!, through its Chinese subsidiary, provided their identifying information to the Chinese government.
Yahoo! settled the case in November 2007 for an undisclosed amount of money, although they did agree to cover the plaintiff's legal costs as a part of the agreement. In a statement released after the settlement was made public, Yahoo! said that it would "provide 'financial, humanitarian and legal support to these families' and create a separate 'humanitarian relief fund' for other dissidents and their families."
One high-profile ATS case involved claims by Nigerian villagers regarding events that occurred on a Chevron offshore drilling platform in 1998, when Nigerian soldiers suppressed a protest against Chevron's environmental and business practices. The protesters, with the help of nonprofit organizations including the Center for Constitutional Rights, the Public Interest Lawyers Group, and EarthRights International, brought claims for wrongful death, torture, assault, battery, and negligence against Chevron, alleging that the company had paid the soldiers that landed on the platform and were therefore liable for the actions that they took. In December 2008, a jury found that Chevron was not liable.
On August 11, 2009, the Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit issued a decision in ''Sinaltrainal v. Coca-Cola Company''.  In this case, plaintiffs alleged that Coca-Cola bottlers in Colombia collaborated with Colombian paramilitary forces in "the systematic intimidation, kidnapping, detention, torture, and murder of Colombian trade unionists."  However, the district court dismissed the complaint and the Eleventh Circuit upheld that ruling.  In doing so, the Eleventh Circuit relied upon the Supreme Court's recent ''Ashcroft v. Iqbal'' decision  in addressing the adequacy of the complaint, which has must have "facial plausibility" to survive dismissal, and noted that Rule 8 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure demands "more than an unadorned, the-defendant-unlawfully-harmed-me accusation."  The Eleventh Circuit then applied the ''Iqbal'' standard to plaintiffs' allegations against Coca-Cola and held that they were insufficient to survive dismissal.
On October 2, 2009, the Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit issued another important ruling.   In ''Presbyterian Church of Sudan v. Talisman Energy, Inc.'', the Second Circuit imposed a higher pleading standard, requiring that "the mens rea standard for aiding and abetting liability in Alien Tort Statute actions is purpose rather than knowledge alone." In this case, which involves allegations against a Canadian oil company concerning its purported assistance to the government in Sudan in the forced movement of civilians residing near oil facilities, the court concluded that "plaintiffs have not established Talisman's purposeful complicity in human rights abuses."  In reaching that conclusion, the Second Circuit stated that "the standard for imposing accessorial liability under the Alien Tort Statute must be drawn from international law; and that under international law a claimant must show that the defendant provided substantial assistance with the purpose of facilitating the alleged offenses."
Charles McArthur Emmanuel (also known as "Chuckie Taylor" or "Taylor Jr."), the son of Charles Taylor, former President of Liberia,"." ''CNN''. September 30, 2008. is a U.S. citizen, born in Boston to Charles Taylor Sr.'s college girlfriend. Raised by his mother in Florida until he was 17, Taylor Jr. traveled to Liberia in 1997 to live with his father.  While in Liberia, Taylor Jr. became the commander of the infamously violent Anti-Terrorist Unit (ATU), commonly known in Liberia as the "Demon Forces."
In 2006, U.S. officials arrested Taylor Jr. upon entering the United States (via the Miami International Airport) and the Department of Justice later charged him based on torture he committed in Liberia. On October 20, 2008, a federal jury convicted Taylor Jr. of multiple counts of torture and conspiracy to torture. On January 9, 2009, he was sentenced to 97 years in prison.
That same day, the World Organization for Human Rights USA and the Florida International University College of Law filed a civil suit in the Southern District of Florida on behalf of five of Taylor Jr.   s victims pursuant to the Alien Tort Statute and the Torture Victim Protection Act. The plaintiffs won by default judgment on all counts and the civil trial to determine damages took place in late December 2009 and January 2010. In February 2010, the court found Taylor liable to the plaintiffs for damages of over $22 million.