The '''World Series of Poker Europe''' (WSOPE) is the first expansion effort of World Series of Poker-branded poker tournaments outside the United States. Since 1970, participants had to travel to Las Vegas if they wanted to compete in the World Series of Poker (WSOP). Although the WSOP held circuit events in other locations, the main tournaments, which awarded bracelets to the winners, were exclusively held in Las Vegas. The inaugural WSOPE, held in 2007, marked the first time that a WSOP bracelet was awarded outside of Las Vegas.  Since its inception, players from 12 countries     Denmark (3) , Afghanistan, Germany, Italy, Norway and USA, UK (3), Canada, Finland, Australia, USA (2), USA/Indonesia (1)     have won bracelets.
In 2004, Harrah's Casinos purchased the rights to the WSOP label. Harrah's later purchased London Clubs International (LCI). LCI operates three casinos in the London area   Fifty, Leicester Square, and The Sportsman. After the purchase of these casinos, Harrah's decided to expand its WSOP label into Europe. European casinos typically have a different environment than those in the U.S. Jeffrey Pollack, the WSOP Commissioner, indicated that the WSOPE would have a "style and flair that is both unique and appropriate to the setting. So don't be surprised if we require participants to wear blazers at the tables. If James Bond were hosting a poker tournament it may look like the World Series of Poker Europe."
The WSOPE was entering a crowded field as many major poker tournaments were already established in Europe. Pollack, however, believed that brand recognition of the WSOP and that the "WSOP bracelet is the most recognized poker hardware globally will allow the WSOPE to quickly catch up." February 27, 2007. Pokerpages.com. Accessed 7/25/07
In marketing the WSOPE, Harrah's Casino did not rely upon the reputation of Harrah's or the WSOP alone. On July 5, 2007, Harrah's announced its alliance with England-based Betfair, one of the largest online gaming companies in the world. The agreement builds on Betfair's European reputation in advertising the WSOPE while creating the largest agreement between a web-based and brick-and-mortar casinos. Due to changes in U.S. laws, effective in 2007, the WSOP could no longer accept money from online gambling companies. This prevented the WSOP from acknowledging WSOP qualifiers from online events. The WSOPE is not bound by this limitation. The United Kingdom Gambling Act of 2005 allows for legal regulated online poker sites. February 27, 2007. Pokerpages.com. Accessed 2007-07-25 Furthermore, as the laws that govern the age of gambling differ in England than the U.S., the WSOPE admits younger players. In 2007, four of the five finalists at the first event of the WSOPE had won bracelets. Thomas Bihl, however, outlasted each of them to claim the first-ever WSOPE bracelet. No previous bracelet winners played at the second final table; Dario Alioto won the bracelet. Annette "Annette_15" Obrestad, became the youngest player to win a WSOP bracelet event at age 18 years, 364 days in the final event of the tournament.
  Three-time bracelet winner John Juanda won his fourth bracelet in the WSOPE Main Event.  Theo Jorgensen, who made it to the 2007 WSOPE Main Event final table, won his first bracelet in the   5,000 Pot-Limit Omaha event.  Sherkhan Farnood, undoubtably had the most challenging final table as four of his final six opponents (Ivo Donev, Howard Lederer, Phil Ivey, and Jeff Lisandro) had a combined 9 WSOP bracelets between them.  The 2008 WSOPE also marked a technological advance with the advent of the mobile hole card camera.  At previous tournaments, the viewing audience could only see the hole cards at select tables.  In 2008, a special camera was used that enabled roaming camera crews to capture the action at adjacent tables.
The 2009 WSOPE was held from September 17 to October 1 at the Casino at the Empire in London, England. It consisted of four bracelet events including a   1,000 No-Limit Hold'em, a   2,500 Pot Limit Hold'em/Pot-Limit Omaha, a   5,000 Pot Limit Omaha, and a   10,000 World Championship No-Limit Hold'em Main Event.
The 2010 World Series of Poker Europe was held from September 14 to September 28 at the Casino at the Empire in London, England. There were five bracelet events, culminating in the   10,350 WSOPE Championship No Limit Hold'em event which was won by James Bord, the first WSOPE bracelet winner from the UK.