The article was closed 06:08, 15 April 2008.
The  is: 
I do not support FAR of an otherwise fine article only because it has had to be protected due to normal and natural fallout from the election cycle.  FAR is not dispute resolution.  Unless the article has other significant issues, I suggest closure or withdrawal of this FAR.  ( ) 17:28, 26 March 2008 (UTC)
I do not support the Barack Obama page as a featured article given the dispute surrounding N/POV.  A group of editors is vigorously protecting this article from information that is noteworthy but that is deemed negative by those editors. A great deal of discussion has taken place on the Talk page regarding these issues.  While some biased edits are certainly coming from editors who seem to insist on forcefully discrediting Obama, the pendulum has swung entirely in the direction of fan-like protectionism, which is undermining Wikipedia principles. --  ( ) 17:38, 26 March 2008 (UTC)
Questioning the Bush administration's management of the Iraq War, Obama spoke of an enlisted Marine, Corporal Seamus Ahern from East Moline, Illinois, asking, "Are we serving Seamus as well as he is serving us?"
Reaffirming his commitment to net neutrality legislation, Obama said "once providers start to privilege some applications or web sites over others, then the smaller voices get squeezed out, and we all lose."
In the July-August 2007 issue of Foreign Affairs, Obama called for an outward looking post-Iraq War foreign policy and the renewal of American military, diplomatic, and moral leadership in the world. Saying "we can neither retreat from the world nor try to bully it into submission," he called on Americans to "lead the world, by deed and by example."
In his preface to the 2004 revised edition, Obama explains that he had hoped the story of his family "might speak in some way to the fissures of race that have characterized the American experience, as well as the fluid state of identity   the leaps through time, the collision of cultures   that mark our modern life."
Keep in mind I did not include all of the quotes in the article. If you look at the other candidates, then the quotes I did NOT include vastly outnumber what is shown in those articles. Not only that, providing quotes, from a politician, as proof of policy is lazy writing and inaccurate. Seriously, we have wikiquote for a reason - an encyclopedia isn't supposed to read like a fluffy interview from Time.   ( ) 21:25, 3 April 2008 (UTC)
Additionally, this article includes things like his left-handedness, his love of chili, his desire to be an "architect" if he had to choose alternative career. These are defended as being relevant because it was from a "human interest" story, but all of this fluff crowds out, and excuses valid additions to the article, with excuses of "oh the article is too big already."  ( ) 21:25, 3 April 2008 (UTC)
Oh,here's another gem that has no business being in an encyclopedia article, "An October 2005 article in the British journal New Statesman listed Obama as one of "10 people who could change the world," the only politician included on the list."
Sorry but some British political rag saying he can change the world is hardly relevant. We might as well include something about him being voted the "sexiest Senator" by People.   ( ) 21:25, 3 April 2008 (UTC)
This article was featured in 2004 and maybe it deserved it back then, but he was an unknown then, and lots of new information, not fluff, has been kept out of this article and minimized. The fact that it was featured 4 years ago has been an excuse to remove the NPOV tag despite its obvious bias.  ( )
Just to make it clear, this article clearly fails wikipedia guidelines under   since it includes so many direct and lengthy quotations - inclusion of his keynote speech is the clearest example of this.   ( ) 22:57, 3 April 2008 (UTC)
Rezko, Pakistan, hiding slightly negative stuff as a phrase are examples.  
FA status also is wrong if some people are threatening others saying that they are socks.  That's why I refuse to sign in using my user.  I will only use my IP.  Another guy from India used his IP so there's proof that at least two people are not socks, even if they share similar views.  Sharing similar views is not a crime.  For example, I disagree with murder.  If you disagree with killing any person for enjoyment, then are you my sock?  No!  I wish I could say it in a nicer way but the situation is bad in this article.  
Also note, like that other IP guy, I am not American.  I am neutral in the presidential contest in America.   ( ) 04:21, 6 April 2008 (UTC) (IP in Southeast Asia)
One example is hiding his Pakistan invasion support.  I knew this and I see it has been on talk page only to be removed.  This is very unique so it qualifies.  There are many cases like this.  
Another example is the description of his tax policy.  The Wall Street Journal Asia (yesterday) says how terrible he is and even JFK knew economic policy better than Obama.  It says that Obama owns little stock unlike 48% of Americans, many of them middle class (not fat cat).
All these do not say Obama is bad man just the facts.  But some seem to want to hide it.  Hiding things from encyclopedia means that FA is not deserving.
I also mention on talk page that I do not sign my user name because of threats to ban people.  That kind of intimidation alone is reason to deny FA renewal.  For your information, I am a neutral in American politics.  I am a Korea editing from Seoul.  Here is proof for the people who attack others accusing them of sock.  Why is it that some people think my ideas are golden, your ideas are sock?   ( ) 06:19, 8 April 2008 (UTC) 
This is not bad; if the article is unprotected, these kinds of corrections are tedious but shouldn't take long.    ( ) 04:50, 9 April 2008 (UTC)
There's definitely POV at work in this article, and the page is protected from any NPOV by Grsz and others. It should certainly be reviewed.   ( ) 06:13, 12 April 2008 (UTC)