 He then served as Vice President of Winner & Associates.  Prior to joining Harrah's Entertainment and serving as WSOP Commissioner, Pollack held prominent roles with NASCAR and the National Basketball Association (NBA).
Pollack has been named to Street & Smith's ''Sports Business Journal'' of "40 Under 40" and twice to The Sporting News 100. He has also won two Emmy Awards. Pollack is married, and resides in both Los Angeles and Las Vegas.  His half-brother is Gary Bettman, the Commissioner of the National Hockey League.
In February 1994, at the age of 29, Pollack founded ''The Sports Business Daily''. It was the first daily trade publication for the sports industry.  Pollack modelled the concept for the Sports Business Daily on the political daily ''The Hotline''.  Doug Bailey, ''The Hotline's'' founder, was Jeffrey Pollack's partner in this venture.  ''The Sports Business Daily'' originally occupied 3 rooms in the same building and initially hired ''The Hotline's'' Stephen Bilafer as the Editor-in-Chief.  With Pollack as its president and publisher, ''The Sports Business Daily'' garnered a strong reputation among to decision-makers in the industry.  By the time ''The Sports Business Daily'' was sold in 1996, it was a "recognized leader in sports industry news and is relied upon by top sports, entertainment, financial, and media executives worldwide."  ''The Sports Business Daily'' provided the content for ESPN's SportsZone "Industry Insider."
The World Series of Poker is the number one poker event in terms of participants, prize money and history.M. Beirne, Brandweek, May 24, 2006 Poker is now the most-played leisure game in America, with upwards of 65 million people who play. The number of poker players exceeds practitioners of golf, tennis, and billiards combined.
In 2005, Harrah's Casino hired Pollack as its Vice President of Marketing.   When he was hired, some people speculated that Pollack "was passing through poker on his way from NASCAR to Bud Selig's seat in Major League Baseball".  His first responsibility with Harrah's was the 2005 World Series of Poker.  Poker players' first impression of him centered on the 2005 Tournament of Champions (ToC). The ToC was hyped as a $2.5 million dollar freeroll for which players had to qualify.  In 2005, the ToC was sponsored by Pepsi, who was about to start an advertising campaign involving Doyle Brunson, Johnny Chan, and Phil Hellmuth.  Pepsi insisted that its three spokesmen take part in the ToC and the WSOP consented.  The other players objected that three corporate exemptions were granted at the last moment.  Pollack was heavily criticized, but addressed the criticism head on.
On January 13, 2006 he was promoted to Commissioner of the WSOP.  One of his first actions as the commissioner was to work towards avoiding the criticism of the ToC.  Pollack started meeting with a group of professional poker players in a monthly council.  Daniel Negreanu was impressed with his first meeting with Pollack, noting that professional poker is "a unique situation, as with the NBA players are being paid, while the poker players actually put up their own money."
Pollack is known for his aggressive marketing.  Since becoming the Commissioner of the WSOP, he has negotiated partnerships with ESPN, Sirius radio, Glu Mobile, Bluff Media, AOL, and Betfair.  He also arranged sponsorships with Miller Brewing Company, Planters and Hershey   s.  Once Pollack was asked if professional poker players would start wearing uniforms covered with ads, similar to NASCAR.  He responded, "That is not out of the realm of possibility.  As long as they stick to the guidelines, players will be allowed to seek endorsement deals and advertise as they wish."
Pollack believes that the strength in the WSOP lies in its tradition and legacy.  He wants to do more to honor the WSOP's past champions, "I want to bring our past, our history, and our DNA along for the ride."  He wants to "grow the popularity of the World Series of Poker," said Pollack. "It is already the No. 1 brand in poker, but we're going to make it even stronger through world-class media partnerships, strategic marketing alliances and superior customer service."
When asked how the WSOP can compete against the World Poker Tour or Professional Poker Tour, Pollack simply brushes them away.     Players measure themselves by how many bracelets they have," he points out, "not by how much money they   ve won. And we   re the only place you can get that bracelet. If poker players are interested in being part of the history and heritage, we   re their only choice.   
Pollack believes that the success of the WSOP is not determined based upon the number of participants every year, but rather upon the players experiences.
For example, in 2007 the WSOP flattened its award structure. The cash awards were distributed more evenly so that people who went out earlier earned more money, while those who made it to the final table won less.
In an effort to reduce complaints about marked cards, the WSOP entered into a partnership with United States Playing Card Company (USPC).  USPC introduced a new "Poker Peek" cards as the official card of the WSOP.  New decks were introduced every day at every table.  In 2006, Copag provided playing cards that became creased as the events endured, resulting in cards that were essentially marked.
The training of WSOP dealers was also heavily criticized in past tournaments, in an effort to forestall this criticism the WSOP began intensive training for dealers as early as March 2007 for over 300 dealers.  The training included staff and supervisory training.  Part of the reason for this additional training was to prevent a repeat of the "extra chips" that materialized during 2006's main event.  During the 2006 main event, the tournament finished with more chips than normal chip upgrading would have led to.  Another effort to reduce that risk was the introduction of special chips exclusively for the main event.  These new chips, however, caused another controversy as they were designed in such a manner that players could not easily differentiate between the values.
On November 13, 2009, Pollack announced on his Twitter feed that he was resigning as Commissioner.