The '''Googleplex''' is the corporate headquarters complex of Google, Inc., located at 1600 Amphitheatre Parkway in Mountain View, Santa Clara County, California, near San Jose. "Googleplex" is a portmanteau of ''Google'' and ''complex'', and a reference to ''googolplex'', the name given to the large number 1010100, or 10googol.
The Googleplex is one of the company's 23 U.S. and Canadian locations.  Google also maintains 23 European locations, 14 Asia/Pacific locations, 5 Middle East locations, and 3 Latin American locations.
The five core buildings, totaling  , were built for and originally occupied by Silicon Graphics (SGI). The office space and corporate campus is located within a larger  site that contains Charleston Park, a  public park; improved access to Permanente Creek; and public trails that connect the corporate site to Shoreline Park and the Bay Trail. The project, launched in 1994 to reclaim a former industrial brownfield, was a creative collaboration between SGI, SWA Group of San Francisco, Sausalito, and the Planning and Community Development Agency of the City of Mountain View. The objective was to develop in complementary fashion the privately-owned corporate headquarters and adjoining public greenspace. Key design decisions placed parking for nearly 2000 cars underground, enabling SWA to integrate the two open spaces with water features, shallow pools, fountains, pathways, and plazas. The project was completed in 1997. The ASLA noted in 1999 that the SGI project was a significant departure from typical corporate campuses, challenging conventional thinking about private and public space. 
STUDIOS Architecture was the executive architect for the original SGI campus, and provided both interior architecture and base building design.
The former SGI facilities were leased by Google beginning in 2003.
In June 2006, Google purchased some of Silicon Graphics' properties, including the Googleplex, for $319 million.
Since 2007 the site has featured a series of solar panels, covering the rooftops of eight buildings and two solar carports capable of producing 1.6 megawatts of electricity. At the time of installation Google believed it to be the largest in the United States among corporations.  The panels provide the power needed for 30% of the  peak electricity demand in their solar-powered buildings.
Four 100kW Bloom Energy Servers were shipped to Google in July 2008, making Google the first customer of Bloom Energy.
There is a giant green statue of the Android logo outside of Building 44 (1635 Charleston Road) on the Google campus (It can be seen using Google Maps Satellite on 45   mode). 
The Googleplex is located between Charleston Road, Amphitheatre Parkway, and Shoreline Boulevard in north Mountain View, California close to the Shoreline Park wetlands. Employees living in San Francisco, the East Bay, or South Bay may take a free wifi-enabled Google shuttle to and from work.  The shuttles are powered by biodiesel.
Neighbors of the Googleplex include Shoreline Amphitheatre to the north; Intuit to the northwest and Century Theatres, Microsoft Corporation's Silicon Valley research complex, and the Computer History Museum to the south. Moffett Field lies nearby to the east. Branders.com is located northwest of Googleplex.