 (since Russia declared itself to be the successor of the Soviet Union), but it has yet to be approved by the Russian parliament. The United States Senate gave its advice and consent to ratification as early as on September 16, 1991 and has no intentions to reopen the issue. In its turn, the US   USSR agreement is the confirmation of the earlier United States     Russia Convention of March 18 (O.S.)/March 30 (N.S.), 1867. This sea border is also known as the '''Baker-Shevardnadze line''' or '''Baker-Shevardnadze agreement''', after the officials who signed the deal, the Soviet foreign minister Eduard Shevardnadze and the US Secretary of State James Baker., September 4, 2002, ''BBC News'' (retrieved Sep. 29, 2009)
From the point, 65   30' N, 168   58' 37" W the maritime boundary extends north along the 168   58' 37" W meridian through the Bering Strait and Chukchi Sea into the Arctic Ocean as far as permitted under international law. From the same point southwards, the boundary follows a line specified by maritimegeographic positions given in the Agreement.
The need in the maritime boundary arose after the United States purchased Alaska from the Russian Empire. At these times, the national maritime interests were restricted only to the three-mile limit. The purchase treaty did mention a boundary across the Bering Sea. However, when the border issue became pressing with the introduction of the 200-mile limit by  the Law of the Sea it turned out the neither side could produce the maps used during the negotiations. What is more, the two sides agreed that the boundary was intended to be a straight line on a map, but they did not agree which map projection was used: Mercator or conformal. This resulted in about 15,000 square nautical miles of disputed area. The 1990 line split the difference between the two lines and introduced several "special areas", which were beyond the 200-mile zone, but in which the sides ceded their rights to the opponent. As a result, the United States controlled a far larger part of the disputed area in the Bering Sea. The United States Congress quickly ratified the agreement as very favorable, but the Soviet Union failed to do so before its collapse in 1992. Many in Russia have criticized Mikhail Gorbachev and Edvard Shevardnadze for rushing the deal and ceding the Russian fishing rights and other maritime benefits for whatever reasons and insist on renegotiation. The United States continues the efforts to enforce the line against the encroaching Russian fishing vessels, in order to build up the evidence of "general state practice" that the 1990 agreement is indeed the marine border between the two countries.