The '''''Orange County Business Journal''''' is a weekly print and online newspaper covering business in Orange County, California. The paper has a circulation of about 23,000 and is the second largest business journal in California after the ''Los Angeles Business Journal'', which has a circulation of 30,000., retrieved 2007-08-03
The ''Orange County Business Journal'' is among the largest business journals in the country, in league with ''Crain   s Chicago Business'', the ''Los Angeles Business Journal'', the ''San Francisco Business Times'', ''Atlanta Business Chronicle'' and the ''Boston Business Journal''.
The ''Orange County Business Journal'' covers information on various industries, including the technology, medical device, aerospace, defense, surfwear, real estate, and finance sector.
Each year, the editorial department of the ''Orange County Business Journal'' publishes a list of the most influential business people in the county (the OC50) and a list of the wealthiest people (OC   s Wealthiest). At the end of each year, the Business Journal publishes a Book of Lists, identifying the top firms in Orange County in over 50 industry groups.
The Journal's web site contains over a dozen video interviews of business executives in Orange County.
The ''Orange County Business Journal'' is owned by CBJ, L.P., which also owns other Business Journals in Los Angeles, San Diego and the San Fernando Valley.
The ''Orange County Business Journal'' holds six events per year, including:
In 1978, Marsha Feldman (later Marengo) started the paper as the ''Business Community Journal''. In 1980, she changed the name to the ''Orange County Business Journal''. The paper was bought over by its current owner: CBJ, L.P. Publisher Richard Reisman and Editor Rick Reiff, now the paper   s executive editor and a Pulitzer Prize recipient, joined soon after, leading a period of rapid growth for the paper.
In 2000, Michael Lyster, the paper   s former technology reporter, returned from ''Investor Business Daily'' to become the editor of the ''Orange County Business Journal''.