A '''solar inverter''' or '''PV inverter''' is a critical component in a solar energy system. It performs the conversion of the variable DC output of the Photovoltaic (PV) modules into a utility freqeuncy AC current that can be fed into the commercial electrical grid or used by a local, off-grid electrical network. An inverter allows use of ordinary mains-operated appliances on a direct current system.  Solar inverters have special functions adapted for use with PV arrays, including ''maximum power point tracking'' and ''anti-islanding protection''.
Solar inverters may be classified into three broad types:
Maximum power point tracking is a technique that solar inverters use to get the maximum possible power from the PV array. Solar cells have a complex relationship between solar irradiation, temperature and total resistance that produces a non-linear output efficiency known as the ''I-V curve''. It is the purpose of the MPPT system to sample the output of the cells and apply a resistance (load) to obtain maximum power for any given environmental conditions. Essentially, this defines the current that the inverter should draw from the PV in order to get the maximum possible power (since power equals voltage times current).
The fill factor, more commonly known by its abbreviation ''FF'', is a parameter which, in conjunction with the open circuit voltage and short circuit current of the panel, determines the maximum power from a solar cell. Fill factor is defined as the ratio of the maximum power from the solar cell to the product of Voc and Isc.
 0) while on the right side of the MPP the curve is falling (dP/dV 
This method is the most common. The algorithm perturbs the operating voltage in a given direction and samples dP/dV. If dP/dV is positive, then the algorithm knows it adjusted the voltage in the direction toward the MPP. It keeps adjusting the voltage in that direction until dP/dV is negative.
P&O algorithms are easy to implement, but they sometimes result in oscillations around the MPP in steady-state operation. They also have slow response times and can even track in the wrong direction under rapidly changing atmospheric conditions.
This method uses the PV array's incremental conductance dI/dV to compute the sign of dP/dV. INC tracks rapidly changing irradiance conditions more accurately than the P&O method. However, like the P&O method, it can produce oscillations and be confused by rapidly changing atmospheric conditions. Another disadvantage is that its increased complexity increases computational time and slows down the sampling frequency.
This method makes use of the fact that the ratio of maximum power point voltage and the open circuit voltage is 0.76. The problem with this method arises from the fact that it requires momentarily setting the PV array current to 0 to measure the array's open circuit voltage. The array's operating voltage is then set to 76% of this measured value. But during the time the array is disconnected, the available energy is wasted. It has also been found that while 76% of the open circuit voltage is a very good approximation, it does not always coincide with the Maximum power point.
Normally, grid-tied inverters will shut off if they do not detect the presence of the utility grid. If, however, there are load circuits in the electrical system that happen to resonate at the frequency of the utility grid, the inverter may be fooled into thinking that the grid is still active even after it had been shut down. This is called islanding.
An inverter designed for grid-tie operation will have anti-islanding protection built in; it will inject small pulses that are slightly out of phase with the AC electrical system in order to cancel any stray resonances that may be present when the grid shuts down.
Since 1999, the standard for anti-islanding protection in the United States has been UL 1741, harmonized with IEEE 1547. Any inverter which is listed to the UL 1741 standard may be connected to a utility grid without the need for additional anti-islanding equipment, anywhere in the United States or other countries where UL standards are accepted.
Similar acceptance of the IEEE 1547 in Europe is also taking place, as most electrical utilities will be providing or requiring units with this capability.
There are two types of anti-islanding control techniques:
The voltage and/or the frequency change during the grid failure is measured and a positive feedback loop is employed to push the voltage and /or the frequency further away from its nominal value. Frequency or voltage may not change if the load matches very well with the inverter output or the load has a very high quality factor (reactive to real power ratio). So there exists some ''Non Detection Zone'' (NDZ).
This method employs injecting some error in frequency or voltage. When grid fails, the error accumulates and pushes the voltage and/or frequency beyond the acceptable range.
Solar micro-inverters convert direct current (DC) from a single solar panel to alternating current (AC). The electric power from several micro-inverters is combined and sent to the consuming devices. The key feature of a micro-inverter is not its small size or power rating, but its one-to-one control over a single panel and its mounting on the panel or near it which allows it to isolate and tune the output of that panel.This also makes expanding the solar power system much easier  since additional panels with microinverters can be added to the existing system without as much system change as in upgrading a conventional system with solar inverters.
Microinverters produce grid-matching power directly at the back of the panel. Arrays of panels are connected in parallel to each other and fed to the grid. This has the major advantage that a single failing panel or inverter will not take the entire string offline. Combined with the lower power and heat loads, and improved MTBF, it is suggested that overall array reliability of a microinverter-based system will be significantly greater than a string-inverter based one. Additionally, when faults occur, they are identifiable to a single point, as opposed to an entire string. This not only makes fault isolation easier, but unmasks minor problems that might never become visible otherwise - a single underperforming panel may not affect a short string's output enough to be noticed.
Microinverters have become common where array sizes are small and maximizing performance from every panel is a concern. In these cases the differential in price-per-watt is minimized due to the small number of panels, and has little effect on overall system cost. The improvement in energy collection given a fixed size array can offset this difference in cost. For this reason, microinverters have been most successful in the residential market, where the limited space for panels constraints the array size, and shading from nearby trees or other homes is often an issue. Micro-inverter manufacturers list many installations, some as small as a single panel and the majority under 50.
Solar grid-tie inverters are designed to quickly disconnect from the grid if the utility grid goes down. This is an NEC requirement that ensures that in the event of a blackout, the grid tie inverter will shut down to prevent the energy it produces from harming any line workers who are sent to fix the power grid.
Grid-tie inverters that are available on the market today use a number of different technologies. The inverters may use the newer high-frequency transformers, conventional low-frequency transformers, or no transformer. Instead of converting direct current directly to 120 or 240&nbsp;volts AC, high-frequency transformers employ a computerized multi-step process that involves converting the power to high-frequency AC and then back to DC and then to the final AC output voltage.
The issue at stake currently is that there are concerns about having transformerless electrical systems feed into the public utility grid since the lack of galvanic isolation between the DC and AC circuits could allow the passage of dangerous DC faults to be transmitted to the AC side.
Many solar inverters are designed to be connected to a utility grid, and will not operate when they do not detect the presence of the grid. They contain special circuitry to precisely match the voltage and frequency of the grid.
Stand-alone inverters&nbsp;&ndash; that is, inverters that are designed to be used without the presence of the electrical utility grid&nbsp;&ndash; can be run from PV panels and batteries using a charge controller. The charge controller regulates the input from the PV and the batteries, regulates the battery output, and handles charging the batteries. This is a very important equipment to have since batteries that are overcharged significantly reduces battery life at the very least or damage the batteries at the worst, making them unstable. A charge controller can also prevent totally draining (deep discharging) a battery, or perform controlled discharges, depending on the battery technology, to protect battery life. It also keeps the electicity from leaving the battery and travelling back through to the solar panel.
There are several versions of a solar charge controller, but all of them basically have the same function. The most basic of all just monitors the voltage of the battery and opens the circuit and stops charging the battery when the optimum level of voltage is reached. Older models used a mechanical relay for the charging circuit.
Modern solar charge controllers use pulse width modulation to lower the degree of applied power to the batteries as they reach their fully charged level. This kind of controller allows the charging of batteries with less stress thereby increasing the battery life. It can keep the batteries fully charged indefinitely. The PWM process is more complex than the previous types but it does not have any mechanical connections.
Advanced solar pumping inverters convert DC voltage from the solar array into AC voltage to drive submersible pumps directly without the need for batteries or other energy storage devices. By utilizing MPPT (maximum power point tracking), solar pumping inverters regulate output frequency to control speed of the pumps in order to save pump motor from damage.
Solar inverters may fail due to transients from the grid or the PV panel, component aging and operation beyond the designed limits. Following are some common reasons specific components of inverters age quickly or fail: