The '''106 Franklin Sq. or Lebanon St. - Wellington Station''' provides a route between Franklin Square in Melrose and Wellington station in Medford. Major areas and key destinations this line serves include Downtown Melrose, Melrose-Wakefield Hospital, Maplewood Square in Malden, and Malden Center. It provides connections to other MBTA lines at Malden Center and Wellington, both connecting to the Orange line.
The '''130 Lebanon St. - Malden Center''' is a now defunct bus route which ran from Lebanon St. in Melrose to Malden Center. The route was discontinued when the 106 was extended part-time to Franklin Sq. in Melrose. The Lebanon St. to Malden Center portion of 106 was nearly identical to the route of the 130. Minimal service was lost with the removal of this route.
The '''131 Melrose Highlands - Oak Grove or Malden Center''' provides service to the Highlands, Downtown, and East Side areas of Melrose. The northern terminus of the route is at Warren and Franklin Streets in Melrose Highlands. The southern terminus of the route is Malden Center, however, rush hour buses terminate at Oak Grove to provide more frequent service. The route provides connections to the MBTA Commuter Rail at Melrose Highlands Station as well as the Orange line at Oak Grove and Malden Center.  There has been a question of whether this route should be extended from its current route to the Square One Mall in Saugus.  As of 2008 the MBTA has made no commitment to extend the route mainly due to the inconvenience many rush hour commuters would experience with such an extension and also a lack of resources.  As of now, anyone desiring service to Square One Mall from Melrose can take any bus to Malden Station and transfer the route 430. According to the MBTA's trip planner, this trip will take approximately 70 minutes.
The '''132 Redstone - Malden Center Station''' provides service to the Stoneham area, connecting the town to Orange line rail service. The northern terminus is at the Redstone Shopping Center in Stoneham. The route runs along Route 28 and turns through Melrose connecting to the MBTA Commuter rail at Wyoming Hill Station and enters Malden connecting to the Orange line at Oak Grove and Malden Center. 
The '''135 Wakefield Square - Oak Grove Station via Wakefield, Greenwood Square & Main Street Melrose''' formerly provided service from Oak Grove Station on the Melrose/Malden border to Wakefield Square.  This route is identical to the 136 and 137, the only difference being that it terminated in Wakefield Square, where the 136 and 137 split.  The MBTA decided in 2004 that they would take the 135 footnote off the 136/137 schedule in 2004 and was renumbered as variations of the 136 route.
The '''136/137 Malden Station - Reading Depot Station''' provides service mostly down Main Street until it comes to a split in Wakefield Center.  Up until this point the 136 and 137 are identical and at this point the 137 travels on the west side of Lake Quannapowitt while the 136 travels on the east side.  When the Orange Line was relocated from the former elevated line to the present day configuration, there was intent to extend the Orange Line to Reading Depot via Melrose & Wakefield.  However, due to the disapproval of some residents, the project was put on hold. The 136 and 137 took the place of the intended extension.  As of 2008, there has been no further commitment to extend the Orange Line.
The '''136 Reading Depot - Malden Center Station via Melrose & Oak Grove''' provides service to Reading, Wakefield, Melrose and  Malden and connects with Oak Grove Station and Malden Center Station.  The 136 route is almost identical to the 137; it remains the same until the split at Wakefield Square.  The 136 route runs along the right side of lake Quannapowitt and rejoins the 137 at Reading Depot & the Reading/Haverhill Commuter Rail Line.
The '''137 Reading Depot - Malden Center Station via North Ave, Wakefield, Melrose & Oak Grove''' provides service to Reading, Wakefield, Melrose and  Malden and connects with Oak Grove Station and Malden Center Station.  The 137 route is almost identical to the 136; it remains the same until the split at Wakefield Square.  The 137 runs along the left side of lake Quannapowitt via North Avenue, Wakefield and Walkers Brook Drive, Reading and rejoins the 136 at Reading Depot & the Reading/Haverhill Commuter Rail Line.  With the exception of rush hour and late night, the 137 runs approximately every hour.  For the passengers south of Wakefield Square, the frequency combined with the 136 makes bus service run every thirty minutes.
The '''430 Saugus Center - Malden Center Station via Square One Mall''' provides service between Saugus Center and Malden Center Station travelling through Melrose on MA Route 99 (Newburyport Turnpike) in the southeast section of the city.