Athens is a qualified Tree City USA as recognized by the National Arbor Day Foundation.
The Mound Builders were groups of Native Americans who built large earthen mounds along the Mississippi and Ohio River Tributary Systems. Together these groups left behind thousands of mounds in the eastern United States. While these groups were spread out throughout this region, some lived in and around Athens, Ohio, from about 1000 B.C. to A.D. 700, producing over two hundred mounds in Athens County alone.The Emergence of the Mound Builders: The Archaeology of Tribal Societies in Southeastern Ohio. Edited by Elliot M. Abrams and AnnCorrinne Freter. Athens, Ohio: Ohio University Press (2005) The Mound Builders of Ohio are separated into two overlapping chronological groups: the builders of effigy mounds, the Adena culture, c. 1000 B.C. to A.D. 200; and the builders of burial mounds, the Hopewell, c. 300 B.C. to A.D. 700.Campbell, Joseph. The Way of the Animal Powers. Volume 1. Historical Atlas of World Mythology. London: Summerfield Press (1983)
The Woodland Indians or the indigenous peoples of the Eastern Woodlands was a cultural group of Native Americans that occupied the Athens area at the time of first contact with Europeans. The many tribes of the Northeast section of the Eastern Woodlands spoke dialects of either the Algonquian or Iroquois languages. 
The French explorer La Salle came through the Ohio country near Athens in 1669 on his first expedition. The Ohio forests were described as being plentiful in chestnuts, hickory nuts, plums, and grapes which they collected for their journey. La Salle greatly admired the birch bark canoes of the Woodland Indians and vowed to take one back to Paris.Parkman, Francis. La Salle and the Discovery of the Great West. 12th edition. Revised with additions. London: Macmillan and Company (1885)
In the decades preceding the first expedition of La Salle into Ohio, the whole region had been devastated by a series of brutal and genocidal wars mostly between the Algonquian tribes and the Iroquois tribes in the northeastern Woodland Indian region. These wars are known as the Beaver Wars. France claimed all of the Ohio country as part of New France and the Dutch claimed New York, then New Netherland. At stake was control of the lucrative fur trade and the French backed the Algonquian tribes and the Dutch and British backed the Iroquois. With guns and ammunition supplied by the Dutch, the Iroquois Seneca tribe attacked the Erie tribe of northern Ohio relentlessly over a two-year period (1654   1656) until the whole Erie tribe was destroyed with only a few remnants of the surviving Erie being absorbed by the Seneca. The Shawnee strongholds in southern and western Ohio marked the western boundaries of the Iroquois conquests in the Athens region.
By the middle of the eighteenth century, the Shawnee, an Algonquian tribe, also known at the time as Shawanese or Showanoese, were the primary tribe of Native American Indians living in what would become Athens County.  The Wyandot and Delaware tribes were frequently in the Athens area in the mid-18th century, coming to the region in hunting groups or war parties. The Shawnee allied themselves with the French in the French and Indian War and later the Shawnee fought against the Americans in the American Revolutionary War and the Indian wars that followed. The Treaty of Greenville (1795) led to the end of all organized Native American Indian settlement in Ohio.Walker, Charles M. History of Athens County, Ohio and Incidentally of the Ohio Land Company and the First Settlement of the State at Marietta with Personal and Biographical Sketches of the Early Settlers, Narratives of Pioneer Adventures, Etc. Cincinnati: Robert Clarke & Co. (1869)  No settlement is shown in the Athens area on an 1794 map by Thomas Kitchin.Kitchin, Thomas and Earl W. De La Vergne. A General Map of the Middle Dominions Belonging to the United States of America. London: Laurie & Whittle (1794)
The first permanent European settlers arrived in Athens in 1797. In 1800, the town site was first surveyed and plotted, but was not incorporated as a village until 1811. In the meantime, Ohio became a state in 1803, and Ohio University was chartered in 1804 becoming the first public institution of higher learning in the Northwest Territory. Previously part of Washington County, Ohio, Athens County was formed in 1805, named for the ancient center of learning, Athens, Greece.
The establishment of Ohio University in Athens would mark the first federal endowment of an educational institution in the United States. In July of 1787, the Congress of the Confederation gave to the Ohio Company of Associates    two townships of good land for the support of a literary institution    in the newly created Northwest Territory.Knight, George W. History and Management of Federal Land Grants for Education in the Northwest Territory. The Papers of the American Historical Association, Volume 1. New York & London: G. P. Putnam's Sons, The Knickerbocker Press (1886) During The First Session of the Second Territorial General Assembly, held in Chillicothe from November 23, 1801 to January 23, 1802, the General Assembly passed an act establishing the    American Western University    at Athens. The act was approved by Arthur St. Clair, Governor of the Northwest Territory on January 9, 1802.The Biographical Annals of Ohio, 1906-1907-1908: A Handbook of the Government and Institutions of the State. Compiled Under the Authority of the Act of April 19, 1904 by A. P. Sandles, Clerk of the Senate, E. W. Doty, Clerk House of Representatives, 77th General Assembly. A revised and enlarged edition of Ohio Statesmen and Hundred Year Book by Col. W. A. Taylor (1892). However, no university with the name of American Western University would be established. Ohio became a state in 1803 and on February 18, 1804, the state legislature passes an act establishing the "Ohio University" in the town of Athens.A Legal History of the Ohio University, Athens, Ohio, including Resolutions of Congress, Contracts, Territorial and State Enactments, Judicial Decisions, etc. Compiled and Published by Authority of the Board of Trustees. Columbus, O.: Cott & Hann, Book Printers (1881)  Athens received city status in 1912 following the 1910 census showing the population had passed 5,000 residents, the requirement for city status in Ohio.
Originally, large tracts of land (Athens and Alexander Townships) were set aside through a contract between the Congress (under the Articles of Confederation) and the Ohio Company of Associates, a group of Revolutionary War veterans.  These lands were given to Ohio University by the Federal government.  This was the first federal land grant for a university, pre-dating the Morrill Act by more than 70 years.  At first, lands were mostly leased out, but the failure of many lessors to pay their rents resulted in most of the land being sold. The sale of these lands funded the growth of Ohio University. Today it is one of the largest institutions of higher learning in Ohio, with an enrollment of over 19,000 on the Athens campus and over 28,000 for all campuses.
The earliest industry in the area was salt production, followed by iron production and coal extraction. Today, the largest employer in the county is Ohio University.
In 1843, the Hocking Canal opened, enabling shipping from the Ohio River up the Hocking River, which passes through Athens, to Nelsonville, Ohio, and points beyond. However, the canal was closed during cold winters when it froze over. The first railroad reached Athens in 1857. In the late 19th century, an interurban line opened between Athens and Nelsonville and operated for some years.
The Athens Lunatic Asylum, later called the Athens State Hospital, opened in 1874. This was located on high ground to the south of town and to the south of the Hocking River, and in the late 19th century was the town's largest employer. The state hospital was eventually decommissioned and the property was deeded to Ohio University. It is now known as The Ridges. Much of the building space has been renovated for offices and research space, and most of the grounds have been set aside as open space, including a land lab.
Large sections of Athens and Ohio University are located in the floodplain of the Hocking River.  Over the last two centuries the town suffered from many destructive floods, including notable floods in 1832, 1873, 1907, 1937, 1949, 1964 and 1968.Straw, Richard. "Images of America: Athens" Arcadia Publishing. 2007. In 1969 the Army Corps of Engineers completed a major work that rerouted and expanded the channel of the Hocking River, for a stretch of several miles around the town, moving the river hundreds of feet to the south. That project and the ongoing efforts to maintain the channel have greatly reduced the negative effects of seasonally high river levels.
In 1904 both the U.S. Army and the Ohio National Guard were conducting training exercises at the same time at the city. When some guardsmen became drunk and caused a disturbance, they were arrested by Army MPs. The ensuing quarrel escalated into a battle on Washington Street, during which one guardsman was killed and several combatants were wounded.
During the cold war, Athens was designated the alternate capital city of Ohio in the event that Columbus was destroyed by a Soviet nuclear strike.  An exercise was held in which Governor Rhodes and the statehouse were evacuated and state government was relocated to Athens.
Athens is located in the unglaciated Allegheny Plateau. Athens is surrounded by hills that rise about three  hundred feet from river valley to the narrow ridge tops.  The county extends west from the Ohio River, mostly centered around the lower Hocking River watershed.  According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , all of it land.
Athens is located mostly on and around a south-jutting ridge bordered by a loop in the Hocking River. The underlying geology is mostly sandstone and shale, including "redbed" shale that presents a severe slip hazard when structures are built over it on hillsides.  However, there are safe zones above sandstone beds, most notably the Connelsville Sandstone that outcrops high on the hillsides.  The old Athens Mental Hospital grounds (now part of the university) was built on the top of a hillside in the late 1860s, and is completely stable due to its position atop the hill rather than on a slope.  The recent University Courtyard Apartments is also built on similar underlying geology across a small valley, but the hilltop was extensively removed in order to create a stable base.
The city receives all its water supply from wells in unconsolidated river aquifers, and is reputed to be the largest city in the United States to do so.
As of the census of 2000, there were 21,342 people, 6,271 households, and 1,906 families residing in the city. The population density was 2,560.4 people per square mile (988.0/km  ). There were 6,715 housing units at an average density of 805.6 per square mile (310.9/km  ). The racial makeup of the city was 89.16% White, 3.82% Black or African American, 0.15% Native American, 4.47% Asian, 0.06% Pacific Islander, 0.60% from other races, and 1.74% from two or more races. 1.41% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.
There were 6,271 households. 12.9% had children under the age of 18 living with them. 22.9% were married couples living together, 5.6% had a female head of household with no husband present, and 69.6% were non-families. 34.5% of all households were made up of individuals and 6.6% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.25 and the average family size was 2.72.
In the city 6.7% of the population was under the age of 18, 66.7% were from 18 to 24, 13.7% were from 25 to 44, 8.0% were from 45 to 64, and 4.9% were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 22 years. For every 100 females there were 88.2 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 86.9 males.
The median income for a household in the city was $17,122, and the median income for a family was $53,391. Males had a median income of $35,849 versus $28,866 for females. The per capita income for the city was $11,061. About 14.8% of families and 51.9% of the population were below the poverty line, including 19.1% of those under age 18 and 7.2% of those age 65 or over.
Ohio University is now the largest employer in Athens County. Coal was once a huge source of employment in the county, but is now a very minor source, as the best and most available coal has been extracted. One of the manufacturing companies that once existed in Athens was the Midget Motors Corporation, makers of the small automobile, the King Midget.
The only truly heavy industry located in Athens is the Athens Mold & Machine Company, located on the near east side and primarily manufactures tire molds.  Other significant employers include Stewart-MacDonald Company, which handles supplies for stringed instruments, Diagnostic Hybrids; additionally, the Ed Map Corporation, Gem Coatings (an industrial powdercoating company) and Specialty Books, are located in The Plains, nearby.
Since the 1970s Athens has earned a reputation as one of the more progressive communities in Southeastern Ohio.  That  reputation includes democratic political leaning, presence of some intentional communities, support for use of alternative energy, development of small farms emphasizing sustainable and organic produced crops, and support for local businesses. Many of these attributes are illustrated the long established (since 1972) farmer's market  currently held year round on Saturdays and Wednesdays at The Market on State on the city's east side.
Old buildings, long established cemeteries and their conjunction at a decommissioned asylum, The Ridges, help inspire a persistent folk lore surrounding Athens as an especially haunted locale.  Athens was vaunted as one of the top fifteen most haunted cities in America on the Fox Family Channel special "Scariest Place On Earth" that aired on October 23, 2000. Locals with knowledge of the history of the Ridges criticized the Fox portrayal as sensationalistic and misleading on details of the situation. While the haunted Athens folklore may be persistent it is not clearly substantiated by professional investigative reporters.
In addition to numerous venues for performing arts, Athens is home to several museums including The Kennedy Museum of art, housed in Lin Hall at The Ridges, which features rotating art collections and free admission.  Also located in Athens is the Athens County Historical Society & Museum, which features a collection of over 40,000 items showcasing Athens County's culture and history.  The Dairy Barn is an arts and crafts center with exhibits, and educational programming, including art camp events for young children.
Athens has a long musical tradition that includes local acts and events for touring musicians, performing at Ohio University and festivals in Athens.  The folk song "Athens County" by Jonathan Edwards  refers to Athens Ohio, where Edwards attended college in the 1970s.
Bands hailing from Athens include The Snapdragons, Appalachian Death Ride, She Bears, Southeast Engine,, The Ridges and the black metal band Skeletonwitch. Athens native Steve Reis, a founder of the Columbus, Ohio-based band McGuffey Lane named his band after a street in Athens.
In 1973, the Ohio Valley Summer Theater began a production called the Appalachian Green Parks Project. It featured music, dance, and theater derived from the Appalachian region.  The group won the Governor's Award for Community Action, released an album of music, performed at the Sylvan Amphitheater in Washington, D.C. on July 4, 1974, made numerous television appearances, provided the soundtrack for an Ohio Department Of Natural Resources public service film titled ''Sweet Ohio'', were designated as the official Bicentennial Touring Group for the state of Ohio, and were the subject of a documentary film during their four year run.
Two former members of the Appalachian Green Parks Project, Jim McGaw and Charlie Lewis began performing with Jimmy Prouty and went on to form the New Vinton County Frogwhompers Marching, Singing, Strumming and Plucking Society in 1976, which was to become one of the most popular groups to come out of the region in the 1970s.
Several significant annual festivals and events are held in or near Athens:
Intercollegiate athletics at Ohio University provide excitement for fans with the most popular games in town being Ohio Bobcats football, men's basketball, and women's volleyball. The 2007 ''Sporting News'' list of the "best sports cities" ranked Athens 105 out of 388 eligible cities, putting it far ahead of much larger cities such as Norfolk, Virginia; El Paso, Texas; Spokane, Washington; and Fresno, California.
In addition to Ohio Bobcats athletics, Athens is home to the Southern Ohio Copperheads, a baseball team of the Great Lakes Summer Collegiate League.
Athens City Schools fields teams at the Middle School (7th & 8th grades) and at Athens High School as the 'Green &  Gold' Bulldogs with over 14 male/female teams offered.
The City of Athens Ohio Community Recreation center offers programming in athletics, childcare, sports camps, community events and more.  Located in the East State Street area, the center is accessible from the Hockhocking Adena Bikeway.  Facilities include an outdoor swimming pool, a skate park, fitness equipment, event rental facilities, playgrounds
The Arts, Parks and Recreation Department actively supports a variety of initiatives. It sponsors adult summer and fall slow-pitch softball that is popular among residents in Athens and the county, though the separate men and women's leagues have fallen apart this year. Co-ed softball continues its popularity, however.  Youth sports, such as soccer and little league, are also supported by local residents. In addition, the department maintains the Athens Skate Park, which is the second largest skate park in Ohio.  Several city parks and play grounds.
Soccer fields. Recreation center.  Arts West.  Athens operates two off-leash enclosed dog parks.
The City has been developing an extensive scenic trail system in the city lands, adjacent Strouds Run State Park, and the Blair Preserve owned by the Athens Conservancy.
Strouds Run State Park is located just outside the city, bordering the city line. This park features 2,606 acres (11&nbsp;km  ) of wooded hills, including many bluffs and rock shelters, centered around a man-made lake. Camping is available.
The City of Athens has recently established the Strouds Ridge Preserve project, currently including some 345 acres (140 hectares), to save land from development adjacent to the state park. This preserve includes an 85 acre (340,000 m  ) old-growth forest known as "Hawk Woods", or, more formally, the Dale & Jacki Riddle State Nature Preserve.  Also adjacent to the state park is the  Blair Preserve, owned by the Athens Conservancy.
The Hockhocking Adena Bikeway is a multi-use asphalt trail with its main hub (mile marker 0) at the Athens Community Center on East State Street. The trail extends  northwest to Robbins' Crossing and Hocking College near Nelsonville, and approximately  further east along East State Street to Holzer Clinic. Construction currently underway will extend the trail farther in this direction. Access points with parking are located at mile 4 at the West State Street Park, mile 10.2 off Rt. 682 in The Plains, and mile 16.4 at Robbins' Crossing and Hocking College. The trail, which generally follows the course of the Hocking River, provides access to the East State Street commercial areas, Ohio University's campus (at South Green and Peden Stadium), The Plains, and Hocking College. It is designed for walking, running, biking, cross-country skiing, skating, and wheelchairs. Additionally several city streets are marked as bike lanes.
The Athens Trail Network is a multi-use trail network branching out from Sells' City Park at the end of Avon Place. A series of twelve trails and connectors branch out into the surrounding woods, heading eastwards to eventually connect with the trails of Strouds Run State Park. The trails are designed for hiking, running, and biking, although some sections are off-limits to bicycles. The trails provide scenic views of the East State Street commercial area and travel past and through notable features such as Sells Pond, Riddle State Nature Preserve (also known as Hawk Woods), Boulder Cove, Turtlehead Cave (also known as Blue Ash Rockhouse), Finger Rock, Pioneer Cemetery, and Dow Lake at Strouds Run State Park. The trail network is maintained by community and university volunteers.
Athens is governed by a mayor/council form of government. The elected Mayor and the department heads (some of whom are elected) run the city's daily operations. Nine council members are the cities law-makers. The city is divided into wards and voters select a mayor, a council member representing their ward and three at-large council members in staggered four year terms. Athens is also covered by the Athens County Department of Health, the Athens County Planning Office, and Athens County Job and Family Services.
The City of Athens has a strict parking policy.  Any vehicle parked for more than 48 hours on any city street will be taken by city order, and is subject to a minimum $145 redemption cost ($125 towing plus $20 ticket).
The City of Athens is also involved in social media and encourages individuals to follow their Facebook page and Twitter as other ways of obtaining pertinent information. Follow the City of Athens on Facebook : http://www.facebook.com/pages/City-of-Athens-Ohio/59973932369#!/pages/City-of-Athens-Ohio/59973932369?sk=info and Twitter: CityofAthensOH
The residents of Athens are served by the Athens City School District made up of five elementary buildings: K-6 (Chauncey, East, Morrison, The Plains & West), a Middle School (grades 7-8) and Athens High School.  They are also served by the Athens County Public Libraries with branches in Albany, Athens, Chauncey, Coolville, Glouster, Nelsonville, and The Plains.
Ohio University is a public university located in Athens that is situated on an  campus. Founded in 1804, it is the oldest university in Ohio, oldest in the Northwest Territory, and ninth oldest public university in the United States.
Athens is served by several news publications:
In addition, Ohio University's telecommunications center provides public radio and television. The FM radio system covers all of southeastern Ohio.
Private broadcast media include:
Former pirate radio stations: