On 14 October 2009, Ukraine switched to the dialling conventions common in the European Union.
In order to call abroad, users would need to dial 0~0 before the country code. For instance, to call Vancouver, Canada, from Kyiv, users would need to dial 0~0 1 778 XXX XX XX. NOTE: ~ means waiting for additional dial tone when calling from landline, fixed phone line. Calls from mobile phones can use 00 prefix.
Calling nationwide requires dialing 0, waiting for a dial tone (optional on digital exchanges), and then the region code followed by the local number. For instance to call Kyiv from Odesa, users would need to dial 0 44 XXX XX XX. Same convention was adopted for mobile operators.
For local calls, users would still be able to dial the local number without a 0 and the area code. Mobile users have to dial full 0-prefixed number, although operators may implement local dialing in cities.
The in-country sequence for ordinary zones consists of a 2 digit zone code, an optional subzone code (never used for the capital of the geographic region corresponding to a phone zone), an optional filler (0 to 2 "2"s, used to make the whole in-country sequence contain exactly 9 digits) and the local phone number (5 to 7 digits). When dialing from cell phones, the in-country dial sequence (with the 0 XX prefix) is used even for phones of the same provider. Otherwise a call may be placed in the nearest geographic area.
Area codes correspond to geographic regions ("oblasts") with exception of Kyiv and Sevastopol which utilize their own area code.  See Area codes in Ukraine for current list.
Cell phone numbers can be assigned both within the cell phone provider zone and within a geographic zone. The latter arrangement is used mainly for CDMA phones and for GSM operators selling their connectivity within one city, like GoldenTelecom GSM. Allocation of new GSM cell phone numbers within a geographic zone is very rare now because law requires all incoming calls to be free, including incoming calls to a cell phone.
Some examples of dialed sequences:
Some mobile operators may support additional dialing plans. For example, Kyivstar also supports the following:
Note that law explicitly prohibits trunk calls to a PSTN phone within the same local area in a geographic phone zone (e.g. from Kyiv to Kyiv), so one cannot dial 0~2 or 0~xx for this, unless the phone exchange is misconfigured or a special circumstance occurs.
The switch to a closed numbering plan, which will introduce seven digit-long numbers for all zones, should be complete in 2011-2012.
Ukraine (similarly to most of ex-Soviet Union countries) used to have a four-level (local, zone, country, international) open dialing plan. For all non-local numbers, the required trunk prefix was '8' followed by an auxiliary dial tone after it (optional on digital exchanges), with the following '2' for in-zone calls, followed by an area code, and '10' for international calls.