Kaymer was born in Dusseldorf, Germany. He turned professional in 2005 and is a member of the European Tour. He has won nine tournaments on the tour including four in 2010 to win the Race to Dubai, formerly the Order of Merit, for the first time. Among those wins was the 2010 PGA Championship, a victory which made him only the second German to win a major championship, after Bernhard Langer.
Kaymer picked up his first professional win at the age of 20 as an amateur at the Central German Classic in 2005 on the third-tier EPD Tour. He shot a    19 (67   64   66=197) to win the tournament by a margin of five strokes.
Kaymer played full-time on the EPD Tour in 2006 from February to August. He played in 14 tournaments and picked up five victories. He finished in the top 10 in all but one of the tournaments. Kaymer won the Order of Merit on the EPD Tour in 2006 by earning    26,664. 
Kaymer shot a round of 59 (   13) in the second round of the Habsberg Classic. This was his scorecard:
Due to his success on the EPD Tour, Kaymer was promoted to the Challenge Tour. He played in eight events from August to October and won two of them. He won the Vodafone Challenge in Germany, which was the first Challenge Tour tournament that he played in. A month later, he won the Open des Volcans in France. Kaymer ended up finishing 4th on the Order of Merit list despite playing in only eight events. In all he earned    93,321. He finished in the top 5 in six tournaments, and his worst finish was a 13th place finish. Due to Kaymer's success on the Challenge Tour, he earned a European Tour card for 2007.
Kaymer made his debut on the European Tour in 2007 at the UBS Hong Kong Open, but he failed to make the cut. He missed the cut in his first five events of the season. In March, Kaymer made his first cut of the season at the Singapore Masters; he finished in a tie for 20th place. In his first seven events of the season, he only made one cut. All of those events were played outside of Europe.
Kaymer found immediate success once he started playing in Europe again. He finished in a tie for 15th at the Madeira Island Open, which was the season's first Tour event played in Europe. The following week, he finished in a tie for 3rd at the Portuguese Open. He made seven consecutive cuts from  to . During that streak, his worst finish was a tie for 35th and he recorded five top 25 finishes.
From 7 June to 9 September, Kaymer played in nine tournaments but only made two cuts. In the two tournaments where he made the cut, he did very well. Kaymer finished in a tie for 7th at the Open de France. Seven weeks later, he finished in a tie for 2nd at the Scandinavian Masters.
Kaymer played in six of the last eight events of the season. He made the cut in all six of those events. On  2007 at the Portugal Masters, Kaymer shot a first round of 61 (   11). This round tied the lowest round of the 2007 European Tour season. It was also the new course record at the Oceanico Victoria Clube de Golfe. He went on to finish in a tie for 7th. Two weeks later at the year-ending Volvo Masters, he finished in 6th place. The Volvo Masters had one of the strongest fields on tour in 2007. He earned    140,000 for his 6th place finish, which was Kaymer's largest payout from a tournament to that time. He earned    754,691 on the season. Kaymer finished the season as the highest-ranked rookie on the Order of Merit, in 41st position, and won the Sir Henry Cotton Rookie of the Year Award. He is the first German to win the award. Kaymer recorded five top 10s on the season. These performances took him into the top 100 of the Official World Golf Rankings for the first time. In November 2007 he moved into the top 75, overtaking Bernhard Langer to become the highest-ranked German golfer.
On 2 November, Kaymer signed with Sportyard, a sports management company based in Sweden.
Kaymer represented Germany at the 2007 Omega Mission Hills World Cup with four-time European Tour winner Alex Cejka. They finished in a tie for 6th place.
Kaymer started 2008 by winning his maiden European Tour event with a wire-to-wire victory at the Abu Dhabi Golf Championship. This achievement lifted him to 34th in the world rankings, making him the only player in the top 50 under the age of 25. It also secured his entry into the WGC Match Play Championship and The Masters. Two weeks after winning the Abu Dhabi Golf Championship, he finished second in the Dubai Desert Classic. He finished the tournament with birdie-birdie-eagle but world number one Tiger Woods topped him by one stroke. Kaymer moved up to a high of 21st in the world rankings due to his runner-up finish. Kaymer picked up his second victory of the year at the BMW International Open, becoming the first German to win the event in its 20-year history. He held a six stroke lead going into the final round but then shot a 75 (+3) which resulted in Kaymer going to a playoff with Anders Hansen. Kaymer birdied the first playoff hole to win the tournament. Kaymer almost picked up his third win of the year at the Alfred Dunhill Links Championship, but he fell to Robert Karlsson in a three-man playoff that also included Ross Fisher. Kaymer recorded another runner-up finish at the Volvo Masters, finishing two strokes behind winner Soren Kjeldsen. Kaymer earned    1,794,500 in 2008 and finished in 8th on the Order of Merit. Kaymer narrowly missed selection for the 2008 Ryder Cup, but European captain Nick Faldo invited Kaymer to assist the European side in a non-playing capacity which Kaymer accepted. Kaymer represented his country at the 2008 Omega Mission Hills World Cup with Alex Cejka. The pair finished in fifth.
In 2009, Kaymer almost defended his title at the Abu Dhabi Golf Championship but finished in a tie for second, one stroke behind winner Paul Casey. He continued his success in the Middle East by finishing in a tie for fourth at the Dubai Desert Classic. Kaymer won his third European Tour event in July, the Open de France ALSTOM. He defeated Lee Westwood on the first hole of a playoff when Westwood hit his approach shot into the water. The win moved Kaymer into the top 100 of the European Tour Career Earnings list.
He also won the following week at the Barclays Scottish Open at Loch Lomond Golf Club in Glasgow, for his fourth career win. He came from a shot behind on the final day with a round of 2-under 69 to win by two strokes. The win elevated him to 11th in the Official World Golf Rankings. The week after that, Kaymer finished T-34 at the 2009 Open Championship, which was his best finish in a major to that time. He bettered this when he moved through the final round field to finish in a tie for 6th at the 2009 PGA Championship.
Kaymer suffered an injury in a go-kart accident and missed September and October. He returned to the final stages of the Race to Dubai on the European Tour, and finished the season ranked third.
In January 2010, Kaymer won the Abu Dhabi Golf Championship by one shot over Ian Poulter.
After missing the cut at the Masters, Kaymer performed very well in the 2010 majors. He finished in a tie for eighth at the U.S. Open and then tied for seventh at The Open Championship, after starting the final round in third place.
On 15 August 2010, Kaymer won the PGA Championship at Whistling Straits for his first major championship. Finishing regulation play in a two-way tie at 11 under par, he defeated Bubba Watson in a three-hole playoff.
Kaymer was a member of the winning European Ryder Cup team. He won both four-balls (partnered with Westwood and Poulter), halved his foursome and lost his singles match. A week later he won the Alfred Dunhill Links Championship at St Andrews with Danny Willett coming in three strokes behind. He was the first player since Tiger Woods in 2006 to win three successive tournaments in a year and the first European to achieve this since Nick Faldo in 1989. The win took him to a career high of third in the Official World Golf Rankings.
Kaymer and Graeme McDowell shared the European Tour Golfer of the Year award.
Entering the 2011 season, Kaymer turned down a chance to become a full PGA Tour member; he had become eligible with his win in the 2010 PGA Championship. He stated he would concentrate on the European Tour for 2011, but would play several U.S. events as well. 
In January 2011, Kaymer claimed his third Abu Dhabi HSBC Golf Championship title in four years and displaced Tiger Woods as number two in the world rankings.
After his runner-up finish at the 2011 WGC-Accenture Match Play Championship, Kaymer overtook Lee Westwood as the number one golfer in the world, making him only the second German (after Bernhard Langer) to be the top-ranked golfer in the world. In April, he lost his number one ranking to Westwood who won the Indonesian Masters.
DNP = Did not play
CUT = missed the half-way cut
Green background for wins. Yellow background for top-10.
DNP = Did not play
QF, R16, R32, R64 = Round in which player lost in match play
Green background for wins. Yellow background for top-10.