The '''Island of Hawaii''', also called the '''Big Island''' or '''Hawaii Island''' (; Hawaiian:  or ), is a volcanic island (the eastern-most and southern-most in the Hawaiian islands chain) in the North Pacific Ocean.  With an area of 4,028 square miles (10,432&nbsp;km  ), it is larger than all of the other Hawaiian Islands combined and is the largest island in the United States.
The Island of Hawaii is administered as the County of Hawaii within the state of Hawaii. The county seat is Hilo.
Traditionally, Hawaii is known as the "Big Island" to reduce confusion between Hawaii Island and the state.
Hawaii is said to have been named for Hawai  iloa, the legendary Polynesian navigator who first discovered it. Other accounts attribute the name to the legendary realm of Hawaiki, a place from which the Polynesians originated (see also Manua), the place where they go in the afterlife, the realm of the gods and goddesses.
Captain James Cook, who called them the "Sandwich Islands", was killed on the Big Island at Kealakekua Bay.
Hawaii was the home island of Paiea Kamehameha, called Kamehameha the Great, who by 1795 united most of the Hawaiian Islands under his rule after several years of war. He gave his Kingdom of Hawaii the name of his native island, and the islands in chain are known collectively as "Hawaiian Islands".
In greatest dimension, the island is  across and
The Island of Hawaii is built from five separate shield volcanoes that erupted somewhat sequentially, one overlapping the other. These are (from oldest to youngest): 
Geological evidence from exposures of old surfaces on the south and west flanks of Mauna Loa led to the proposal that two ancient volcanic shields (named Ninole and Kulani) were all but buried by the younger Mauna Loa.  Geologists now consider these "outcrops" to be part of the earlier building of Mauna Loa.
Because Mauna Loa and Kilauea are active volcanoes, the island of Hawaii is still growing. Between January 1983 and September 2002, lava flows added  to the island. Lava flowing from Kilauea has destroyed several towns, including Kapoho in 1960, and Kalapana and Kaimu in 1990. In 1987 lava filled in ''Queen's Bath'', a large, L-shaped, freshwater pool in the Kalapana area.
The southernmost point in the United States, Ka Lae, is on Hawaii.  The nearest landfall to the south would be in the Line Islands.  To the north is the island of Maui, whose Haleakala volcano is visible from Hawaii across the Alenuihaha Channel.
Approximately 35&nbsp;km (22 miles) southeast of Hawaii lies the undersea volcano known as Loihi. Loihi is an erupting seamount that reaches  below the ocean surface. Continued activity from Loihi will likely cause it to breach the surface of the ocean 10,000   100,000 years from now.
The Great Crack is an  long,  wide and  deep fissure in the island, in the district of Kau. According to the United States Geological Survey, The Great Crack is the result of crustal dilation from magmatic intrusions into the southwest rift zone of Kilauea., USGS, July 16, 1998. While neither substantial earthquakes 1868 and 1975 caused a measurable change in The Great Crack, lava welled out of the lower  of the Great Crack in 1823.
One can find trails, rock walls, and archaeological sites from as old as the 12th century around the Great Crack.  Approximately  of private land were purchased during the Presidency of Bill Clinton, specifically to protect various artifacts in this area as well as the habitat of local wildlife.  
The Hilina Slump is a  chunk of the south slope of the Kilauea volcano which is slipping away from the island. Between 1990 and 1993, Global Positioning System measurements showed a southward displacement up to approximately 10 centimeters per year.
On April 2, 1868, an earthquake with a magnitude estimated between 7.25 and 7.75 on the Richter scale rocked the southeast coast of Hawaii.  It triggered a landslide on Mauna Loa, five miles (8&nbsp;km) north of Pahala, killing 31 people.  A tsunami claimed 46 additional lives.  The villages of Punaluu, Ninole, Kawaa, Honuapo, and Keauhou Landing were severely damaged.  The tsunami was reported to roll over the tops of the coconut trees, up to  high, and reach inland a distance of a quarter of a mile in some places.
On November 29, 1975, a  wide section of the Hilina Slump dropped  and slid  toward the ocean. This movement caused a 7.2 magnitude earthquake and a  high tsunami.  Oceanfront properties were washed off their foundations in Punaluu.  Two deaths were reported at Halape, and 19 others were injured.
The island suffered tsunami damage from earthquakes in Chile in 1946 and Alaska on 27 March 1964.  Downtown Hilo was severely damaged in both, with many lives lost.  Just north of Hilo, Laupahoehoe lost 16 school children and 5 teachers in the 1946 tsunami.
In March 2011 a 9.0 magnitude earthquake off the east coast of Japan again created a tsunami that caused significant damage in Hawaii. The estimated damage to public infrastructure alone was $3&nbsp;million.Nakaso, Dan (14 March 2011) . ''Star Advertiser'', Retrieved 15 Mar 2011
There were 52,985 households out of which 32.20% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 50.60% were married couples living together, 13.20% had a woman whose husband did not live with her, and 30.40% were non-families. 23.10% of all households were made up of individuals and 8.00% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.75 and the average family size was 3.24.
The age distribution was 26.10% under 18, 8.20% from 18 to 24, 26.20% from 25 to 44, 26.00% from 45 to 64, and 13.50% who were 65 or older. The median age was 39 years. For every 100 females there were 100 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 98 males.
Sugarcane was the backbone of Hawaii Island's economy for more than a century (see Sugar plantations in Hawaii).  In the mid-twentieth century, sugar plantations began to downsize and in 1996, the last plantation closed.
Most of Hawaii Island's economy is based on tourism (see Tourism in Hawaii), centered primarily in resort areas on the western coast of the island in the North Kona and South Kohala districts. More recently, Hawaii Island has become a focus for sustainable tourism.
Diversified agriculture is a growing sector of the economy. Major crops include Macadamia nuts, papaya, flowers, tropical and temperate vegetables, and coffee beans. Only coffee grown in the Kona District of this island may be branded Kona coffee. The island's orchid agriculture is the largest in the state, and resulted in the unofficial nickname "The Orchid Isle." The island is home to one of the United States' largest cattle ranches: Parker Ranch, on  in Waimea. Hawaii is also known for Astronomy, and numerous telescopes are operated on the summit of Mauna Kea, where atmospheric clarity is excellent and there is little light pollution.
Image:Hawaii national parks map.gif|National parks, mountains and cities on the island
Image:Hawaii Island topographic map-en.svg|Topographical map of the island of Hawaii
The island was traditionally divided into districts called ''moku''. The names of the districts are (counter-clockwise, from the southeast): Puna, Hilo, Hamakua, Kohala, Kona, and Kau. The county government subdivides some of these to form elective districts of the county council. There are no incorporated municipalities on the island. Some of the named towns include:
Two roads connect the two major cities, Hilo on the east coast and Kailua-Kona on the west coast of the island:
There are also State highways 270 (Kawaihae - Hawi) and 180 (the "Kona coffee road", from Honalo to State highway 190), Saddle Road (Hilo to Waimea, passing between Mauna Loa and Mauna Kea), South Point Road (Highway 11 to South Point), etc.
Rental car offices are at the international airports.  Taxi service is also available.  Island-wide zero-fare public transport is provided by the "Hele-On Bus".
Two commercial airports serve Hawaii Island:
There is also:
Major commercial ports are Hilo on the East side and Kawaihae on the West side of the island. Cruise ships often stop at Kailua-Kona.