A '''car phone''' is a cell phone device specifically designed for and fitted into an automobile.
The car phone was once, in the late 1970s and 1980s, more popular than the regular cell phone. However, since the cell phone boom in the 1990s, when cell phones became much more affordable, the car phone has suffered, as most people carry their cell phone around with them, and the availability of hands free kits installed into many cars allow the driver to talk and listen to a call while driving. 
In Finland, car phone service was first available in 1971 on the zero-generation ARP (Autoradiopuhelin, or Car Radiophone) service. This was succeeded in 1982 by the 1G system NMT (Nordic Mobile Telephone), used across Scandinavia and in other often remote areas.
In North America, car phone
Since a traditional car phone uses a high-power transmitter and external antenna, it is ideal for rural or undeveloped areas where mobile handsets may not work well or at all.  However, due to current US Federal Communications Commission regulations, carriers must pay penalties for activating any equipment that is not an E911 compliant device, such as analog. 
There were a few car phones available , including the Nokia 810 and more recently the Motorola VC6096 for use with GSM networks and a car phone made by ''NAL Research'' for the Iridium satellite network. Motorola provides US customers with the m800 and m900 car phones, for use with CDMA and GSM networks respectively. Modern car phones have color screens and support high speed data connections as well as the ability to access SIM cards stored in other phones via Bluetooth.
Recently, some automobiles feature integrated, "hands-free" systems to utilize a consumer's cellular phone, via a Bluetooth wireless link or use an integrated transceiver. The systems use an internally mounted microphone, and the car's audio system, and may feature voice activation and control.
See http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Footnotes for an explanation of how to generate footnotes using the  tags, and the template below. 