I have some areas I'd like to fill and I'm hoping people out there have experience in this and can advise me on relatively cheap methods as well as effective methods. First, my door has a big gap on the bottom and it bothers me a lot because of energy leaking out. It's not a uniform gap either; there's almost no gap under the hinge side, but the other side rides above the metal guard about half an inch. This is obviously not good for A/C and heating. What's the best way of making less of a leak? I've been looking at rubber door sweeps, but I'm not sure if they're installable on triangular gaps. They're only about $8 for the cheaper ones, so I'm going to give those a try unless someone has a better method, or know that it doesn't work. 
Second, we got a cat a month ago, and she likes playing with her toys in the kitchen, since the tiles there allow her toys to be tossed around easier than on the carpet in the rest of the house. However, most of her toys are small enough to fit under the oven and refrigerator, and I have to spend lots of time retrieving them for her. Just now, I got 4 toy mice and a toy saucer from under the oven. What can I use to cover the gaps under the oven and refrigerator so she won't lose her toys every few minutes?
P.S. I tried getting her a larger toy mouse but she doesn't play with it much, despite spraying catnip on it. Thanks. -- &nbsp;( ) 01:18, 21 August 2007 (UTC)
How much of a difference, in terms of performance, is there between a manual and automatic transmission. Assuming Car A with a manual transmission can do 0-60 mph in 8.0 seconds, how much slower would an automatic be? Thanks.   02:03, 21 August 2007 (UTC)
Im working on a Manga called Ken (with the kanji for 'story' after it, meaning Ken's Story) anyways, i need to know what noise you might here if your hit by a bullet.
Okey, thank for answering my question, nobodys answered my questions in along time, so thanks.  03:04, 21 August 2007 (UTC)
I need the definitions of the Quilting skill levels.  Susan Melgaard
Can someone please confirm if alledged Melbourne CBD gunman Christopher Wayne Hudson is 29 or 31 years old.  One newspaper says 29, others say 31? Thanx Lushlaverle   05:41, 21 August 2007 (UTC)
I   m looking for a list of the world   s countries sorted by the height of each country   s highest point above sea level, which for most countries would be the height of their highest mountain.  Do we have such an animal here, or if not, is one available elsewhere?  I realise this is quite problematical for the the countries in the Himalayan region where the highest mountains are, because some mountains straddle 2 countries, some borders are disputed, and some formerly autonomous regions are claimed by other countries (eg. Tibet > China).  But I   m less interested in the countries that would be at the top of the list, and more interested in where countries down the list would slot in relative to each other.  But for argument   s sake, if we deem Everest to belong to Nepal, then Nepal would be No.1 on the list.  Country 2 would be Pakistan because K2 lies mainly there.  Country 3 would be Tibet, then India, then Bhutan     and so on.   I   m basing these first few countries on List of highest mountains.  But the list is quickly exhausted because only the top peak in each country counts, and the others are eliminated.  Where do I go from here?  --    05:54, 21 August 2007 (UTC)
When buying a fare from this airline is the fuel surcharge they add on already part of the fare that you get, or do you have do pay this surcharge seperately.--  07:21, 21 August 2007 (UTC)
Ask them.  10:14, 21 August 2007 (UTC)DT
Some surfing on various food blogs leads me to believe that a "Japanese scallion" is also called "negi" or "naganegi" (). However, Japanese scallion is  a redirect to Allium chinense while negi is  a redirect to Welsh onion. Would any expert in Japanese cuisine care to clarify this? --  08:55, 21 August 2007 (UTC)
Here's some quick copy and paste, which may help answer your questions. 
Kenkyusha's New Japanese-English Dictionary (5th ed.) gives:
The Japanese Wikipedia, which has botanical nomenclature, gives:
Note that Allium is named ''negizoku'' after ''negi''.   23:17, 21 August 2007 (UTC)
If I scanned my genuine ID at low resolution but with all the text legible, would that allow bad guys to do anything spooky?
I mean, erasing parts of image like in   severely cripples its value as an illustration, but I guess it has been done for some purpose I'm unaware of. --  10:46, 21 August 2007 (UTC)
If I edit away the serial number and birth date, substituting bogus numbers, but leave my name and the surrounding text (there's no address there) unedited -- would that be safe enough? I don't think my Photoshop skills are powerful enough to create smooth-looking text in the scanned image. --  05:57, 22 August 2007 (UTC)
What are the advantages of rocket artillery? I'm always hearing how innacurate they are. --  13:41, 21 August 2007 (UTC)
Rocket artilleries can use the Shoot-and-scoot tactics to prevent enermy Counter-battery fire.
Thanks all. All your answers were helpful. --  12:16, 22 August 2007 (UTC)
Just to add my own penny's worth - with rocket artillery you can unleash the lot in a single salvo.  All of your ammo will hit the target in a few seconds.  That said tube artillery has the advantage of being able to keep on firing for longer periods (counter-battery threats not withstanding), rocket artillery takes time to reload even the MLRS takes a little while.
Rockets usually need fewer crew members compared to guns as well   16:29, 27 August 2007 (UTC)
Flickr requires users to make an account using their Yahoo ID--but which part of a Flickr account ''is'' the user's Yahoo ID? Is it the name included in the phrases "Photos from " and 's photostream" or is it the one in the URL: flickr.com/photos/ -- or neither? And also, am I correct in thinking that a person's Yahoo ID is also their e-mail address, meaning that I email someone at @yahoo.com? --  14:17, 21 August 2007 (UTC)
I was watching the Batman &Robin movie from 1997 (George Clooney, Arnold Governator), and at one point, Alfred's neice discovers the Batcave.  She stumbles upon this computer with Alfred's "brain algorithms" programmed into it.  I have 2 questions: 1. What does that mean?  2. Is that possible?  If so, how?  If no, why not?  Thanks   17:14, 21 August 2007 (UTC)
They were trying to convince you of the idea that Batman was smart enough to program a computer to be a reasonable facsimile of a human being, Alfred in this case, at least enough to understand human speech and respond appropriately.  As far as I know, it is beyond our collective capability to create such an advance artificial intelligence, but for fun, check out the article on Jabberwacky.    22:04, 21 August 2007 (UTC)
I just read yet another news story of a fatality due to a driver driving the wrong way down the highway.  I never understood this.  If we exclude impairment (alcohol, drugs, etc.) ... how in the world does anyone drive the wrong way down a highway and not notice it?  I have never understood that.  I mean ... isn't it completely obvious?  For example, all the signs would be "backwards" ... you are travelling in the same direction as the "opposite" side of the highway ... and, duh ... there are cars heading ''toward'' you (travelling in the opposite direction, as opposed to the same direction as you).  It seems that these drivers often go miles and miles driving like this (so it's not like a quick mistake, they realize it, and turn around quickly).  Also, is it not obvious when you first get on the highway, that you are using an exit ramp and not an entrance ramp?  Does anyone have any ideas or insights as to how and why drivers make this mistake? And another question ... can't road and highway officials implement some minor / inexpensive precaution (perhaps painting arrows on the road, the way that they paint those solid or broken white lines that divide lanes, etc.)?  Seems like an easy enough solution ... how come no precautions are ever undertaken?  Any ideas?  Thanks.  (  17:20, 21 August 2007 (UTC))
Example:
I've just returned from a visit to India (et al.), and I saw many, many examples of cars and other vehicles driving the wrong way on their "highways".   They do it quite intentionally - they flash their lights to let you know they're coming, and if you don't move out of their way, you will suffer the consequences.  We do live in a very sheltered world in the West.  --    03:10, 22 August 2007 (UTC)
Wasn't it Douglas Adams that said "When making things foolproof, they tend to underestimate the ingenuity of the complete fool" ... or something similar.   11:57, 22 August 2007 (UTC)
A woman calls her husband on the cell phone (mobile phone) to warn him "The news says there's some idiot driving the wrong way on the highway, so watch out on your drive home."
The man replies "Not just one, there's hundreds of 'em on this highway !".   05:33, 23 August 2007 (UTC)
Why don't alcoholic beverage bottles have nutrition fact labels on them?
I was wondering what the gun laws were in UK + Ireland. I know its not very specific but any info is good--  ( ) 20:50, 21 August 2007 (UTC)