The '''Emotional Spectrum''' is a fictional concept within the DC Universe, primarily portrayed in ''Green Lantern'' titles. Most notably, the colors of the Emotional Spectrum are harnessed as power sources by various fictional organizations wielding power rings.
In DC Comics, the Emotional Spectrum is divided into the seven colors of the rainbow, with each color corresponding to a different emotion: rage (red), avarice (orange), fear (yellow), willpower (green), hope (blue), compassion (indigo), and love (violet). At San Diego Comic Con 2009, Geoff Johns described his own vision of the emotional spectrum; an aspect of the DC Universe he began to shape more actively during the preliminary stages of the ''Blackest Night'' plotline. He explains that the idea is something he sees as being real, and a product of the complexity of human emotions (as well as those of other sentient, fictional beings within the comics he writes).Johns, Geoff. . San Diego Comic Con 2009. San Diego Convention Center, San Diego CA. 25 July 2009. Accessed 2 August 2009. The two emotions on the far ends of the emotional spectrum (rage and love), have a much stronger influence over their users. Johns explains that rage is an emotion that's closely related to the primal instincts one needs in order to survive. In instances of fight-or-flight response, rage would embody "fight." Johns elaborates that love is the most pure emotion, but also "powerful and just as distorting as rage." Though these emotions are overwhelming, they are not negative if used correctly. While describing interaction between the different emotions, Johns describes willpower (the emotion central to the spectrum) as being the ability to maintain control over one's emotions and grow as an individual. Hope embodies a spiritual quality that emerges from that awareness, and compassion (according to Johns) is an even more difficult emotion to explain that is more rare in today's society.
Although originally only the Green Lanterns and Sinestro utilized the spectrum, the formation of Corps around other colors of the spectrum is explored in the "Sinestro Corps War" and ''Blackest Night'' storylines.
Emotional entities are a small pantheon of creatures, within the DC Universe that are pure embodiments of the emotions comprising the Emotional Spectrum. At San Diego Comic Con, Johns clarified that all of the Corps have a related entity. As of ''Green Lantern'' (vol. 4) #54 all seven entities have been revealed within ''Green Lantern'' titles. Though the Black Lantern Corps (introduced as major antagonists within the ''Blackest Night'' plot line) are powered by death rather than one of the lights of the Emotional Spectrum, ''Green Lantern'' #43 reveals that their leader (Black Hand) is a similar entity as well.Johns, Geoff. . San Diego Comic Con 2009. San Diego Convention Center, San Diego CA. 25 July 2009. Accessed 2 August 2009. In ''Blackest Night'' #7, Nekron unearths another similar being referred to as "The Entity." Like Black Hand, the Entity does not belong to the Emotional Spectrum, but instead is the embodiment of the white light that creates life in Johns' creation story for the DC Universe. In Brightest Day it's revealed that the former guardian Krona was the Caretaker/Handler for the entities and has immunity from the various lights of the emotional spectrum.Johns, Geoff. . San Diego Comic Con 2009. San Diego Convention Center, San Diego CA. 25 July 2009. Accessed 2 August 2009.
 is the embodiment of rage and is connected to the red light of the Emotional Spectrum and its appearance bears a resemblance to a demonic bull. The Butcher is born to the DC Universe after the first murder. The head and horns of this emotional manifestation resembles the Red Lantern Corps insignia. This entity is first mentioned during the "Blackest Night" event in ''Green Lantern'' (vol. 4) #51. Atrocitus becomes mesmerized by the amount of rage he senses within the Spectre while it is under the possession of a black power ring. After a conflict with Parallax, Atrocitus attempts to recruit the Spectre as the entity of his Corps. Although he is briefly infected by the uniform and characteristics of a Red Lantern, the Spectre shrugs off the effects. He explains that he is God's rage, and doesn't belong to Atrocitus. However, the Spectre does claim to have faced "the crimson creature of anger," adding that Atrocitus will be destroyed if he seeks out the entity.
The Butcher was eventually found by the Spectre and Atrocitus, and was contained inside Atrocitus' power battery, until Krona managed with the help of Ophidian to capture the entity. Krona then invaded Oa and made the Butcher possess the Guardian of the Universe named Herupa.
Ophidian is the embodiment of greed which is connected to the orange light of the Emotional Spectrum. This entity resembles a large serpent with the Orange Lantern insignia on its head. In its debut appearance, it is depicted being created when the first creature ate what it did not need. In an interview with Newsarama, Johns revealed that the orange entity of greed resides in Larfleeze's power battery and speaks to Hal Jordan when he is briefly overwhelmed with the power of the orange light in ''Green Lantern'' #42.  More recently, it was revealed that Ophidian had been trapped in the Orange Power Battery by Larfleeze.
After breaking out of prison and tracking down under the command of Krona, Larfleeze and Green Lantern Hal Jordan, Hector Hammond consumed the battery and became Ophidian's host. Currently, Ophidian is bonded with one of the Guardians after Krona exorcised the greed entity from Hammond.
Parallax is the embodiment of fear, born when one of the earliest life forms first felt terror, and is connected to the yellow light of the Emotional Spectrum; it is insect-like in appearance, and the inside of its mouth resembles the Sinestro Corps. symbol. In ''Green Lantern: Rebirth'' #3, Parallax is described as an entity of living fear that is born at the dawn of sentience itself. Parallax creates fear and paranoia in any civilization it comes across, and threatens to trap the entire universe in a vicious cycle of fear and violence. To prevent this from happening, the Guardians trap Parallax in a comatose state and seal it within the Green Central Power Battery. Its presence within the battery eventually becomes the "yellow impurity" that renders the Green Lantern Corps power rings useless against the color yellow. However it is able to posess Hal Jordan after Coast City is destroyed, and makes him slaughter nearly all the other Corps and Oans.
 Following the creature's defeat in ''Rebirth'', an experienced Green Lantern (with effort) can overcome the yellow weakness by recognizing the fear behind it and facing that fear.
Parallax was the first of the seven emotional entities to be captured by Krona.  When Krona invades Oa with Parallax and the other six entities and had them possess the Guardians, Parallax took over the Green Lantern Corps' central power battery, restoring its impurity and gaining control of the Green Lanterns save for Hal Jordan, Guy Gardner, Kyle Rayner, John Stewart, and Ganthet.
Ion is the embodiment of willpower, born when life first moved of its own accord, and is connected to the green light of the Emotional Spectrum. Ethan Van Sciver describes Ion as resembling a large, primitive whale or fish. Representing the stability of willpower, Ion serves to support its host, providing a vast supply of power in return for the willpower provided by its host. This contrasts with Parallax, who dominates its host, controlling them in order to inspire fear in others. Ion is prominently featured in the "Sinestro Corps War" storyline, and is first seen when it is removed from Kyle Rayner. The entity itself has several physical characteristics emulated by the Guardians and their Corps. The Guardians' insignia appears in a pattern on the creature's dorsal side. Ion also has a monk fish-like appendage that ends in a lantern-like lure.
After being taken from Rayner, the Ion entity is held captive on Qward and experimented upon by the Anti-Monitor. Later rescued by a team of Lanterns, it is returned to the Guardians of Oa, who bond the creature with Sodam Yat (a rookie Green Lantern from the planet Daxam) in order to form an "ultimate weapon" to combat Superboy-Prime.
Ion was the second of the seven entities to be captured by Krona after been exorcised from Yat and had been held captive in Ryut until Krona invades Oa and made Ion possess one of the Guardians of the Universe.''Green Lantern'' #64
Adara is the embodiment of hope and is connected to the blue light of the Emotional Spectrum, is bird-like in appearance, and has the Blue Lantern Corps' insignia on its chest. It is first shown during the ''Blackest Night'' event in ''Green Lantern'' (vol 4) #52, as Sinestro (recently transformed into a White Lantern) is recounting the creation of the emotional entities. The hope entity is depicted as being created from the first act of prayer from a sentient being. In the comic it is referenced that hope was born during a flood.
Adara was later captured along with Proselyte by  Krona, and after he invades Oa, Krona made Adara possess one of the Guardians of the Universe.
Proselyte is the embodiment of compassion and is connected to the indigo light of the Emotional Spectrum. In its first depiction, Proselyte is explained simply as: "Rage grows from murder. Hope from Prayer. And at last, compassion is offered to us all." This entity has a form similar to a cephalopod with four visible appendages. Its inner surface is lined with features that resemble the Indigo Tribe's insignia. 
Proselyte was later captured along with Adara by Krona. After he invades Oa, Krona made Proselyte possess one of the Guardians of the Universe.
The Predator was recently captured off-panel by Krona. When Krona invades Oa he made the Predator possess one of the Guardians of the Universe.
Although the Entity does not represent a light of the Emotional Spectrum, it is a similar being. The Entity is the manifestation of the white light that creates life and is the physical embodiment for the White Lantern Corps.
Like the Entity, Black Hand does not represent a light of the Emotional Spectrum directly, but he is a similar being as well in that he represents the void devoid of life in the spectrum of light Black.Black Hand is the physical embodiment for the Black Lantern Corps which are powered by death.
A gestalt of a human woman named Violet Harper and an "Aurakle", an ancient energy-being resembling a sphere of iridescent color, Halo can create auras with the colors of the emotional spectrum around herself, each one giving her different powers.
During the Blackest Night, Halo's powers proved highly effective allowing her to destroy Black Lanterns and their rings, a feat usually reserved only for the wielders of the various Lantern Corps and the users of the Dove power.
 She is also able to create a pheromone field, that surrounds her in coruscating light resembling a rainbow, giving her an irresistible personality to everyone. Johns comments on her briefly, stating in an interview that she does not fully understand her powers and uses them more for fun.