The '''Department of the Army''' is one of the three Military Departments within the Department of Defense of the United States of America, and is composed of, and includes all the units of the United States Army. It is headed by the Secretary of the Army, a civilian official appointed by the President after confirmation by the Senate. The Secretary of the Army is responsible for, and has the statutory authority under Title 10 of the United States Code to conduct all the affairs of the Department of the Army, subject to the authority, direction and control of the Secretary of Defense. The highest ranking military officer in the department is the Chief of Staff of the Army, who is also a member of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Other senior officials are the Under Secretary of the Army and the Vice Chief of Staff of the Army.
The Department was formed in 1789 as the Department of War and was renamed, along with the Secretary's title, by the National Security Act of 1947 to the Department of the Army on September 18, 1947.
See ''Structure of the United States armed forces''
The Department of the Army is the a Military Department under the umbrella of the United States Department of Defense. The Department is headed by the United States Secretary of the Army, civilian appointed by the President of the United States with the confirmation by the United States Senate. The Secretary of the Army is responsible for, and has the authority to conduct all the affairs of the Department of the Army, subject to the authority, direction and control of the United States Secretary of Defense.
The Department of the Army is divided between the Office of the Secretary, the civilian management of the Department, and the Army Staff, the Army's senior military officials. The Office of the Secretary is led by the United States Under Secretary of the Army, a civilian, who is the second highest ranking official in the Army Department. The Office of the Secretary is divided into multiple branches, each headed by an Assistant Secretary of the Army, each a civilian appointed by the President. The Army Staff is led by the Chief of Staff of the United States Army, a four-star general who is a the highest ranking officer in the Army and the Army member of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. The Chief of Staff is assisted in managing the Army Staff by the Vice Chief of Staff of the United States Army, a four-star general and second-highest ranking officer in the Army. The Army Staff is divided into several directorates, each headed by a three-star general.
The Office of the Secretary and the Army Staff are organized along similar lines, with civilians and military officers both overseeing similar program areas.
A key official within the Department of the Army is the Director of the Army Staff, who is a three-star general. The Director is responsible for integrating and synchronizing the work of the Office of the Secretary and the Army Staff so that they meet the goals and priorities of the Secretary of the Army. Other key figures within the Department of the Army are the Sergeant Major of the Army, the United States Army Judge Advocate General, the Chief of the Army Reserve, the Chief of the National Guard Bureau, the United States Army Provost Marshal General, the United States Army Surgeon General,  and the Inspector General of the Army.