The '''UCF Rosen College of Hospitality Management''' is an academic college of the University of Central Florida located in Orlando, Florida, USA. The dean of the college is Abraham Pizam, Ph.D.
The college is renowned as one of the finest schools of hospitality in the United States. Rosen College is also one of the fastest growing academic programs at UCF.
UCF offered its first program in Hospitality Management in 1983.  The program became a full-fledged college in 2004 when Harris Rosen, owner of Orlando-based , donated 20 acres adjacent to his Rosen Shingle Creek Resort and $25 million to start the College.
The Rosen College of Hospitality Management offers three undergraduate degrees and two graduate degrees.
All three Rosen College undergraduate programs confer the Bachelor of Science (BS) degree upon successful graduation.
The graduate program includes a Master of Science degree in Hospitality and Tourism Management and a PhD in Hospitality Education.
In addition, a graduate Certificate in Hospitality Management is offered for international students with bachelor's degrees in either hospitality or business.  The program lasts six months and consists of 12 graduate credit hours, of which nine are earned from course work and the remaining three from an internship at Walt Disney World Resort.
Orlando is one of the world's premier tourist destinations: over 42 million tourists visit the area each year.  The Greater Orlando area has over 120,000 rooms and 4,000 restaurants, with no less than 75 theme parks and attractions, including Walt Disney World Resort, the world's largest and most-visited attraction.
The Rosen College campus is designed to imitate a resort-style feel with elegant Spanish-inspired architecture and landscaping, various areas of the college are dedicated in name to major donors to the college including the Disney Dining Room, Universal Orlando Library, Darden Auditorium, and the state-of-the-art Anheuser Busch Beer & Wine Lab. The campus includes the Three Pillars Cafe, a student-operated cafe that serves various cuisines and food items.  The College is located near the Orange County Convention Center.
Regular Shuttle service is offered Monday through Thursday to and from the UCF Main Campus. The college has seen record high enrollment for the 2008 and 2009 school year.
The college features an on-site Campus Life Office that coordinates on-campus activities and events in conjunction with the UCF Student Government Association. The college offers a variety of student organizations including nationally-renowned associations such as Eta Sigma Delta (International Hospitality Management Honor Society), National Society of Minorities in Hospitality, and the Professional Convention Management Association, and the National Association of Catering Executives. The college is also home to the only chapter of the Future Theme Park Leaders Association. The Career Services Office also offers career development events including the popular annual Career Expo with historically high attendance from world-renowned companies and organizations.
In 2005 the University opened two on-campus housing buildings, able to hold 400 residents and 8 resident assistants (one per floor). The student apartment community includes an outdoor pool, community center, outdoor grill area, and key-card only access into the building. The campus is under the law enforcement jurisdiction of the UCF Police Department which provides 24 hour security for the campus including the apartment community.