The '''Orange County Courthouse''' is located on Courthouse Square in Paoli, Indiana at the intersection of State Roads 37 and 156.
The courthouse is one of the two oldest courthouses in Indiana that have been used continuously. The other being in Rising Sun, Indiana (Ohio County). The Orange County Courthouse was built 1847-1850. It is a good example of the Greek Revival style of architecture. The court house is distinguished by a Doric portico with six fluted columns.
Info provided by Paoli News Republican - 
Info edited
The renovated Orange County Courthouse was the site of a special open house event Sunday, July 12, 2009 from 2-4 p.m. Landscaping work around the building has also resulted in it being named the Dirt Diggers Garden of the Month for July.   
Orange County Commissioners President Don Crockett said he thinks it was a very enjoyable day.
In addition to the tours, other activities planned include entertainment from local musicians, refreshments and guest speakers. Representing Indiana Lieutenant Governor Becky Skillman was David Terrell of the Office of Community and Rural Affairs.
She pointed to the restored tin ceiling 22 feet above the courtroom, with its stately chandelier, as an example.
But, he said, the outside of the building is also very attractive. He said the landscaping around the lawn is a big improvement, too.
The courthouse, the county   s third and one of the oldest courthouses in the state still being used for its original purpose, dates back to an 1847 decision by the Orange County Commissioners.
The opening of the Vincennes-New Albany Turnpike (what is now US 150) was expected to    put Paoli on the map,    and local officials called for a new and better structure to replace the $3,950 1818 courthouse. That masonry building had replaced the county   s original dirt-floor log cabin courthouse, which was built on the northwest corner of the square for $25.
Cost overruns seem to have been a part of the present courthouse   s history from the beginning. Expenses ballooned to $13,561.85, which was almost twice as much as the $7,182.50 initial estimate.
A clock was placed in the courthouse cupola in 1856. It was replaced in 1898 by an E. Howard clock that remains in service to this day.
The courthouse has survived at least two fires, and it earned a spot on the National Register of Historic Places in 1975.
In a 1993 letter to the editor, the late James M. Tucker wrote,    For nearly a century and a half, the courthouse, that grand old lady, has been a silent witness to life in Orange County. She has, at various times over the years, been used as a community center, a funeral home, a church and a meeting place. Her lawns have been used to hold ice cream socials, band concerts and political rallies. 