The '''company of Warren and Brown''' was founded as a partnership in 1921 by Mr Andrew C. Brown and Mr William H. Warren, commencing at this time as    jobbing    engineers, specializing in tool making and gear cutting.
After carrying out work of this nature for several years, the Company's production focus shifted to the manufacture of tools to service the motor trade which was then in its infancy.
The business was gradually extended with the development of a number of production lines suited to automotive reconditioning equipment.
In December 1930 the partnership was converted into a proprietary company.
At the outbreak of World War II the factory's resources were used to aid the war effort and apart from manufacturing its normal range of products, the company took a leading part in production of tools and gauges for military purposes and was largely responsible for the more important tooling associated with .303 ammunition.
The company was next approached by the United States Government's Director of Machine Tools and Gauges and requested to undertake the manufacture of a range of    self centering chucks   . These chucks had never been manufactured in Australia before and information regarding overseas manufacturing procedures was not available. Warren and Brown commenced an extensive design and tooling programme and after many initial problems made their first deliveries of chucks to Government in February, 1942.
By 1949 the continuing business expansion stretched the company's financial resources to the limit and in May, 1949 Warren and Brown Pty Ltd became part of the Repco organization and with the added resources available the company expanded into the heavier equipment field, adding products such as clutch rebuilders, spring testers, boring bars and other machines to its range.
In 1948, Warren and Brown took out patents on what has now become known as the    Dual Signal    trip mechanism for their world renowned range of torque wrenches. The first wrenches were released onto the market in 1949 and to this day still hold the major share of the Australian market despite an onslaught of cheap imports. Warren and Brown torque wrenches are recognised as the bench mark to where other similar products aspire to be and have been sold extensively around the world and can be found in the toolboxes of some of the biggest names in world motorsport.
As a result of a significant change in ownership and corporate direction by the parent Repco Group in 1985, Warren and Brown was finally purchased by five of its management team in 1986 and relocated to its present site in Maidstone.
Renamed Warren and Brown and Staff, the company became a privately owned Proprietary Limited company.
Under this structure the company has continued as a manufacturer and supplier of specialized tools to the automotive, industrial, electrical and electronic industries.
When the company applied its electronics expertise to its long established clinical air pumps, this resulted in the first switch mode circuit being designed and patented in Australia. This circuit, which can operate on either 12Volt DC or 90 to 260Volts AC enabled suffers of asthma, emphysema, cystic fibrosis and other respitory ailments to be fully mobile as the pump could operate in a car and aeroplane or from any domestic electricity system around the world.
As a tool designer and manufacture. Warren and Brown were approached by Telecom Australia (Telstra) to design and produce coax cable stripping tools. This has led to the development of many other tools for Telstra and other major companies and has provided a vehicle for Warren and Brown to enter the telecommunications industry with their widely accepted Optic Fibre Management System.
Warren and Brown is established in export markets throughout the world with its traditional range of automotive tools and equipment. Global markets include the United Kingdom, Europe, Russia, the U.S.A. and Asia.
The company changed its name from Warren and Brown and Staff to Warren and Brown Technologies in 1997.
Through the Lightpaths brand Warren and Brown Technologies have continued to develop a range of telecommunications solutions and Products through various Research & Development programs. Specialising in optic fiber management, distribution and termination Warren and Brown along with major telecommunications companies have developed new age FTTH solutions.
The other side of Warren and Browns success has been its range of precision tools including torque wrenches, soldering irons and various hand tools