Despite a quadrupling of forest visitors since 1990, the number of people requiring rescue remains steady at around 25 to 50 per year, largely because of the increased use of cell phones and GPS devices.
Cascade Range weather patterns can be deceiving, with sudden sustained winds of , and visibility quickly dropping from hundreds of miles to an arm's length; climbers can experience  temperature drops in less than an hour after leaving an access point.  This pattern is responsible for the most well known incidents of May 1986 and December 2006.
Avalanches are popularly regarded to be a major climbing hazard, but relatively few Mount Hood deaths are attributed to them.  For the 11-year period ending April 2006,
 there was one death on Mount Hood caused by an avalanche,
Compared to other western states, Oregon has the fewest avalanche fatalities.
Worldwide, between 100 and 200 people die each year from avalanches.
The two major causes of climbing deaths on Mount Hood are falls and hypothermia.
Preset     = TimeVertical_OneBar_UnitYear
ImageSize  = width:330 height:280
PlotArea   = bottom:10 left:40
Period     = from:1890 till:1990
ScaleMajor = start:1890 increment:10
ScaleMinor = start:1890 increment:1
Colors =
BackgroundColors = canvas:canvas
PlotData =
According to ''Mount Hood: A Complete History'' by Jack Grauer,
In an unusual accident reported in Grauer's book, on August 27, 1934, Victor Von Norman successfully climbed the peak via the southern route, along with a group of fellow University of Washington students. He then ventured too close to a fumarole between Crater Rock and the "Hogsback" that connects Crater Rock with the summit ridge, was overcome by oxygen-barren gases emanating from the fumarole, and fell about  to his death. A number of men who tried to retrieve the body were also nearly overcome by the fumes before finally succeeding in their efforts.
On March 1, 1969, James Eaton died when he fell head first into a concealed 60 foot crevasse near the edge of the upper portion of the White River Canyon.  Eaton was ski instructor and a member of the Mt. Hood Ski Patrol.
Beginning on New Year's Eve in 1975, two 16-year-olds and an 18-year-old survived in a snow cave 13 days through a snow storm.
On May 19, 1980, Tom Hanstedt died while descending the mountain's southeast face, falling deep into a crevasse on the Newton-Clark Glacier. His body was never recovered.
On June 6, 1981 David H. Turple and Bill Pilkenton died in a fall from Cooper Spur on the northeast side of the mountain.
On June 21, 1981 five members of the Mazamas climbing group died during a fall from Cooper Spur while descending.
One of the worst U.S. climbing accidents occurred in May 1986 when seven students and two faculty of the Oregon Episcopal School froze to death during an annual school climb. Of the four survivors, three had life-threatening hypothermia; one had legs amputated.
On July 11, 1987 Arthur Andersen Jr. was killed when he and two other men fell on the south side of the peak and slid into a crevasse.
In June 1990 William Ott died from hypothermia on the mountain. Ott's widow was not surprised to learn of her husband's fate. She said she had not expected her husband, who had terminal cancer, to return from the trip he had chosen to make by himself.
Preset     = TimeVertical_OneBar_UnitYear
ImageSize  = width:330 height:280
PlotArea   = bottom:10 left:40
Period     = from:1990 till:2010
ScaleMajor = start:1990 increment:5
ScaleMinor = start:1990 increment:1
Colors =
BackgroundColors = canvas:canvas
PlotData =
On September 25, 1995 Kenneth Budlong, 45, of Portland attempted to climb the peak via the Cathedral Ridge route. Budlong was very experienced, having summited the peak 22 times before. However, the weather turned very quickly, and Budlong vanished. Despite an extensive search over the following days, his whereabouts were never determined, and his body never found.
On May 19, 1997, a solo climber summited successfully with his dog, Buckwheat.  While descending Coe Glacier he slipped and fell , fracturing his neck.  After being reported overdue by family, rescuers found him with facial lacerations, slight hypothermia, and cervical trauma.  He was treated and helicoptered to Portland, but Buckwheat was not at the scene.  A month later, the dog appeared at Cooper Spur Inn, some  ENE across the rugged Mount Hood Wilderness, evidently having survived on snow melt and berries.
On September 6, 1997, an experienced telemark skier, Mark Fraas of Hood River, ascended wearing crampons and carrying skis to the  level of Cooper Spur, not intending to summit.  He slipped and fell more than  down the Chisholm Trail and Eliot Glacier.  Twenty-five rescuers responded to his partner's cell phone call and found him dead.  Retrieval required technical mountaineering skills and equipment.  Fraas was not known to have any climbing experience.  This was at least the 13th fatality from Cooper Spur. All involve loss of footing, inability to self-arrest, and a long fall over rock cliffs above the Eliot Glacier.
On May 31, 1998 during a graduation climb for The Mazamas mountaineering club, several were caught by an avalanche.  One died, one had serious injuries.
The climbers were at the  level on the West Crater Rim route; the forecast was for "significant avalanche danger" and was posted "high avalanche hazard" at Timberline's climbing registration.
A large slab avalanche fracture occurred at the  level,  vertical below the westernmost summit ridge.
A roped team of three were swept down the steep slope through the Hot Rocks area.
One was killed by injuries during the fall and found under four feet of snow about an hour later.
The other two climbers had a fractured pelvis, and fractured ankle, respectively.
The leader, who was only briefly caught by the avalanche, had injuries to an ankle and shoulder.
On May 23, 1999, an experienced pair of climbers summited successfully.  Shortly after commencing their descent, one stumbled and both fell more than  to their deaths.
On June 22, 1999, a 24-year-old medical student from Michigan apparently set out from a remote trailhead where his rental car was found.  Temperatures dropped 15 degrees and more than an inch of rain fell beginning the next day.  Ten days after his presumed disappearance, searching began with up to 70 rescuers combing the area.  Additional searches included cadaver dogs and psychics.  No sign of him was found.
On September 8, 2001, rescuers abandoned a search for a 24-year-old Hungarian exchange student who had been missing for six days.  He had been hiking with friends when he left the group with light clothing and no provisions.  Two days after his disappearance, the weather turned cold and snowy.
On May 24, 2002, a 30-year-old Argentine national attempted to snowboard off Mount Hood's summit along Cooper Spur ridge.  He lost control after a few turns and tumbled over  to his death.
On May 30, 2002, three climbers were killed and four others injured when they fell into a crevasse (''The Bergschrund'') in the "hogsback". Most unusual was the televised  whose rotors clipped the sloping ice bridge.
On March 7, 2003, the search for a man snowshoeing from Timberline Lodge was abandoned after more than four days in heavy winter weather.  More than six feet of snow fell during the search.
On Thursday, December 7, 2006, three experienced climbers&mdash;Kelly James, Brian Hall, and Jerry "Nikko" Cooke&mdash;began what they expected to be a two-day expedition on the more-treacherous north slope of the mountain.  On Saturday, December 9, 2006, the climbers failed to meet a friend who was scheduled to pick them up at Timberline Lodge.
On the morning of Saturday, February 17, 2007, eight experienced climbers from the Portland area ascended in sunny, mild weather.  Observing worse weather mid-afternoon, they camped at the  level of Illumination Saddle overnight.  Sunday morning, they abandoned a summit attempt and descended in freezing rain and snow, visibility less than , and winds at 40 to 70&nbsp;mph (64 to 120&nbsp;km/h). At about noon, disoriented, three of the climbers and a black lab stepped off a cliff (at the  level at the east edge of Palmer Glacier) while tethered together and tumbled down several hundred feet of steep slope into White River Canyon.  One of the remaining five climbers was lowered by rope to search for the fallen group, but returned without seeing them.  They called for help by cell phone, and were advised of even worse weather advancing, so dug in expecting another night.  However, rescuers arrived and evacuated them Sunday evening. The three fallen climbers were unable to dig into solid ice to build a snow cave, so they improvised a shelter and were in hourly cell phone contact with rescuers.  They had a Mountain Locator Unit, sleeping bags, GPS, and a tarp.  The dog, Velvet, helped keep them warm.  Rescuers arrived Monday about 10:45 am.  One was hospitalized for a head injury, the others were treated for minor injuries and released.  The dog had broken nails and a cut on one of her back legs from cold exposure.
On May 12, 2007, five climbers were stranded at the  level by whiteout conditions.  The climbers contacted rescuers by cell phone and obtained assistance to navigate to ''Illumination Saddle'', on the south side of the mountain.  Using their GPS navigation unit, the climbers traversed to the saddle and descended the mountain without further incident.  The climbers carried a Mountain Locator Unit with them, which would have allowed rescuers to pinpoint their location, had they not been able to descend from the mountain on their own.
On September 7, 2007, two Portland-area climbers were ascending a technical approach to the Pearly Gates at early afternoon when one slid to the edge of the Bergshrund and sustained injuries sufficient for him to call for rescue assistance.  His partner decided it was too dangerous to descend the frozen gravel and loose rock face and remained in place.  Rescuers arrived about five hours later, assessed the fallen climber, treated minor injuries and belayed him walking down.  The other climber required technical climbing equipment and was assisted down the Bergshrund.  He walked down and joined his partner about dawn at a Timberline snowcat at the top of the ski area.
On January 14, 2008, two young experienced climbers intended to ascend the Leuthold Couloir route (above Illumination Rock) and began in good weather.  When their return was overdue that afternoon, a search and rescue team activated for the following morning, but was turned back by bad weather.  At 9 am, cell phone contact was established and rescuers learned they spent the night below the tree line.  Rescuers escorted them out two hours later.
The climbers were unprepared for bad weather which arrived as they reached the  level.  Thinking they had a clear weather window, they had no GPS, nor Mountain Locator Unit, and did not believe their cell phone was usable.  Descending with a map and compass, they navigated southward hoping to encounter Timberline Lodge, Government Camp, or the Mount Hood Highway.  Not finding any of these, they reached the  level and built a snow cave to spend the night.  In the morning, they inadvertently discovered a geocache labeled with coordinates just as a rescue sheriff called their cell phone.
On October 19, 2008, an inexperienced solo climber fell as he began his descent after summitting. His crampons slipped leading to an uncontrolled slide of about  vertical near Crater Rock. He was unable to arrest his fall using an ice ax, and blacked out after his head struck the surface. Another climber witnessed his fall and rushed to assist, observed head trauma and confusion, and called for help using a cell phone, then descended to meet rescuers. A third climber remained with him until help arrived since the victim was unable to descend on foot. Rescuers arrived a few hours later, applied first aid to stabilize, and called for air evacuation to a Portland hospital. He was treated for cuts and scrapes, and released.
On January 17, 2009, a search and rescuer on a training exercise was injured when the ice he was climbing collapsed causing him to fall some  resulting in severe ankle injuries.  Another team member was injured, but was able to walk down.  Another rescue team was practicing in the area at the time and assisted the first team.
On January 21, 2009, a climber died after a temperature inversion likely loosened ice from cliffs above the Hogsback.  She tumbled  before stopping in a natural depression.
On February 1, 2009, two men were ascending the Hogsback.  Fatigue and poor weather caused them to abort a summit attempt and descend.  One lost his balance and fell some  before self-arresting, during which he dislocated a shoulder.  The other climber called 911 and initiated assistance.  Another group of climbers stopped and helped walk the injured climber to the Timberline Ski Area where a snow cat with rescuers awaited.
On May 17, 2009, a climber received severe injuries to his face, arm and leg in a  fall at the 10,600 level of the Hogsback.  At least 40 climbers were attempting to summit at the time. The previous day a climber in a group of ten was struck by falling ice.  Both climbers were hospitalized.
On December 13, 2009, rescuers recovered the body of 26-year-old Luke T. Gullberg, of Des Moines, Washington, at about the 9,000-foot level, two days after the trio began climbing an especially treacherous face of the mountain.