A prominent foreign geographer and cartographer was Hellenistic geographer Ptolemy (90   168) who researched at the library in Alexandria to produce a detailed eight-volume record of world geography. During the Middle Ages, India sees some exploration by Chinese and Muslim geographers, while European maps of India remain very sketchy.
A prominent medieval cartographer was Persian geographer Abu Rayhan Biruni (973   1048) who visited India and studied the country's geography extensively..
European maps become more accurate with the Age of Exploration and Portuguese India from the 16th century. The first modern maps were produced by Survey of India, established in 1767 by the British East India Company. Survey of India remains in continued existence as the official mapping authority of the Republic of India.
Cartography of India as a part of the greater continent of Asia develops in Classical Antiquity.
In Greek cartography, India appears as a remote land on the eastern fringe of Asia in the 5th century BC (Hecataeus of Miletus). More detailed knowledge becomes available after the conquests of Alexander the Great, and the 3rd century BC geographer Eratosthenes has a clearer idea of the size and location of India. By the 1st century, at least the western coast of India is well known to Hellenistic geography, with itineraries such as the Periplus of the Erythraean Sea. Ptolemy by the 2nd century has good knowledge of  Indian Sea, including an oversized Sri Lanka (''Taprobane''), but not of the interior of the subcontinent.
Indian cartographic traditions also covered the locations of the Pole star, and other constellations of use. These charts may have been in use by the beginning of the Common Era for purposes of navigation. 
Other early maps in India include the Udayagiri wall sculpture   made under the Gupta empire in 400 CE   showing the meeting of the Ganges and the Yamuna.Schwartzberg, 1302
 The boundaries of land, granted to the Brahman priests of India by their patrons, were described in detail.  The descriptions indicated good geographical knowledge and in one case over 75 details of the land granted have been found. The Chinese records of the Tang dynasty show that a map of the neighboring Indian region was gifted to Wang Hiuen-tse by its king.
 The Iranian geographers Abu Muhammad al-Hasan al-Hamdani and Habash al-Hasib al-Marwazi set the Prime Meridian of their maps at Ujjain, a centre of Indian astronomy. In the early 11th century, the Persian geographer Abu Rayhan Biruni visited India and studied the country's geography extensively. He was considered the most skilled when it came to mapping cities and measuring the distances between them, which he did for many cities in the western Indian subcontinent. He also wrote extensively on the geology of India. In 1154, the Arab geographer Muhammad al-Idrisi included a section on the cartography and geography of India and its neighboring countries in his world atlas, ''Tabula Rogeriana''.
The cartographic tradition of India influenced the map making tradition of Tibet, where maps of Indian origin have been discovered. Islamic cartography was also influenced by the Indian tradition as a result of extensive contact. 
Maps from the Ain-e-Akbari, a Mughal document detailing India's history and traditions, contain references to locations indicated in earlier Indian cartographic traditions.
The seamless globe was invented in Kashmir by Ali Kashmiri ibn Luqman in 998 AH (1589-90 CE), and twenty other such globes were later produced in Lahore and Kashmir during the Mughal Empire. Before they were rediscovered in the 1980s, it was believed by modern metallurgists to be technically impossible to produce metal globes without any  , even with modern technology. These Mughal metallurgists pioneered the method of lost-wax casting in order to produce these globes.Savage-Smith (1985)
The scholar Sadiq Isfahani of Jaunpur compiled an atlas of the parts of the world which he held to be 'suitable for human life'. The 32 sheet atlas   with maps oriented towards the south as was the case with Islamic works of the era   is part of a larger scholarly work compiled by Isfahani during 1647 CE. According to Joseph E. Schwartzberg (2008): 'The largest known Indian map, depicting the former Rajput capital at Amber in remarkable house-by-house detail, measures 661    645&nbsp;cm. (260    254 in., or approximately 22    21&nbsp;ft).'Schwartzberg, 1303
A map describing the kingdom of Nepal, four feet in length and about two and a half feet in breadth, was presented to Warren Hastings.Sircar, page 327 In this raised-relief map the mountains were elevated above the surface and several geographical elements were indicated in different colors. The Europeans used 'scale-bars' in their cartographic tradition.  Upon their arrival in India during the middle ages, the indigenous Indian measures were reported back to Europe, and first published by Guillaume de I'Isle in 1722 as ''Carte des Costes de Malabar et de Coromandel''.
The modern map making techniques in India, like other parts of the world, employ digitization, photographic surveys and printing. Satellite imageries, aerial photographs and video surveying techniques  are also used.See  The Indian IRS-P5 (CARTOSAT-1) was equipped with high resolution panchromatic equipment to enable it for cartographic purposes. IRS-P5 (CARTOSAT-1) was followed by a more advanced model named IRS-P6 developed also for agricultural applications. The CARTOSAT-2 project, equipped with single panchromatic camera which supported scene specific on-spot images, succeed the CARTOSAT-1 project.Burleson, D. (2005), "India", ''Space Programs Outside the United States: All Exploration and Research Efforts, Country by Country'', McFarland, 136-146, ISBN 0-7864-1852-4.