The '''1985 James Hardie 1000''' was the 26th running of the Bathurst 1000 touring car race. It was held on October 6, 1985 at the Mount Panorama Circuit just outside Bathurst. It was the first time the race was held exclusively for cars complying with the Australian version of International Group A touring car regulations. The event was Round Four of both the 1985 Australian Endurance Championship and the 1985 Australian Manufacturers' Championship.
The race was dominated by the Tom Walkinshaw Racing run Jaguar XJSs, which finished first and third in the race. John Goss and German driver Armin Hahne claimed the victory with team boss Tom Walkinshaw and his co-driver Win Percy finishing three laps down in third. On the same lap as the winning Jaguar was the Schnitzer Motorsport prepared BMW 635CSi of Italian driver Roberto Ravaglia and his Venezuelan co-driver Johnny Cecotto. The Holden Dealer Team Commodore of Peter Brock and New Zealand Formula Pacific racer David Oxton were on the lead lap with three laps to go when they broke a timing chain and retired.
The race was held for cars complying with the Australian version of International Group A touring car regulations with three engine capacity classes.
Class A was for cars with an engine capacity of under 2000cc, or two litres. Cars that had competed during the 1985 Australian Touring Car Championship and appeared in the entry list for the race included: Alfa Romeo Alfetta, Ford Escort RS2000, Toyota Corolla, Toyota Sprinter, Triumph Dolomite Sprint and Volvo 360 GLT. Only five cars finally entered, four Toyotas, two of them factory supported, and an Alfa Romeo which did not start.
Class B was for cars between two and three litres of engine capacity. Turbo charged cars acquired a multiplier of 1.3, meaning a 2000cc car with a turbo became a car with 2600cc for the purposes of the class structure. This saw the factory supported turbo charged Mitsubishi Starions and Volvo 240s compete against non-turbo Audi 5+5, Toyota Celica Supra and the factory backed Alfa Romeo GTV6. While the venerable Ford Capri and a factory supported BMW 323i had made appearances in the championship, none fronted for the race.
Over three litre cars were in Class C which featured Holden Commodore V8s, the big V12 Jaguar XJS cars, the V8 Ford Mustangs and Rover Vitesses and the BMW 635CSi.