The ''California Planning & Development Report'' in 2007 ranked San Bernardino's downtown first on its list of the "Most Disappointing Mid-Sized City Downtowns in California," largely due to perceptions of poor public safety, a moribund mall and various failed redevelopment initiatives. The ''San Bernardino County Sun's'' own reporters have referred to the area as a "urban nightmare," due to the high crime and urban decay surrounding it.
Currently, the San Bernardino City Council is considering another redevelopment effort. The city   s Economic Development Agency presented the council with a draft of the Downtown Core Vision / Action Plan in 2009.     a guide for revitalizing downtown San Bernardino for the next 10 years. The plan is the culmination of a year of research, community participation, and planning led by the city   s EDA and the urban planning firm EDAW. The city is discussing the construction of a new government center/civic plaza that will contain an iconic 24 story tower. The county of San Bernardino is also considering a new 12 story court house, hoping to help the old 1926 congested court house and the downtown skyline.
Seccombe Lake is known as "The Duck Park" or "El Parque De Los Patos". It is a haven for homeless transients. It is located at the corner of 5th Street and Sierra Way.
Meadowbrook Park is the main downtown park and is home to much activity. The park is located at the corner of 3rd Street and Sierra Way 
Court Street Square is a square in the downtown area used for the Main Street's events. Downtown San Bernardino is home to many festivals throughout the year including the annual Route 66 Rendezvous, in honor of mother road U.S. Route 66. Approximately 500,000 classic cars come from around the world for this event which takes place on the third weekend in September for four days and three nights of a classic car parade. Court Street Square is at the corner of Court Street and "E" Street.
The city is planning an new district along Fourth Street. The key aspect of the plan is to make the area around the California Theatre and former CinemaStar site on Fourth Street as an area for entertainment and dining. Dining is all that is needed to make this into a reality, as well as the opening of Maya Cinemas, which is expected to open in mid 2010. 
The California Theatre of Performing Arts, in downtown San Bernardino, holds cultural events, including touring Broadway theatre presented by Theatrical Arts International, the Inland Empire's largest theatre company, and the San Bernardino Symphony. The historic Fox Theatre of San Bernardino is also located in the downtown area, next to American Sports University. The Fox Theater has been reopened and remodeled.
Downtown San Bernardino had a large, luxurious, two story theater until it closed in September 2008. Maya Cinemas was expected to open at the old site of the CinemaStar on February 27, 2009, and although it has so far failed to do so, they still have plans for a downtown San Bernardino theater.
The Norman F. Feldheym Central Library is the flagship of the San Bernardino Public Library system. It opened on September 30, 1985, and is the city's fifth central library building since the first one was operated out of a rented house in 1891. Architects Gregory Villanueva 
City Hall is a six story, glass-sheathed building designed in 1963 by Cesar Pelli to reflect the urban environment around it. It is not sure what will happen to the current city hall when the new one begins construction and opens, part of the downtown revitalization project.
Carousel Mall originally opened as Central City Mall in October 1972. In the late 1980s, the mall began to decline due to reduced interest from businesses in close proximity to Inland Center (which is closer to the 215/10 Interchange) and rising crime in the area.  Its name was changed to the Carousel Mall as part of a failed revitalization plan in the early 1990s. All the anchor stores and many of the businesses left.
In response to the closures, the mall's owners developed a mixed-use concept to fill vacated retail outlets with offices.  LNR Property Corp purchased the property in February 2006 with the intention of developing a high density residential and commercial project.  In January 2008, after facing deadlock with the city, LNR Corp sold the Carousel Mall to M & D Properties for $23.5 million.
American Sports University is located within the district.
San Bernardino is the terminal station for Metrolink's Inland Empire-Orange County Line (to Oceanside via Orange County) and Metrolink San Bernardino Line (to downtown Los Angeles). Amtrak's Southwest Chief, operating from Los Angeles to Chicago has one daily train in each direction, which stops at the same station.
The City of San Bernardino is a member of the joint-powers authority Omnitrans, and downtown is a major transfer point in the local bus system. Buses primarily serve the 4th Street Transit Mall, and provide local service throughout the region, as well as express service to Riverside. A Bus Rapid Transit project, called sbX, is planned from Cal State San Bernardino to Loma Linda. A bus transit center is planned in the vicinity of E Street and Rialto Avenue. There is also the MARTA bus which takes people directly from downtown to the communities in the San Bernardino Mountains.
The San Bernardino International Airport is expected to provide both domestic and international air services. It will provide growth to the city and the Inland Empire. Buses are expected to serve the airport, which lies two to three miles (5&nbsp;km) from downtown.  Currently the airline finished major construction, however there are no current commercial flight airlines occupying the terminals.
Image:Vanirtdsb_001a.jpg|Vanir Tower next to City hall in "D" Street
Image:Downtown_San_Bernardino_2004_dt_003.jpg|DowntownSan Bernardino in 2004
Image:Sb_plaza_2003_dt_on_fifthst_002.jpg|Building in Downtown called the San Bernardino Plaza 
Image:Sb_2004_dt_radissonhotalin_Downtown_San_Bernardino_001c.jpg|Downtown Hotel Tower 1
Image:San_Bernardino_County_Arrowhead_Plaza.jpg|Court District of San Bernardino County called the Arrowhead Plaza
Image:Andresen_Building_in_downtown_San_Bernardino.jpg|Andreson Building
Image:San_Bernardino_County_Records_Tower.jpg|San Bernardino County Records Tower 
Image:DSanBerdoo.jpg|CalTrans Building next to the San Bernardino County Law Library    