The Mexico Indigena project began in 2005, and the bulk of its work will end in 2008.  Led by a multinational team of Latin Americanist geographers, including Peter Herlihy  the Associate Director and Graduate Advisor, Latin American Studies, University of Kansas, as well as Jeremy Dobson and Miguel Aguilar Robledo, it focuses on the geography of Mexico's indigenous populations and the changes in the cultural landscape and conservation of natural resources resulting from the gargantuan land certification and privatization program called the ''Programa de Certificacion de Derechos Ejidales y Titulacion de Solares'' (Program for the Certification of Ejido Rights and Titling of House Plots or PROCEDE). The legal changes initiated by the PROCEDE program may eventually lead to the disappearance of the ''Registro Agrario Nacional'' (RAN) , Mexico's rural land registry for communal property (''ejidos'' and mainly indigenous ''comunidades agrarias'').
Mexico Indigena's primary method for obtaining and understanding geographic data is participatory research mapping (PRM). In PRM, local investigators, chosen by the communities, are trained by the formal researcher in geographic data gathering techniques. Cognitive mental (individual) maps are converted to consensual (community) maps, including only features whose nature, name, and coordinates have been verified. These are then converted to standardized maps, which the communities may choose to use for educational, political, legal, or other, purposes. Participatory maps of resource-use areas, for example, have been used successfully for indigenous territorial claims in Panama (Herlihy 2003) and elsewhere.  Mexico Indigena's primary tool for joining data from different sources to produce maps and to analyze trends is geographic information systems (GIS).
Sponsoring and collaborating institutions and participants  of the Mexico Indigena research project have included the University of Kansas (US), the Autonomous University of San Luis Potosi (Mexico), the Foreign Military Studies Office, Radiance Technologies (US) , and the Mexican federal environmental ministry SEMARNAT. 
In many respects the Mexico Indigena project is an example of military geography. 
The National Association of State Universities and Land-Grant Colleges' International Development Project Database Survey notes that the Mexico Indigena research project has received between $751,000-$1,000,000 from all sources external funds, including: U.S. Department of Defense, Foreign Military Studies Office; U.S. Department of State, Fulbright-Garcia Robles; the American Geographical Society; the University of Kansas' Center of Latin American Studies; Mexico's Secretaria de Medio Ambiente y Recursos Naturales; and the Universidad Autonoma de San Luis Potosi.    
The false attribution of location in the visual arts has been deemed "geopiracy" by Vogel (2006) and rigorously defined  in Vogel et al. (2008). Mexico Indigena raises consequential questions when humans are ''not'' falsely situated (located) in digitally-generated topographies of the human terrain. The ethical questions generated by the moral quagmire associated with efforts such as the Mexico Indigena project have yet to be adequately addressed. While Mexico Indigena's ethical guidelines explicitly assert "No information will be acquired through deception or misrepresentation"  significant concerns have arisen regarding the nature of the research, despite the project's embrace of a putatively participatory research methodology that ostensibly "empowers" the local community in geographic knowledge generation and manipulation. Naive statements by team leaders of Mexico Indigena's controversial land titling project designed to produce "digital human terrains," (for example, "Experience has proven that, when communities themselves give the world their understandings of their land, the world is better equipped to respect these alternative understandings"), underscore legitimate and deeply troubling questions that have emerged surrounding the ethical conduct of the US-based researchers involved in Mexico Indigena. Mexico Indigena project leader Peter Herlihy and the editor of "Participatory Mapping of Indigenous Lands in Latin America" a special Issue of  the journal ''Human Organization'' of the Applied Anthropology Association initially explained to the Union of Organizations of the Sierra Juarez of Oaxaca (UNOSJO, S.C.) that the proposed research objective was to assess the influence that the Mexican Government's PROCEDE program has had on indigenous people's communities. Nevertheless, Herlihy did not explain that the research initiative he led was financed by United States Army's Foreign Military Studies Office (FMSO), nor did he mention that research findings would be given directly to FMSO. As the Zapotec's indigenous organization, the Union of Organizations of the Sierra Juarez of Oaxaca notes, "Herlihy neglected to mention this despite being expressly asked to clarify the eventual use of the data obtained through research." Similarly, he failed "to acknowledge  the participation of Radiance Technologies, a company that specializes in arms development and military intelligence" 
According to a statement released at the end of January 2009 by the Project leader, Peter Herlihy, "FMSO has financed the expedition to Mexico, as well as others to Colombia, the Antilles and Jordan, through the Radiance Corporation  that administers the contracts between FMSO, AGS, and the universities" . Managed under contract by Radiance Technologies, an Alabama-based military contractor specializing in intelligence and logistical services, Herlihy's research has been financed through FMSO, indicating for some that "the Mexico Indigena project is involved in gathering intelligence for the US Army." 
According to the Independent Media Center  "The researched  communities knew nothing of this involvement and are left feeling like victims of geopiracy."
The Kansas City based SmartPort Inc.  is pushing forward with its project to convert Kansas City into what is called an inland port for Mexican shipments, and facilitating the free passage of goods across the Mexican border. One may question why Kansas City merchants may have an interest in maps of Mexico. Yet as SmartPort Inc. observes, "Located in the heart of America at the hub of the transcontinental and NAFTA trade corridors, Kansas City is a center of choice for warehousing, manufacturing and distribution". Herlihy has commented that his research in Mexico can can benefit SmartPort Inc. planners by offering them with information about the regions along Mexico's railways. He said, "They can take this information and use it for all kinds of things to really understand what they call the cultural terrain," Herlihy is reported to have also said. "You can't even predict all the uses" 
Given the American Geography Society's long and intimate association with imperial agendas, it is perhaps no surprise that the AGS sponsored Mexico Indigena project has been the source of fierce criticism from indigenous organizations in Mexico, not to mention from a student-based group at the University of Kansas--the academic home of Mexico Indigena (see KUWatch.org). Student supporters of KU Watch's critique of Mexico Indigena demonstrated at the University of Kansas to enhance awareness about research conducted at the University funded by the Department of Defense.http://www.kansan.com/stories/2008/mar/25/student_activists_seek_open_discussion_government_/ In response to criticisms raised by the University of Kansas student group KU Watch, Peter Herlihy, a leader of the Bowman Expedition, said that he was "proud to raise the flag and say look at what the government is funding," In addition, Herlihy reported that his research project "empowers indigenous people by putting intellectual property where it belongs." Moreover, he noted that "Geographical intelligence is needed for peace and prosperity just like it is needed for war and destruction," . Recently, a number of geographers have written to the AAG requesting that it conduct its own inquiry into the nature and consequences of Peter Herlihy's research in Mexico, which they "feel violated the ethical norms of our profession."http://www.colorado.edu/geography/class_homepages/geog_5722_s09/SelectedResponsestoAGS.pdf
 This concern culminated in mid January, 2009, when Juan Perez Luna y Aldo Gonzalez of the Union of Organizations of the Sierra Juarez of Oaxaca (UNOSJO) released a press statement denouncing the Mexico Indigena's lack of full disclosure regarding funding procured from the United States Army Foreign Military Studies Office.  The full press release can be found at the following link:. 
The Co-chair of the Indigenous Peoples' Specialty Group (IPSG) of the Association of American Geographers (AAG) and Secretary of the Indigenous Peoples' Knowledges and Rights Commission (IPKRC) of the International Geographical Union (IGU), Renee Pualani Louis, lamented the release of UNOSOJO's declaration by noting how it was such a "sad day for geographers and anyone doing research with Indigenous communities especially in Meso-America." 
As the Union de Organizaciones de la Sierra Juarez de Oaxaca's press release indicates, Zapotec Indigenous Peoples in Mexico are demanding full tansparency from the U.S. scholar leading the United States Department of Defense funded project. In their words, "Prof. Herlihy failed to mention that he received funding from the Foreign Military Studies Office of the U.S. Armed Forces. The failure to obtain full, free and prior informed consent is a violation of the rights of indigenous communities as codified in the Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples adopted by the United Nations in 2007." (according to UN Declaration Article 11/2, research must be conducted with free prior and informed consent). As noted by the website ''El Enemigo Comun'' in their essay 'A Road to Hell', "The role of the Foreign Military Studies Office in identifying 'emerging and asymmetric' threats in Oaxaca, Mexico is chilling to say the least. Fort Leavenworth has a vast array of knowledge with regards to how neo-liberal changes in Mexico's property regime will affect indigenous culture and land use" . Data from the "Mexico Indigena" project are disseminated monthly at Fort Leavenworth's Foreign Military Studies Office. It is reported that during a conversation between Gen. Petraeus and the project leaders of Mexico Indigena, Petraeus observed that, "knowledge of the cultures is a multiplier of  forces   the knowledge of cultural ` terrain' can be as important, and at times more, than the knowledge of the geographic terrain". Accordingly, the project heads of Mexico Indigena are reported to have stated that "the culture and local residents are then the 'decisive terrain'".http://www.narconews.com/Issue55/article3382.html So-called-participatory mapping PRM is a technique that fully capitalizes on local indigenous knowledge in the creation of "formalized" maps necessary for the creation of neo-liberal property regimes. According to an excerpt from 2006 ''Methodological Approaches'' Report of Mexico Indigena: "The participatory mapping, or PM, methodology rests on the philosophy that local populations have some of the best and most detailed knowledge of their surrounding lands and resources and that can be collected and interpreted geographically.".http://web.ku.edu/~mexind/methods_text.htmhttp://www.amergeog.org/gr/jul08/herlihy.html
Neglecting to disclose funding sources to research participants violate the ethical principles of both the Association of American Geographers (AAG) as well as the Belmont Report. Failure to inform participants about the potential risks or unintended consequences associated with the study abrogates the principal of informed consent, and hence violates the rights of the project participant's. Mexico Indigena's military-funded investigations do in fact pose a risk in Oaxaca for individuals and communities, especially in light of the fractious and divisive  nature of village and inter-village politics in Southern Mexico, not to mention the socio-political turmoil in this region that has been fragmented by international migration, political factionalism and economic marginalization. 
Notwithstanding such critiques, in Peter Herlihy's estimation, ''Mexico Indigena'' is a concerted effort to renew "society's commitment to inform the public and the United States government about world geography". The American Geographical Society has been clear about the potential sanctions accompanying a breach of ethical conduct. According to an AGS document released on the  ''Mexico Indigena'' web site called "Developing Guidelines for Ethical Conduct of Foreign Field Research": 
The Union de Organizaciones de la Sierra Juarez de Oaxaca (UNOSJO) has reiterated its rejection of the University of Kansas geographers associated with the ''Mexico Indigena'' Project for failing to obtain informed consent from the communities involved in the research. UNOSJO continues to maintain that research was conducted in a covert fashion. Moreover, the coordinator of the Union de Organizaciones de la Sierra Juarez de Oaxaca Aldo Gonzalez Rojas is reported to have said in Spanish that "the looting of traditional Zapotec knowledge about land and territoriality is tantamount to geopiracy (geopirateria), which is being conducted through the work of Mexico Indigena in the indigenous communities of the Sierra. This in turn has generated an international debate over the ethical nature of social research conducted in indigenous communities." 
Aldo Gonzalez Rojas, speaking on behalf of UNOSJO, has indicated that it is necessary to determine if the information collected by "Mexico Indigena" is for U.S. military or counter-insurgency purposes.  As such, UNOSJO has called for complete disclosure of the institutions and corporations with privileged access to the data collected by Mexico Indigena. UNOSJO holds that the DOD funded Bowman expedition in Mexico is dedicated to developing military tactics for application in zones of armed conflict.  UNOSJO continues to claim that Mexico's Secretaria de Medio Ambiente y Recursos Naturales (SEMARNAT) has financed the work of Mexico Indigena through its support of the University of San Luis. SEMARNAT has previously disputed UNOSJO's claim, saying they have not funded the implementation of the "Mexico Indigena" project in indigenous or mestizo communities in the Sierra Juarez. According to Esteban Ortiz Rodea, reports from the indigenous communities of Tiltepec, Yagavila, Ixtlan, Yagila and Guelatao suggest few indications of the actual communal collection of zapping information, despites "Mexico Indigena" project's championing of PRM.
Posted on the ''Mexico Indigena'' web site is an image of a "parcel sketch map of part of community of La Pila, with request to PROCEDE authorities" from an ''ejidatario'' of the Pila   Municipio de Ciudad Valles, which provides digitized visual identification of families tying them to place (parcels). 
Aguilar Robledo, Miguel and Peter H. Herlihy 2005 "Tierras, recursos naturales y mapeo comunitario en la Huasteca Potosina, Mexico." ''CLAAG'' Instituto de Geografia Unidad Academica Morelia-''UNAM''.
Araujo Saulo 2009. "Zapotec Indigenous People in Mexico Demand Transparency from U.S. Scholar" ''Anarkismo''. January 22.
Avendano, Olga Rosario 2009. "Denuncian que EEUU hace labores de contrainsurgencia en poblaciones indigenas de Oaxaca." Jan. 14 ''Olor de  mi tierra.'' web site 
Betran Garcia, Hermogenes, 2009 "'Saberes indigenas' robados" 15  Feb ''ADN Sureste'' web site.
Briseno, Patricia 2009 "Financia ejercito de los EU proyecto encubierto de investigacion" ''Quadratin '' Jan. 15.
Briseno Patricia 2009. "Semarnat se borro del mapeo." ''EXonline''. January 17.
Coordinacion para el Dialogo y la Negociacion en Chiapas 2009 "Personal militar de EU mapeo partes del pais" Feb. 10.
Davies, Nancy 2009 "Geographic Survey Project of the Sierra Juarez Mountains Stirs Protests: In Oaxaca, Geographers Deny Surveillance Charges" ''The Narco News Bulletin'' February 21.
Dobson, J. 2006. AGS Conducts Fieldwork in Mexico. ''Ubique''. Vol 26, No. 1.
Forte, Maximilian 2009. "Contemporary Colonial Scholarship and the Spreading Human Terrain System: AGS Bowman Expeditions, Zapotec Indians, and onto the Caribbean." Posted in COLONIALISM/IMPERIALISM ''OPEN ANTHROPOLOGY''  Jan. 29.
Herlihy, P. 2003. Participatory research mapping of indigenous lands in Darien, Panama. ''Human Organization''. 62: 315-331
Herlihy, P. 2007 ''Mapas Comunales de La Lima, La Pila, Chuchupe, Kuatlamayan, Chimalaco, Tazaquil, Tacuime, and Santa Cruz, Mexico''. Mexico Indigena: Cartografia participativa, tenencia de la tierra, uso de los recursos naturales y conservacion ambiental en comunidades indigenas de la Huasteca, Mexico:. Informacion obtenida a traves de Etno-investigadores Locales.
Herlihy, P. and G. Knapp. 2003. Maps of, by, and for the Peoples of Latin America. ''Human Organization'' 62.
Herlihy, Peter H., Jerome Dobson, Miguel Aguilar Robledo, Derek Smith, John Kelly, and Viera, Aida Ramos 2008 "A digital geography of indigenous Mexico: prototype for the American Geographical Society's Bowman expeditions." (GEOGRAPHICAL FIELD NOTE). ''The Geographical Review''.
Herlihy Peter H., and Miguel Aguilar-Robledo 2007 "The First Bowman Expedition: Methodology and Focus on Indigenous Mexico" Bill Wood Commemorative Session III: The New AGS Bowman Expeditions ''Association of American Geographer's'' Annual Meeting, San Francisco, April.
Herlihy, Peter, Derek Smith, John Kelly and Jerome Dobson 2006. "''Mexico Indigena'': Mexican Open-Source Geographic Information Systems (GIS) Project Final Report, Year One", Prepared by the Radiance Research Team for the Foreign Military Studies Office and the American Geographical Society June 5.
Hernandez, Carlos Alberto 2009 "Aldo Gonzalez actua con fines electorales, alerta Semarnat La dependencia no financio ni conocio del proyecto Mexico Indigena, afirma delegado estatal." ''El Imparcial'' Jan. 23 .
Maines, Sophia 2006 "Expeditions touted as modern intelligence gathering" ''Exploring the world anew'' October 23 
Matias, Perdro 2009 "Exigen se investiguen posibles violaciones a pueblos indigenas." ''Barricada de Oaxaca''. Jan. 16 
Matias, Pedro 2009 "Repudian en Oaxaca el proyecto Mexico indigena" ''Proceso.'' Feb. 19 Oaxaca web site  
MEXICO INDIGENA 2008 "Mexico Open Source Geographic Information Systems (MOS-GIS)" ''Project Status Reports'' February.
Oaxaca Study Action Group 2009 "Fwd: Zapotec Indigenous People in Mexico Demand Transparency from U.S" Jan. 30 ''Oaxaca Study Action Group'' web site.
Ribeiro, Silvia 2009 "Geo-Piracy in Oaxaca... and Much More US Academics Are Mapping Resources in Mexico; Corporations and the US Military Are the Beneficiaries of the Data" ''La Jornada''. February 3.  
Radiance Research Team (Herlihy, Peter H., Derek A. Smith, John H. Kelly, Jerome E. Dobson) 2006 "Overview and Preliminary Analysis of Nine Communities in the Huasteca Potosina" Prepared for the Foreign Military Studies Office and the American Geographical Society. June 5.
Stanton, John 2009. "Human Terrain System meets the Bowman expeditions: US Army/TRADOC Embroiled in Another Controversy." Jan. 29 .
Torrentera G. Lilia 2009 "  Que hacen las Expediciones Bowman en Mexico?" Jan 15 
Torrentera G., Lilia 2009 "Permite gobierno mexicano espionaje de EU en zonas indigenas." Jan 15 . 
UNOSJO, S.C. 2009 PRESS BULLETIN FROM UNION OF ORGANIZATIONS OF THE SIERRA JUAREZ OF OAXACA (UNOSJO, S.C.) Oaxaca de Juarez, Oax., Mexico 14 January (Denouncing Mexico Indigena Project and demanding that Peter Herlihy "honor his promise of transparency and that the Mexican public be made aware all his sources of funding and the institutions that received information on findings obtained in the communities.")
Vogel, Joseph, 2006. "The Economic Justification for Ecocritical Certification of Big-Budget Movies
Vogel, Joseph, Janny Robles, Camilo Gomides, and Carlos Muniz, 2008. "Geopiracy as an Emerging Issue in Intellectual Property Rights: The Rationale for Leadership by Small States"  21 Tulane Environmental Law Journal (Spring), 391-406.
Zavala, Juan Carlos 2009 "Espia Ejercito de EU a Oaxaca." ''Diario Despertar'' Jan 14.