The word can be used as both a noun and an adjective. In adjectival use, it is generally understood to mean "of or relating to the United States"; for example, "Elvis Presley was an American singer" or "the American President gave a speech today." In noun form, it generally means U.S. citizen or national (see Names for U.S. citizens). The noun is rarely used in American English to refer to people not connected to the United States. When used with a grammatical qualifier, the adjective ''American'' can mean "of or relating to the Americas," as in Latin American or Indigenous American. Less frequently, the adjective can take this meaning without a qualifier, as in "American Spanish dialects and pronunciation differ by country", or the name of the Organization of American States. A third use of the term pertains specifically to the indigenous peoples of the Americas, for instance, "In the 16th century, many Americans died from imported diseases during the European conquest".
The Spanish, French, Portuguese, German, and Italian languages use cognates of the word "American", in denoting "U.S. citizen". In Spanish, ''americano'' denotes geographic and cultural origin in the New World; the adjective and noun, denoting a U.S. national, ''estadounidense'' (United States person), derives from ''Estados Unidos de America'' (United States of America). Such usage is slightly more descriptive than "American", but also not sufficiently specific to the United States of America, since it would be equally applicable to citizens of Mexico, which is officially named Estados Unidos Mexicanos (United Mexican States). The Spanish term ''norteamericano'' (North American), is frequently used to refer things and persons from the United States, but this usage is not accurate, because the term can also denote things and persons from Canada, Mexico, Greenland, Bermuda and St Pierre and Miquelon.
The Spanish words ''estadounidense'' (United States person), ''yanqui'' (Yankee), and gringo are Mexican, Central American, Caribbean, South American and European Spanish usages denoting U.S. things and persons. In personal denotation, "gringo" means ''estadounidense'', in particular, and anglophones in general, and, linguistically, any speech not Spanish, i.e. "She is speaking gringo, not Spanish". Cognate usages may cause cultural friction between U.S. nationals and Latin Americans who object to American English's exclusionary denotations of ''American''.
Portuguese has ''americano'', denoting a person or thing from the Americas, and for a U.S. national and things ''estadunidense'' (United States person), from ''Estados Unidos da America'', and ''ianque'' (Yankee), but the term most often used is ''norte-americano'', even though it could, as with its Spanish equivalent, in theory apply to Canadians, Mexicans, etc., as well. In French, ''etasunien'', from ''Etats-Unis d'Amerique'', distinguishes U.S. things and persons from the adjective ''americain'', which denotes persons and things from the United States but may also refer to ''the Americas''; likewise, the German usages ''U.S.-amerikanisch'' and ''U.S.-Amerikaner'' observe said cultural distinction, solely denoting U.S. things and people. It is important to note that these are "politically correct" terms and that in normal parlance, the adjective "American" and its direct cognates are almost always used unless the context does not render the nationality of the person clear. For example, the word "Amerika" in German has a one-to-one equivalence to its meaning in modern English: it may denote North America, South America, or both, and in some instances refers to the United States.
The derivation of ''America'' has several explanatory naming theories. The most common is Martin Waldseemuller's deriving it from ''Americus Vespucius'', the Latinised version of Amerigo Vespucci's name, the Italian merchant and cartographer who explored South America's east coast and the Caribbean sea in the early 16th century. Later, his published letters were the basis of Waldseemuller's 1507 map, which is the first usage of ''America''. (See  )
In 1886, Jules Marcou said Vespucci renamed himself from ''Alberigo'' Vespucci (''Albericus Vespucius'') to ''Amerigo'' Vespucci after meeting the native inhabitants of the eponymous Amerrique mountain ranges of Nicaragua that connect North America and South America, an important geographic feature of New World maps and charts. Moreover, there is the 1908 theory that ''America'' derives from Richard Amerike of Bristol, England, financier of John Cabot's 1497 expedition. Cabot is believed the first Western European on the mainland. In the event, the adjective ''American'' subsequently denotes the New World's peoples and things.
 The earliest recorded use of this term in English is in Thomas Hacket's 1568 translation of Andre Thevet's book on ''France Antarctique''; Thevet himself had referred to the natives as ''Ameriques''. In the following century the term was extended to European settlers and their descendants in the Americas. The earliest recorded use of this term in English dates to 1648, in Thomas Gage's ''The English-American: A New Survet of the West Indies''. In English, "American" was used especially for people in the British America, and came to be applied to citizens of the United States when the country was formed. The Declaration of Independence refers to " unanimous Declaration of the thirteen united States of America" adopted by the "Representatives of the united States of America" on July 4, 1776. The official name of the country was established on November 15, 1777, when the Second Continental Congress adopted the Articles of Confederation, the first of which says, "The Stile of this Confederacy shall be 'The United States of America' ". The confederation articles further state: "In Witness whereof we have hereunto set our hands in Congress. Done at Philadelphia in the State of Pennsylvania the ninth day of July in the Year of our Lord One Thousand Seven Hundred and Seventy-Eight, and in the Third Year of the independence of America." Common short forms and abbreviations are the ''United States'', the ''U.S.'', the ''U.S.A.'', and ''America''. Colloquial versions are the ''U.S. of A.'' and ''the States''. The term ''Columbia'' (from the Columbus surname), was a popular name for the U.S. and for the entire geographic Americas; its usage is restricted to the District of Columbia name. Moreover, the womanly personification of Columbia appears in some official documents, including editions of the U.S. dollar.
In the Federalist Papers, Alexander Hamilton and James Madison use ''American'' with two different meanings, political and geographic; "the American republic" in Federalist Paper 51 and in Federalist Paper 70, and, in Federalist Paper 24, Hamilton's ''American'' usage denotes the lands beyond the U.S.'s political borders:
United States President George Washington's farewell in 1796 says: "The name of American, which belongs to you in your national capacity, must always exalt the just pride of patriotism more than any appellation."
Originally, the name "the United States" was plural   "the United States are"   a usage found in the U.S. Constitution's Thirteenth Amendment (1865), but its current common usage is singular   "the United States is". The plural is set in the idiom "these United States".
Before the Constitutional Convention, several country names were proffered, the most popular being "Columbia". The problems of "the United States of America" as a name (long, awkward, imprecise) were discussed; the Constitution ignores the matter, using "the United States of America" and "the United States". The name "Colombia" (derived from Christopher Columbus; Sp: ''Cristobal Colon'', It: ''Cristoforo Colombo''), was proposed by the revolutionary Francisco de Miranda to denote the New World   especially Spain's and Portugal's American territories and colonies; it was used in the country names Republic of Columbia and the United States of Colombia.
Early official U.S. documents betray inconsistent usage; the 1778 Treaty of Alliance with France uses "the United States of North America" in the first sentence, then uses "the said United States" afterwards; "the United States of America" and "the United States of North America" derive from "the United Colonies of America" and "the United Colonies of North America". The Treaty of Peace and Amity of September 5, 1795 between the United States and the Barbary States contains the usages "the United States of North America", "citizens of the United States", and "American Citizens".
Semantic divergence among Anglophones did not affect the Spanish colonies. In 1801, the document titled ''Letter to American Spaniards''   published in French (1799), in Spanish (1801), and in English (1808)   might have influenced Venezuela's Act of Independence and its 1811 constitution.
The Latter-day Saints' Articles of Faith refer to the American continent as where they are to build Zion. The Old Catholic Encyclopedia's usage of ''America'' is as "the Western Continent or the New World". It discusses American republics, ranging from the U.S. to "the republic of Mexico, the Central American republics of Guatemala, Honduras, San Salvador, Nicaragua, Costa Rica, Leon, and Panama; the Antillian republics of Haiti, Santo Domingo, and Cuba, and the South American republics of Venezuela, Colombia, Brazil, Ecuador, Peru, Bolivia, Paraguay, the Argentine, and Chile".
Use of the term ''American'' for U.S. nationals is common in United Nations. The Secretary General refers to people from the United States as Americans, as has the UN High Commissioner for Refugees. The UN has referred to financial markets in the United States as "American financial markets."
American Samoa is a recognized territorial name at the United Nations.. United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs,
Population Division. Retrieved August 6, 2009.
 ("United-Statesian") rather than ''americano''. The dictionary of Real Academia Espanola in 1992 did not include the alternative ''from the United States'' as one of the meanings of ''americano''.
The ''Diccionario de la Lengua Espanola'' (Dictionary of the Spanish Language) published by the Real Academia Espanola (Royal Spanish Academy), defines ''estadounidense'' (United Statesian) as "someone or something from or relating to the United States", the common Spanish usage for U.S. people and things. People originating from, or who have lived in, the Western Hemisphere might be called ''americanos''.
Moreover, the Royal Spanish Academy advises against using ''americanos'' exclusively for U.S. nationals:
English translation:
Prior to Confederation in 1867, the word "Canadian" referred only to residents of the colony of Canada, which consisted of the territory of modern Quebec and Ontario. The term did not apply to residents of the colonies of New Brunswick, Nova Scotia, Prince Edward Island or Newfoundland. Collectively, the British colonies were known as British North America, and their residents referred to themselves as "British Americans." Since the War of 1812, the term "American" acquired a pejorative context within Canada. Even since the BNA Act of 1867, which defines the word Canada in its modern context, the pejorative context of the term "American" remains widespread.
 Canadians rarely apply the term "American" to themselves     some Canadians resent being referred to as Americans because of mistaken assumptions that they are U.S. citizens or an inability, particularly of people overseas, to distinguish Canadian English and American English accents. Some Canadians have protested the use of ''American'' as a national demonym. People of U.S. ethnic origin in Canada are categorized as "American (U.S.)" by Statistics Canada for purposes of census counts.
Generally, ''americano'' denotes "U.S. citizen" in Portugal. Usage of ''americano'' to exclusively denote people and things of the U.S. is discouraged by the Academia das Ciencias de Lisboa (Lisbon Academy of Sciences), because the specific word ''estado-unidense'' (also ''estadunidense'') clearly denotes a "United Statesman" and a "United Stateswoman". The term currently used by the Portuguese press is ''norte-americano''.
In Brazil, the term ''americano'' (American) is used to address both that which pertains to the American continent and, in current speech, that which pertains to the U.S.A. (the particular meaning is deduced from context). Alternatively the term "norte-americano" (North American) is also used in more informal contexts while "estadunidense" (United-Statesman) is the preferred form in academia. The term "America" (America) on the other hand is used almost exclusively for the continent as the U.S.A. are called "Estados Unidos" (United States) or "Estados Unidos da America" (United States of America).
The Getting Through Customs website advises business travellers not to use "in America" as a U.S. reference when conducting business in Brazil.
The United States Census Bureau reports 7.3 percent of U.S. residents to be of "United States or American" ancestry based on responses to the 2000 Census long-form questionnaire (1 in 6 sample). Discrete responses of ''United States'' and ''American'' or an ambiguous response or a state-name response (excluding Hawaii) were aggregated as "United States or American". Distinct racial, ethnic, and cultural groups such as "American Indian", "Mexican American", "African American", and "Hawaiian" were coded separately.
The word "American" appears in the name of the U.S. territory of American Samoa. American Samoa began using the word ''American'' in its title when it became a U.S. territory.
Media releases from the Pope and Holy See frequently use ''America'' to refer to the United States, and ''American'' to denote something or someone from the United States.
Many other international treaties use the term ''American'' and ''American citizen''. The Thailand Treaty of Amity protects Americans and American companies. The Treaty between the United States and the Dey of the Regency of Algiers on March 7, 1796 protected ''American citizens''. The Louisiana Purchase Treaty between France and United States referred to ''American citizens''. The 1858 Treaty of Amity and Commerce between the United States and Japan protected ''American citizens'' and also used the term ''American''. The Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo between Mexico and the U.S. uses the term ''American Government'' to refer to the United States, and ''American tribunals'' to refer to U.S. courts. The 1825 treaty between the United States and the Cheyenne tribe refers to ''American citizen''. The Treaty of Paris ending the Spanish-American War, known as ''Guerra Hispano-Estadounidense'' in Spanish, uses the word ''American'' in reference to United States troops.
Products that are labelled, advertised, and marketed in the U.S. as "American Made" must be "all or virtually all made in the U.S." The Federal Trade Commission, to prevent deception of customers and unfair competition, considers an unqualified claim of "American Made" to expressly claim exclusive manufacture in the U.S. "The FTC Act gives the Commission the power to bring law enforcement actions against false or misleading claims that a product is of U.S. origin."
English, French, German, Italian, Japanese, Hebrew, Arabic, Portuguese, and Russian speakers may use the term ''American'' to refer to either inhabitants of the Americas or to U.S. nationals. They generally have other terms specific to U.S. nationals, such as German ''US-Amerikaner'', French ''etatsunien'', Japanese           ''beikokujin'', Arabic                  ''amriikaanii'' (as opposed to the more-common              ''amriikii''), and Italian ''statunitense'', but these may be less common than the term ''American''. Adjectives derived from "United States" (such as ''United Statesian)'' are awkward in English, but similar constructions exist in Spanish (''estadounidense''), Portuguese (''estado-unidense'', ''estadunidense''), Finnish (''yhdysvaltalainen'': from ''Yhdysvallat'', United States), as well as in French (''etats-unien''), and Italian (''statunitense'').
In Spanish, at least one reference reports ''estadounidense'', ''estado-unidense'' or ''estadunidense'' are preferred to ''americano'' for U.S. nationals; the latter tends to refer to any resident of the Americas and not necessarily from the United States. In Portuguese, ''estado-unidense''(or estadunidense) is the recommended form by language regulators but today it is less frequently used than ''americano'' and ''norte-americano''.
Latin Americans also may employ the term ''norteamericano'' (''North American''), which conflates the United States and Canada.
With the 1994 passage of the North American Free Trade Agreement, the following words were used to label the ''United States Section'' of that organization: in French, ''etatsunien''; in Spanish, ''estadounidense''. In English the adjective used to indicate relation to the United States is ''U.S.''
The word Gringo is widely used in parts of Latin America in reference to U.S. residents, often in a pejorative way but not necessarily. ''Yanqui'' (''Yankee'') is also very common in some regions, but it is usually pejorative. Throughout Latin America the word ''Gringo'' is also used for any foreigner from the United States, Canada, or Europe, however the true sense of the word is any foreigner.
In other languages, however, there is no possibility for confusion. Chinese ''meiguoren'' for example, is derived from a word for the United States, ''meiguo'', where ''mei'' is an abbreviation for ''Yameilijia'' "America" and ''guo'' is "country". The name for the continent of America is ''meizhou'', from ''mei'' plus ''zhou'' "continent". Thus a ''mei'''zhou'''ren'' is an American in the generic sense, and a ''mei'''guo'''ren'' is an American in the U.S. sense. Similar words are found in Korean and Vietnamese. In Swahili, the more naturalized word ''Marekani'' means specifically the United States, and ''Wamarekani'' are U.S. nationals, whereas the international form ''Amerika'' refers to the continent, and ''Waamerika'' are the inhabitants thereof. Likewise, the Esperanto word ''Ameriko'' refers only to the continent. For the country there is the term ''Usono'', cognate with the English word ''Usonia'' later popularized by Frank Lloyd Wright. Thus a citizen of the United States is an ''usonano'', whereas an ''amerikano'' is an inhabitant of the Americas.
There are a number of alternatives to the demonym "American" (a citizen of the United States) that do not simultaneously mean any inhabitant of the Americas. One uncommon alternative is "Usonian", which usually describes a certain style of residential architecture designed by Frank Lloyd Wright. Over the years, many other alternatives have also surfaced, but most have long fallen into disuse and obscurity. ''Merriam-Webster's Dictionary of English Usage'' says, "The list contains (in approximate historical order from 1789 to 1939) such terms as Columbian, Columbard, Fredonian, Frede, Unisian, United Statesian, Colonican, Appalacian, Usian, Washingtonian, Usonian, Uessian, U-S-ian, Uesican, United Stater." Nevertheless, no alternative to "American" is common.