Mobal (under the name Mobell) was created in the mid 1980s from a UK company called Torrent. Torrent was an industrial tool rental company serving the construction industry.  When cellular phones first became commercially available Mobal started renting these to construction companies to use on work sites.
The decision was made to sell off the tool rental business called Torrent, and form a new company to focus purely on renting cell phones.  This new company was called Mobell.
As cell phones became more popular, different operating technologies were developed around the world, like GSM, CDMA and D-AMPS.  This started to create problems when people traveled and still wanted to use their cell phone.  If it was the wrong technology for the country they were visiting, it would not work.
Mobell started to specialize in providing cell phone rental for international travelers visiting countries where their own cell phones would not work.
Mobell expanded with a branch in New York - called Mobal Communications, as well as a branch in Tokyo.
In July 2008 Mobal Japan opened up a  in Tokyo   s Narita International Airport. Located by Departures in Narita   s Terminal 1, the counter provides flexible mobile communication solutions for business travellers and tourists alike.
When satellite phones became commercially available, Mobal added these to their product range, allowing travelers to remote locations or in  to still keep in contact. These advances have led to journalists and reporters being able to communicate even  or areas where standard cell phones won't work.
Today Mobal continue to focus on selling international phones to travelers, satellite phones to remote travelers and offer a range of services to provide both holiday makers and business travelers the ability to communicate while abroad.
Mobal has now expanded its product base into offering a low cost, no contract cell phone service for Americans.   plans start at just $9.99 with $15 Free inclusive call allowance a month.