Wendell Mitchell has been endorsed by the following organizations:
For more 2010 campaign information, visit 
Senator Mitchell is a conservative Democrat who is known for working across party lines to build better schools, recruit industry, and fund important projects in his district.   In 2007, Mitchell   s colleagues in the Senate voted him to the position of Deputy President Pro Tempore, an important role in guiding the future of our state. His seniority in the Alabama Senate has made him one of the state   s most effective lawmakers.
Senator Mitchell is chairman of the standing committee on Governmental Affairs in the Senate and chairman of the Joint House-Senate Committee on Energy.   He also serves as a voting member of every Senate committee by virtue of his position as Deputy President Pro Tempore.
Mitchell earned a bachelor   s degree from Auburn University and a law degree from the University of Alabama. He is the past Dean of Jones Law School at  and is still active as a Professor of Law at the institution.
A champion for economic development, Wendell Mitchell has used his experience to create new job opportunities in our area. His efforts include helping land new industries such as Hyundai and SMART, as well as providing assistance to keep existing businesses growing.
As Senator for District 30, Mitchell has also fought for and won more than $36 million in funding for local projects that improve our community. These include projects such as a new vocational wing at , the new Health and Fitness Center in Prattville, , the  in Troy, a new baseball complex in Brantley, and equipment for various local fire departments.
Senator Mitchell has been a strong supporter of Troy University and Lurleen B Wallace Community College, which institutions are in his district, as well as being a champion for all educational programs throughout the six counties he represents.
He led the fight to bring prescription drug relief to seniors and to make sure that dollars for education aren   t spent on non-education items.   Mitchell also authored the  to protect the free exercise of religion and sponsored legislation that required the teaching of the Biblical account of human creation wherever evolution is taught.