While different casinos offer different poker variants, the most popular poker games offered in U.S. casinos include:
Casinos offer poker in ring game (cash game or live-action game) and tournament formats.
Most casinos manage table seating on a first-come, first-served basis. During peak periods, there may be long waiting lists for poker seats. Players can normally be on multiple waiting lists (for different types of games and money amounts). In some rooms, players can phone in to get a place on the list, and it will be held for some set amount of time. Players on the list can similarly inform the manager that they will be dining, and their places on the list will be held until they return.
Chips are the primary currency of the game. These can be purchased from the casino employee dealing the game or from cashiers at windows found around the casino.  Most casinos employ chip runners, who sell chips to players. Some public cardrooms will not allow players to buy chips from each other at the table.  Some houses allow cash to play; some only allow $100 notes.
Public card rooms typically charge a fee for conducting the game.  The ''rake'' is the scaled commission fees taken by a casino operating a poker game. This fee structure is common in low-stakes cash games. For ring games, it is generally 5-10% of each poker hand, up to a predetermined maximum amount, such as 3% up to $3.00.  This fee is sometimes referred to as the "drop" since the dealer will drop the rake into a container at the table.  In California, rakes based on the size of the pot are not legal, so a fixed per-hand drop is assessed based on the betting limits at the table.  
The casino may alternatively charge an hourly rate for renting a seat.  This fee is referred to a time fee, or simply "time."  Time fees might be combined with a rake, but that is not common.  Time fees are more common in mid or high stakes games.  
For tournaments, the fee might be 10% of the buy-in, but can vary widely.  The fee might or might not be spelled out clearly. Generally, a tournament will be advertised as "buy-in amount+fee". For example, "$100+$10" would have $100 going to the prize pool and an additional $10 going to the house as the fee for a total of $110 cost to the player.
Poker is a player versus player game  (unlike blackjack or roulette) and the house has no interest in the money wagered.  The rake, drop, or time fees provide the house's revenue.
Aside from the particular rules of gameplay, some common rules in U.S. public cardrooms  include:
In many cardrooms, the rules in effect at a particular table can be varied if the players at the table give unanimous consent to the change (for example, whether or not to allow straddling at a table), or alternatively may dispense with certain rules on a case-by-case basis provided no player objects to the dispensation (for example, to allow one player to sell or give chips to another).  Depending on the cardroom (or even on the particular dealer), some rules (such as the "show one show all" rule) might not be enforced unless a player requests enforcement.
The authority to operate public cardrooms in the U.S. is primarily prescribed by state laws, with some Federal laws covering tribal gaming. States usually limit public poker cardrooms to casinos and parimutuel betting facilities (e.g., horse tracks, greyhound tracks, off-track betting (OTB) facilities, and Jai Alai frontons) or tribal reservations.
Local laws may limit the type or nature of poker games offered in public cardrooms. For example, North Dakota has a limitation of $25 per individual hand, game or event. In Montana the maximum size of a won pot is $300. Florida requires that in limit games, all bets be no more than $5, while in no-limit games the maximum buyin is $100. In Florida, poker tournaments are exempted from the betting structure rules and may use any betting structure the cardroom wishes. Tournament formats are used to circumvent gambling rules in other states as well.  Unlike some other forms of gambling, tribal gaming may be subject to state laws governing poker.