The '''Volkswagen D24 engine''' is a 2.4&nbsp;litre inline-six cylinder (R6/I6), naturally aspirated diesel engine, formerly manufactured by Volkswagen Group from 1978 to 1995.ETKA
Subsequent forced induction variants of this engine were also available as the '''Volkswagen D24T engine''' with a turbocharger, and a turbo intercooled version, the '''Volkswagen D24TIC engine'''.  These turbocharged variants resulted in higher power and torque outputs.
All variants (naturally aspirated and forced induction) displace  from a cylinder bore of , and a piston stroke of .  Its inline six cylinder block is constructed from grey cast iron, and has seven main bearings to support the die-forged steel crossplane crankshaft.  The cast aluminium alloy cylinder head contains two valves per cylinder each with two concentric valve springs, and shim-adjustable bucket tappets.  The valves are opened via a timing belt-driven single overhead camshaft (SOHC), and the combustion chamber compression ratio is 22.0:1.
Attached to the cylinder head is a cast aluminium alloy intake manifold on one side, and two cast iron exhaust manifolds on the other (one manifold for three cylinders).  The fuel system uses a Bosch mechanical distributor-type injection pump which feeds indirect fuel injection into a remote whirl pre-combustion chamber.
The initially available variant of the D24 produced a DIN-rated motive power output of  at 4,000&nbsp;revolutions per minute (rpm); and it generated a torque turning force of  at 2,800&nbsp;rpm.  Subsequent minor evolutions and revisions resulted in differing power and torque ratings.
The D24 was fitted in the Volkswagen LT range from Volkswagen Commercial Vehicles, with factory production from August 1978 to December 1995.  Specific dates of the variants - CP: 08/78-11/82, DW: 12/82-07/92, 1S: 08/88-07/92, ACT: 08/92-12/95.
The D24 was also found in a number of Volvo Cars - specifically the 240, 740, and 940 and was coupled to Volvo ZF, AW, M45, M46 (overdrive) or M47 transmissions.
The D24 also found use in military vehicle applications. It was used in the early variants of the Steyr-Daimler-Puch Pinzgauer High Mobility All-Terrain Vehicle, with current Pinzgauers being manufactured with the turbocharged variant - the D24T.
In service, the unit proved to be a somewhat mixed bag; some owners reported excellent reliability and long engine lives, others complained of overheating, frequent blowing of head gaskets, cylinder head cracks, premature wear of the bottom and top end bearings, low oil pressure etc.
A poorly maintained cooling system could also lead to overheating and, especially with the higher stressed turbo engines, head gasket problems.
The camshaft drive belt also required changing at the recommended intervals, which was a pretty involved job, not least because of poor access in the under-floor engined LT vans, and the necessity of special (and expensive) locking tools to carry out the replacement.
The top end also featured adjustable tappets using the bucket and shim arrangement, and required checking every , although later (1990   ) models had self-adjusting hydraulic tappets.
In many cases however, engines that have been looked after properly and treated with mechanical sympathy (this engine is particularly sensitive to being thrashed from cold, it is important to go gently until warmed up, and to avoid short journeys which will exacerbate rapid engine wear) have been known to clock up 500 000 - 600 000 miles