Roy Mitchell-Cardenas is the youngest child of John Eldon Mitchell and Diana Gloria Cardenas de Mitchell, born on July 25, 1977 in Houston, Texas, United States of America. When he was two years old, his family moved from Houston to McAllen, on the Mexican-American border, where his father began to teach him how to play guitar at the age of six. Roy added drums to his musical arsenal soon thereafter. He attended Milam Elementary, Our Lady of Sorrows (OLS) Catholic School, and Memorial High School. It was at OLS that Mitchell-Cardenas met Raul Castillo, Robert Vleck, and Nick Trevino, with whom he began a popular underground punk group called IPM (Influential Phecal Material). After IPM, Roy, along with Robert Vleck, joined Steve Salinas and Dennis Parker to form the funk punk outfit Jive. Many bands followed during these years in the Rio Grande Valley, e.g., hardcore band Confused, jam band Atreyu's Ensemble, acoustic band Roadside Prophets, noise band Otis and funk band Word.
Mitchell-Cardenas moved to New Orleans, Louisiana when he was eighteen to attend Loyola University New Orleans, where he studied music, philosophy, and classics. His keen interest in jazz flourished in its birthplace, and on a break from school in 1997, he acquired his first upright bass in Reynosa, Mexico. Mitchell-Cardenas met Paul Meany and Adam LaClave in New Orleans and later joined their group Earthsuit in 1998 after a semester of study at University of North Texas, where he studied bass with John Adams. After 4 years of touring with Earthsuit, the band beginning to break up, Roy left the music business and moved back to McAllen to complete his degree. 
While completing his undergraduate work in English at The University of Texas-Pan American (UTPA) (2002   2004), Mitchell-Cardenas played in various jazz, latin jazz, funk, and salsa ensembles. He also reunited with a David "Meshach" Jackson, a long-time friend from Baton Rouge, whose album he would produce and co-write in later (Meshach Jackson - Experiments(in)Drowning(ep) - 2006). It was at UTPA that Roy began writing short stories, and compiling material for his first novel. He is currently searching for a way to publish his books. Many of his stories have been posted on his blog. After receiving his Bachelor of Arts (B.A.) in English, Roy attended St. Thomas University (Florida) School of Law in Miami; however, he decided to quit in order to take a chance at success with Mutemath.
In response to the redundant questions on bass playing Mitchell-Cardenas got on the road with Mutemath, he started a free video blog for short bass lessons. These lessons cover technique, tricks, tips, and theory ranging from funk, jazz, latin, and rock playing.