Absolute Poker was established in 2003, it is licensed by the Kahnawake Gaming Commission.
In September 2007, Absolute Poker began defending itself following accusations made by members of several Internet forums that the online poker room has a "superuser" account which allows one player to read the hole cards of another during a game.  By October, widespread Internet allegations of cheating led to the Kahnawake Gaming Commission beginning an investigation.
Although allegations had been made about several accounts, one of the most remarkable pieces of evidence was a complete history of a tournament which was won by a player called "POTRIPPER". This history was far more complete than normal; it included all hidden hole cards for all of the players at the table, and the IP addresses of players and third-party observers who were watching the game via the internet. It was sent out, perhaps by accident, when a player complained about suspicious play. Reviewing the data, well-known mathematician and gaming expert Michael Shackleford said:
Shackleford subsequently blacklisted Absolute Poker on his gaming related website.
On October 19, an unofficial source within Absolute Poker claimed that an employee had hacked the system to "prove a point".  On October 21, Absolute released an official statement:
In November 2007, Absolute issued an interim statement claiming the employee cheating had taken place over a period of forty days and that the cardroom was refunding $1.6 million to affected players.  The Kahnawake Gaming Commission issued its report on the incident in January 2008.  Among other consequences, Absolute Poker was fined $500,000.
The Quebec provincial police opened an investigation into the ongoing matter.
Founded in 2001, UltimateBet is licensed by the Kahnawake Gaming Commission..
Once a year, UltimateBet hosts a live tournament, the Aruba Poker Classic, which was a World Poker Tour event for the first four seasons of the show.  In 2005, Freddy Deeb won the event, claiming the $1,000,000 prize.  Prior winners were Eric Brenes in 2004, Erick Lindgren in 2003, and Juha Helppi in 2002.  The tournament in 2008 is a $5,000 buy in event with a guaranteed $1 million top prize.  
Spokespeople for UltimateBet have included professional poker players Phil Hellmuth and Annie Duke, as well as actress-turned-poker player Tiffany Michelle.
Like other online poker rooms, UltimateBet also offers a .net play-money-only cardroom.
UltimateBet offers Texas hold 'em, Omaha high and high low, seven card stud high and high low. Mixed games tables are also offered (HO, HOSE, HORSE).
Prior to the passage of the Unlawful Internet Gambling Enforcement Act of 2006, the software parent company of the cardroom, Excapsa Software was traded on the London Stock Exchange as XCP.L. In October 2006, the company announced it was selling its assets to a private company and moving to delist itself from the stock exchange. The legality of the deal was immediately questioned because most of the payment would take place after the act became law.
The company sponsors the poker television series ''Poker2Nite'', hosted by professional poker player Joe Sebok and radio host Scott Huff.
UltimateBet had a cheating scandal similar in nature to that of Absolute Poker.  In May 2008, the company released a statement about the scandal, claiming that cheating had taken place from March 2006 to December 2007. However, in a later statement they confirmed that the cheating had begun at the start of 2005:
We have also confirmed that the cheating dates back further than we initially believed.   We can now confirm that the cheating began in January 2005, long before Tokwiro Enterprises ENRG acquired UltimateBet from the previous ownership.
The company claimed the cheating was perpetrated by employees of the former owners, Excapsa Software.  According to the company, the fraudulent activity was traced to unauthorized software code that transferred hole-card information of other players to the perpetrators during play.  UltimateBet stated it had removed the cheating software as of February 2008 and began issuing refunds to affected players.
On September 29, 2008, the Kahnawake Gaming Commission stated it had found clear and convincing evidence to support a conclusion that between the approximate dates of May 2004 to January 2008, Russ Hamilton was the main person responsible for, and benefiting from, multiple cheating incidents at Ultimate Bet.