The region of the Beagle Channel, explored by Robert FitzRoy eighteen-thirties, was one of the last ones to be colonized by Chile and Argentina. The cold weather, the long distances from other inhabited regions and the shortage of transport and subsistence kept it far from the governmental task.
In the maps exhibited in this page it is possible to appreciate the lacking knowledge of the geography by navigators and explorers of the zone and also the statesmen who had to decide on the borders. Nevertheless, when the Boundary treaty of 1881 between Chile and Argentina was signed, in the Beagle Channel zone at least the main islands and waterways were known.
The Beagle Channel Arbitration Court reviewed in-depth the cartography of the zone and stated thatBeagle Channel Arbitration between the Republic of Argentina and the Republic of Chile, :
From 1881 to 1888 show almost all Argentine maps the Picton, Lennox and Nueva islands as Chilean Territories.
All Chilean maps have shown always the islands as Chilean territories, like the map of engineer Alejandro Bertrand showed here. This border line is today valid for both countries.
There were some few dissentient maps in this period, but the Court declared it untrustworthy because of its ''"excentric"'' borderline. (see below).
At the bottom, right, the map bears the inscription in the Library of Congress.
As may be observed, the international boundary is traced along the centre of the Beagle Channel, showing Picton, Nueva and Lennox and all the other islands and islets extending southwards as far as Cape Horn as being under Chilean sovereignty.
In the extreme southern region, the international boundary is traced along the centre of the Beagle Channel and stretches to the south of the Isla de los Estados. Here it shows Picton, Nueva and Lennox Islands and all other islands and islets extending southward as far as Cape Horn as being under Chilean sovereignty.
The relevant sections of the maps are shown on the left side.
The "Mapa orohidrografico" shows the Islands ''"Picton"'' and ''"Nueva"'' as under Argentine und the Island ''"Lennox"'' as under Chilean sovereignty. In contrast, the "Mapa general" shows all disputed islands as Chilean territories.
This and other turnarounds (see below) of Paz Soldans Interpretation of the 1881 Boundary Treaty caused the Arbitral Court to discard his maps from the documentary evidence.
Other maps of Paz Soldan show the disputed islands as Chilean Territories:
In the southern region the international boundary is shown traced through the centre of the Beagle channel, continuing beyond the eastern mouth of the Channel, indicating Picton, Nueva and Lennox Islands and all other islands and islets extending southward as far as Cape Horn as being under Chilean sovereignty
In the course of time became noticeable in Argentina a position that worked continuously towards a new interpretation of the Boundary Treaty. For example, in 1885 appeared a map of Mariano Paz Soldan that continued the perpendicular in the Tierra del Fuego Island forth to the Antarctic, ''<<a fanciful line unrelated to the Treaty basis of division>>'' as stated by the Court of Arbitration. In 1891, the Argentine Government created an "International Boundaries Office" at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and in 1893 issued other decree providing that works on national geography already published should not be considered as officially approved unless accompanied by a "special statement" from the Department of Foreign Affairs.
By the review of the cartography, the tribunal refused the validity of 3 in Argentina and 1 in London (by the Argentine Embassy) published maps. The maps are not disponible for now, but the court gave to every refuse a briefly map description (see text on the maps) that allowed us to rebuild the border line as showed at the left side.
In order to decide the vadility of a map the court used following criterion for exclusion:
The refused maps are:
Rafael Santibanez Escobar cited from an article on 25. April 1904 in the newspaper "La Prensa" of Buenos Aires and from an article in May 1904 in the Magazine "Boletin del Centro Naval".
The new name didn't prevail and disappeared into oblivion. The Treaty of Peace and Friendship of 1984 between Chile and Argentina mention (only) the Beagle channel.
Other Europeans maps showing the same zone:
The international boundary shown in the Beagle Channel zone corresponds to the Argentine claim in the area which the arbitral decision of 18 April 1977 put a definitive end. Nueva Island is not shown on the map, and Picton and Lennox Islands are partially shown, coloured as belonging to the Argentine Republic. Nevertheless all the other islands and islets extending southward as far as Cape Horn figure as under Chilean sovereignty.
Curiously in the official Argentine map the geographic nomenclature "OCEANO ATLANTICO SUR" (South Atlantic Ocean) appears inserted to the south of Hoste Island and in the western region of Wollaston and Hermite Islands, in other words more than one degree longitude west of Cape Horn, thus contradicting the (1978) Argentine thesis concerning the ocean toponymy in the region of the extreme south of America, that the Cape Horn was the border between the Pacific and Atlantic Ocean.
The book justifies, as they say, the Argentine claim over the islands. Not only Picton, Nueva, Lennox and all islands east from Cape Horn meridian are Argentine Territories but also the east side of Navarino Island with the Chilean village of Puerto Toro appears under Argentine sovereignty.
The original map is approximately 25&nbsp;cm width and 25&nbsp;cm height and contains the names of the main islands of the conflict with Chile: Picton, Nueva, Lennox and Cape Horn (''Cabo de Hornos'').
In this map all islands south and east of Navarino island appear then under Argentine sovereignty: Picton, Nueva, Lennox, Freycinet, Deceit, Wollaston, Hall, Cape Horn, Hermite, Herschel, Gratil, Grevy, Bayly, Augustus, Snipe, Terhalten, Jerdam, etc. At that time Argentina requested Chilean support at the TIAR against the United Kingdom.
1983, after the war, Argentina issued a postage stamp to commemorate ''"the first"'' reconquest of the Falkland Islands. The stamps shows explicit the Cape Horn Island with an Argentine label.
The contrast could hardly be starker between the multiple Argentine views and the sole Chilean view of the 1881 Boundary Treaty. The interpretation of the 1881 Boundary Treaty seems to have challenged to the limit the fantasy and intelligence of the Argentine cartography as of 1888, for they found more than 9 different border lines from the same text. Anyway, in his ''Report and Decision'' on 18 April 1977  the Court of Arbitration judged:
Argentine scientists Carlos Escude and Andres Cisneros in ''Historia general de las relaciones exteriores de la Republica Argentina'' give a resume of the Boundary Treaty of 1881: 
The same opinion shares the authors Karl Hernekamp, Annegret I. Haffa and Andrea Wagner in their works mentioned in the reference.
In 1904 the Argentine government solicited to the Chilean government a common demarcation of the border line in the Beagle Channel.