Phone novels started out primarily read and authored by young women on the subject of romantic fiction such as relationships, lovers, rape, love triangles, and pregnancy. However, mobile phone novels are gaining worldwide popularity on broader subjects. Rather than appearing in printed form, the literature is typically sent directly to the reader via SMS text message, chapter by chapter. Japanese ethos of the Internet regarding mobile phone novels are dominated by false names and forged identities.  Therefore, identities of the Japanese authors of mobile phone novels are rarely disclosed.  "Net transvestites" are of the most extreme play actors of the sort.
Cell phone novels are downloaded in short installments and run on handsets as Java-based applications on a mobile phone. Cell phone novels often appear in three different formats: WMLD, JAVA and TXT. Maho i-Land is the largest cell phone novel site that carries more than a million titles, mainly novice writers, all which are available for free. Maho iLand provides templates for blogs and homepages.  It is visited 3.5 billion times each month.  In 2007, 98 cell phone novels were published into books.  "Love Sky" is a popular phone novel with approximately 12 million views on-line, written by "Mika", that was not only published but turned into a movie.http://www.newyorker.com/reporting/2008/12/22/081222fa_fact_goodyear
Five out of the ten best selling novels in Japan in 2007 were originally cell phone novels.
The first cell phone novel was    published    in Japan in 2003 by a Tokyo man in his mid-thirties who calls himself "Yoshi". His first cell phone novel was called ''Deep Love'', the story of a teenager engaged in "subsidized dating" (enjo kosai)  in Tokyo and contracting AIDS. It became so popular that it was published as an actual book, with 2.6 million copies sold in Japan, then spun off into a television series, a manga, and a movie. The cell phone novel became a hit mainly through word of mouth and gradually started to gain traction in Taiwan, China, and South Korea among young adults.  In Japan, several sites offer large prizes to authors (up to $100,000 US) and purchase the publishing rights to the novels.
The movement also became popular in Europe and Africa. In Europe it started in about 2007, promoted by people like Oliver Bendel and Wolfgang Hohlbein, and publishers such as Cosmoblonde or Blackbetty Mobilmedia. Teenagers in South Africa have been downloading an m-novel called Kontax - a novel specifically written for mobile phones. The top cell phone novel in the United States, a novel called Secondhand Memories that can be viewed on Textnovel,http://www.textnovel.com has been viewed more than 30,000 times.
Although Japan was the original birthplace of the cell phone novel, the phenomenon soon moved to other parts of East Asia, and many of the online writers are university students. These writers understand what narratives will attract young readers, incorporating emergent events or trendy elements from teen culture into their stories.
The cell phone novel is changing reading habits; readers no longer need to physically go to a bookshop and purchase a book. They can go online using their cell phone, download a novel, and read it on their personal mobile phone anywhere, any time they wish. Similar to the e-book, its mobility and convenience saves time.