The '''Motorola Bag Phone''' was a transportable cellular telephone manufactured by Motorola, inc. from 1992 to 2000.
Motorola introduced their line of powerful, rugged cell phones in 1992. These phones put out 3 watts of power (as opposed to 0.6 watts that today's cell phones output) which made them popular for truckers, boaters, and people in rural areas. Because of their durability, many of these phones are still in working order today.
The Bag Phones are a derivative of the Motorola 4500X, 4800X, and 5000X that proved popular in Europe, as well the American version, the Motorola "Tough Talker". These phones featured the handset attached to an extremely large and heavy, but durable metal case containing the transceiver and battery pack. By reducing the size and weight of the transceiver and battery pack, and introducing more fashionable leather bags in which to contain them, Motorola was able to make them more marketable to the average cellular phone consumer, and hence the Bag Phone.
The phones consist of a handset with a black & white LCD display with InUse (indicating that a call is in progress), NoSvc (cannot receive a cellular signal and is unable to make or receive calls), and Roam (accessing a cellular system other than your home system) indicators, a numeric keypad with other buttons for different functions (depending on the model), and a separate speaker for the ringer and hands-free use. This plugs into the transceiver (the heart of the phone), which plugged into that is a "rubber duck" antenna, and the power supply connector which plugs into a 12 volt automotive outlet. (A 12 volt lead-acid battery that connects to the power supply, providing approximately 2 hours of talk time and 48 hours of standby time, was also available.) All of these parts are conveniently put together in a leather case specially designed for Motorola Bag Phones by Caseworks, inc. of Chicago. These phones can also be permanently installed in a car.
The majority of Bag Phone models operated on the AMPS network. During the late 90s, though, Motorola produced a few Special Edition digital Bag Phones. They were dual mode AMPS/TDMA phones marketed as the "Digital Concert Series." Because both the AMPS and TDMA networks are extinct as of mid 2009 , the service life of all Motorola Bag Phones have come to end, and they now serve only as a collector's item.
The original Motorola Bag Phone has been succeeded by Motorola's M-Series, which adds support for today's cellular networks, and adds the basic features of todays cell phones.
Although they are technically all similar, Motorola produced many different handset styles of the bag phone. These can usually be determined by the model number on the underside of the handset (SCN**** on most handsets). Each type of handset also had its own transceiver (usually SUN****). Random handsets can be used with random transceivers, but some mismatches may result in unusable functions. For example, plugging a 4500 handset into a 3 Button transceiver will result in the Up/Down, one-touch, VOL and STO buttons to be either unusable or perform a totally different function. The handset types are as follows:
Some Motorola 480's and Digital Concert phones, as well as all Motorola SCN2500A 2900, 2900 Gold Series, 2950 Special Edition, and 2800DLD phones were made with a special color LCD alphanumeric display. The color LCD display is back-lit using a small incandescent light bulb instead of the usual green LED lights for the b/w screens. This bulb uses more power than the LEDs, which is a negative for battery users. The incandescent bulb is also prone to burning out, or breaking in heavy use. The incandescent bulb also heats up the display after a few minutes of use, causing the usually black display background to turn an orange color. Nevertheless, it provides a brighter, easier to read display than the front-lit b/w screens. The downside to the color screen is when the back-light goes out after a few seconds for battery users, the 4 indicators at the bottom of the screen are almost completely invisible.
The color display indicators show up as follows:
Numbers/letters-orange (red on the Digital Concert)
Power (Indicated by a dot on all phones with color displays)-green
InUse-green
NoSvc-red
Roam-yellow
All models of Bag Phones were available with three different styles of bag in which to be contained. The most common bag was a small, flimsy, low-profile bag, with a compartment to the right of the handset in which to contain the transceiver and battery, and a flap that folded over the entire top of the bag and fastened closed with Velcro when not in use. A less common, more upright bag was more sturdy, and featured the handset above the compartment containing the transceiver and battery, with a flap that folded over the top and fastened with Velcro. The highest end bag was known by Motorola's documentation as the "Attache Carry Case", and it was in fact more like a case than a bag, featuring internal cardboard, making it very sturdy. Opening like a suitcase, it featured on the left side of the case the handset, with the transceiver/battery compartment to the right of it (the same configuration as the "flimsy" bag). On the right side of the case was a pocket to hold the user manuals (and any other papers) plus a smaller pocket below it, and a tiny pocket above it. In the center of the case was an elastic loop in which the antenna or a pen could be stored. To close, the Attache case was folded, then zippered. Although it featured the Motorola logo on the side, carriers of Bag Phones with the Attache case such as Sprint Cellular often had their own logo sewn on top.
The 2900 was available only with the Attache Carry Case, and the Meteor was available only with the upright bag.
Image:bagphoneDIGITAL.jpg|Motorola Digital Concert Bag Phone with color LCD display, in upright bag.
Image:Motorola2950.jpg|Motorola 2950 Special Edition Bag Phone, in Attache Carry Case.
Image:Motorola2900BagPhone.JPG|Motorola 2900 Bag Phone with color LCD display, in Attache Carry Case.
Besides the mainstream Bag Phones that were targeted for the North American market, Motorola also produced Bag Phones that run on the GSM 900 network under the '''International Series''' brand name. These phones, targeted mostly for the European market, are largely the same as their AMPS/TDMA counterparts, except the handset is slightly different in form and uses a black and white dot-matrix LCD display. These phones have not quite reached the end of their service life, as the GSM 900 network is still active in many parts of the world, most notably  Europe, the Middle East, Africa, Oceania, and most of Asia.