The mission was proposed in 2001 to reuse the design of the ''Mars Express'' mission. However, some mission characteristics led to design changes: primarily in the areas of thermal control, communications and electrical power. For example, since Mars is approximately twice as far from the Sun as Venus is, the radiant heating of the spacecraft will be four times greater for ''Venus Express'' than ''Mars Express''. Also, the ionizing radiation environment will be harsher. On the other hand, the more intense illumination of the solar panels will result in more generated photovoltaic power. The ''Venus Express'' mission also uses some spare instruments developed for the ''Rosetta'' spacecraft. The mission was proposed by a consortium led by D. Titov (Germany), E. Lellouch (France) and F. Taylor (United Kingdom).  
The launch window for ''Venus Express'' was open from 26 October to 23 November 2005, with the launch initially set for 26 October 4:43 UTC. However, problems with the insulation from the Fregat upper stage led to a two week launch delay to inspect and clear out the small insulation debris that migrated on the spacecraft. It was eventually launched by a Soyuz-FG/Fregat rocket from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan on 9 November 2005 at 03:33:34 UTC into a parking Earth orbit and 1 h 36 min after launch put into its transfer orbit to Venus. A first trajectory correction maneuver was successfully performed on 11 November 2005. It arrived at Venus on 11 April 2006, after approximately 150 days of journey, and fired its main engine between 07:10 and 08:00 Universal Time (UTC) to reduce its velocity so that it could be captured by Venusian gravity into a nine day orbit. The burn was monitored from ESA's Control Centre, ESOC, in Darmstadt, Germany.
Seven further orbit control maneuvers, two with the main engine and five with the thrusters, were required for ''Venus Express'' to reach its final operational 24-hour orbit around Venus.
Venus is the most Earth-like planet in our solar system. Starting out in the early planetary system with similar sizes and chemical compositions, the history of the two planets have diverged in spectacular fashion. It is hoped that the ''Venus Express'' mission can contribute not only to an in-depth understanding of how the Venusian atmosphere is structured, but also to an understanding of the changes that led to the current greenhouse atmospheric conditions. Such an understanding may contribute to the study of climate change in on Earth.
Thorsten Dambeck: '''', MaxPlanckResearch, 4/2009, p.&nbsp;26 - 33