The '''University of Virginia Health System''' is a nationally renowned healthcare provider based in Charlottesville, Virginia and associated with the University of Virginia. The health system includes a medical center, school of medicine and health sciences library. The health system provides inpatient and outpatient care, patient education and medical research and education in Charlottesville and at satellite care locations throughout Virginia, including Albemarle County, Amherst County, Augusta County, Campbell County, Fluvanna County, Louisa County, Nelson County and Orange County.
With a history dating back more than 180 years to the founding of the nation   s 10th medical school, the UVA Health System   s patient care, research and medical education are routinely ranked among the best in the country by U.S. News & World Report and other independent sources.
The UVA Health System   s history can be traced to the founding of the University of Virginia in 1819. At the first meeting of the university   s Board of Visitors in 1819, a School of Medicine was authorized. The School of Medicine     the 10th medical school in the U.S.     officially opened in March 1825 with a single professor, Dr. Robley Dunglison, recruited by Thomas Jefferson to UVA from London.
More than 75 years later, UVA opened its first hospital in March 1901 with 25 beds and three operating rooms. A few months after its opening, the hospital established a training program for nurses. That training program would grow into the UVA School of Nursing, which was formally established in 1956.
Just as medical education has been a part of UVA since its founding, so too has medical literature     the 8,000 books purchased by Jefferson to create the University Library included 710 books on the medical sciences. UVA   s medical literature moved to the UVA Medical School building in 1929. Its current home was dedicated in April 1976. The UVA Health Services Foundation was founded in 1979 to handle billing as well as provide benefits and administrative support to UVA physicians.
Part of the University of Virginia, the University of Virginia Health System consists of five components:
Several UVA Medical Center departments are regularly ranked among the top 50 in the country by U.S. News & World Report. These are the departments that made the magazine   s 2007 rankings:
UVA   s School of Medicine and School of Nursing have also been highly ranked by U.S. News & World Report. In the 2007 rankings, the School of Medicine was ranked 23rd among medical schools for research and 38th among medical schools for primary care.
The School of Nursing   s master   s degree program was ranked 19th in 2007 by U.S. News & World Report, while the magazine ranked two of the school   s specialty programs in the top 10. The School of Nursing   s Clinical Health Specialist program in psychiatric/mental health ranked 5th, while its Clinical Health Specialist program in adult/medical-surgical ranked 6th.
On March 30, 2009, the UVA medical center was named as one of the top 100 hospitals in America for 2008 by the Thomson Reuters.   The index is based upon clinical excellence, operating efficiency and financial health, and patient satisfaction using criteria such as risk-adjusted mortality index, risk-adjusted complications index and risk-adjusted patient safety index. 
In 2006, UVA Medical Center received Magnet Recognition status for its nurses from the American Nurses Credentialing Center. About 4.45 percent of all healthcare organizations in the U.S. have received magnet status. Criteria for the award include quality of nursing care, measures for quality improvement and quality of nursing leadership.
Fifty doctors from UVA Health System were chosen for inclusion in 2006 for the sixth edition of Castle Connolly's ''America   s Top Doctors.'' Nineteen UVA Health System physicians were chosen for a companion listing, ''America   s Top Doctors For Cancer.''
Dr. Thomas A.E. Platts-Mills, FRS is the head of the Division of Allergy and Clinical Immunology .  In 2010, Dr. Platts-Mills was elected as a Fellow of The Royal Society, the first allergist to be named to this select group.
See http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Footnotes for a