As was the case with contemporaries Ratt and Rough Cutt, the group's core - guitarists Joe Floyd and Tommy Asakawa, bassist Rick Bennett and vocalist Parramore McCarty - was made up of San Diego, CA transplants in search of fame and fortune up the coast in L.A.  Adding drummer Liam Jason to the band and initially going under the name Fury, the band soon started to make a name for themselves in the local clubs with their futuristic brand of European influenced heavy metal.
In 1984, the band recorded a 3-song demo, including the anthemic 'Fighting For The Earth', which went into heavy rotation on KMET radio and became a huge hit locally helping turn Warrior into one of the most buzzed about acts around town. Subsequently, the band signed a record deal with MCA Records and Richard Branson's Virgin/10 Records label in Europe, and began to record their debut album with producer Doug Rider at Cherokee Studios and Sunset Sound in L.A..  The rhythm section of Jason and Bennett would be replaced after the sessions were completed with  Black Sheep bassist Bruce Turgon and drummer Jimmy Volpe stepping in.  ''Fighting For The Earth'' was released in 1985 and though not a huge commercial success, the album became an instant favorite among underground metal heads. A short trip to the UK that same year saw Warrior perform at the legendary Marquee Club in London and make an exclusive TV appearance on Channel 4's popular ECT program where the band performed 'Fighting For The Earth' (the band's single and video) and 'Defenders of Creation.'   
Fueled by internal turmoil and record company problems, Warrior split up in early 1987, with vocalist Parramore McCarty briefly fronting Rough Cutt in place of the Quiet Riot bound Paul Shortino and Jimmy Volpe joining Foreplay. Bassist Bruce Turgon would later turn up in Shadow King, featuring Lou Gramm (ex-Foreigner, Black Sheep) and Vivian Campbell (ex-Whitesnake, Dio).  Guitarist Joe Floyd initially teamed up with former Warlord drummer Mark Zonder.  Floyd and Zonder's partnership was to be short-lived, with Zonder joining Fates Warning.  Warrior then continued on with Floyd acquiring the services of bassist Kelly Magee and vocalist Shawn Carvin from the band Wrathborne, along with former Warrior drummer Liam Jason.  This marked the only time in Warrior's History that the band was a four- piece as opposed to their traditional five piece lineup with two guitarists.   A heavier, more physical style of play was evolving from the band...and with Magee and Carvin also contributing to the songwriting it became obvious that a name change to the band was in order.  "Cold Fire" became Warrior's new name.  The band went through several drummers, including Jason, and David Eagle (Oingo Boingo) before finally settling with future Megadeth drummer Nick Menza (ex-Rhoads, The Green). Cold Fire would contribute the song 'Of The Flesh' (with Floyd, Magee, Carvin and Jason) to the ''Rock Climbers-The Hottest of Hollywood'' compilation LP before folding in 1990.  Meanwhile McCarty had been brought in by Warner Bros. to complete the ''Atomic Playboys'' album, a new project put together by former Billy Idol axeman, Steve Stevens.  Released in 1989, the album proved a commercial disappointment and the group disbanded after undertaking a US club tour (which featured McCarty's former Warrior band mate Bruce Turgon on bass). McCarty next formed the short-lived PTM with Hellion guitarist Alan Barlam, bassist Mike Davis (ex-Terriff, Lizzy Borden), and drummer Reynold 'Butch' Carlson (ex-Terriff, Driver, Jag Panzer).  Barlam was let go in favor of Carlson's Driver band mate, Roy Z, who collaborated with McCarty on several new songs which soon sparked the idea of a Warrior reunion.
Come 1991, Floyd and McCarty had put together a new Warrior line-up featuring Roy Z on guitar, bassist Kelly Pattrik (ex-Darren Housholder), and drummer Dave Imondi (ex-Assassin & I, Napoleon).  The band played several shows before Imondi was ousted and replaced by San Diego native Jorge Miguel Palacios (ex-No Alibi).  In 1992, the band cut a 3-song demo at Joe Floyd's Silver Cloud studio consisting of 'Fight Or Fall', 'White Mansions', and the Bruce Turgon-penned 'New Nation', produced by Warren DeMartini of Ratt.  With grunge and alternative rock dominating the musical landscape Stateside, the band caught the attention of German-based indie label Dream Circle, who had previously signed Roy Z's Latin hard rock band, Tribe of Gypsies.  A deal was struck but progress on the album was slow and eventually halted when Z left the fold to concentrate on his own group and work with former Iron Maiden vocalist Bruce Dickinson.  Most of his guitar tracks were erased and eventually re-cut by new arrival Mick Perez (ex-Jones Street).  The album, titled ''Ancient Future'', finally saw the light of day in 1998 with Dream Circle handling Europe, Metal Blade taking care of North America, and Teichiku releasing the album in Japan where it included a bonus track in the form of a ''Fighting For The Earth'' era demo, 'All I Need.'   Warrior were also invited to play Germany's massive Wacken Open Air festival with a line-up that now featured McCarty, Floyd, Perez, bassist Sam, and drummer Dave DuCey. 
In 2001, Warrior returned with ''The Code Of Life'' on Reality Entertainment/Nuclear Blast, the band's first album not to feature Parramore McCarty on vocals who had declined to take part in the recording.  His replacement was Rob Rock (ex-M.A.R.S., Impellitteri, Joshua) who had earlier recorded his solo debut album, ''Rage of Creation'', at Joe Floyd's Silver Cloud studio.  Rock and Floyd were joined by guitarist Mick Perez, bassist Simon Oliver, and drummer Dave DuCey. The album featured a number of notable writing contributions: Former guitarist Roy Z co-wrote the album opener 'Day of Reckoning' while Iron Maiden's Bruce Dickinson, himself a Silver Cloud alumnus, is credited on 'We Are One.'  Dickinson's ''The Chemical Wedding'' touring guitarist, Richard Carrette, co-authored and played lead guitar on 'The Endless Beginning.'  Even though the album earned some of the best reviews in the band's career, ''The Code Of Life'' was not supported with any gigs or touring.
With Rob Rock off tending to his fledgling solo career, Warrior was once again in need of a vocalist for their next album. At the suggestion of the band's co-producer, Warren Croyle, legendary Maltese born singer Marc Storace of label mates Krokus was brought into the fold for 2004's ''The Wars Of Gods And Men''  (Reality Entertainment). Storace flew to Los Angeles where he recorded all his vocal tracks at Floyd's San Fernando Valley studio. Godhead guitarist Jason Miller was tapped to contribute additional lead guitars as Mick Perez had retired from music. The album also marked the debut of new bassist Rob Farr, a band mate of drummer Dave DuCey in National Dust. Again, the album was not supported by any live work and Warrior remained strictly a Joe Floyd studio project. 
In 2008, Floyd once again reunited with original vocalist Parramore McCarty who brought along San Diego guitarist AC Alexander, with Farr and DuCey remaining on board on bass and drums, respectively.  The band played their first live show in nearly a decade in April 2008 in San Diego and announced plans for a new album studio album which has yet to materialize.  As of 2009, Warrior have markedly stepped up their live profile, playing their first show in over a decade for Hollywood Sherriff Productions February 28TH, 2009 at the Key Club on the Sunset Strip for the DC4 record release show. Warrior also played their first European show in over a decade at the prestigious Bang Your Head!!! festival in Germany as well making an appearance at Rocklahoma 2009.