The following are ''&#91;draft&#93;'' Wikipedia guidelines for the use of diagrams and maps in articles.
Diagrams (including charts) and maps are valuable additions to Wikipedia pages when they fulfil these criteria:
Other qualities such as being entertaining, "eye-candy", startling or artistically rendered do not compensate for lacks in the above criteria. Avoid chartjunk.
Such images must adhere to  , like any other. In particular, do not violate   by using all or portions of a diagram or map published in another source.  Instead create a new one, presenting the information germane to the Wikipedia article(s) the image is intended for.
For diagrams of chemical structures, see   for guidance.  &#91;There are probably others that could be pointed to here.&#93;
For maps, where possible use the blank map images available at   when producing new maps. See also the   and its talk page.
It is preferable that diagrams and maps be saved in the SVG file format. This is an open standard for vector image files. If saving the image as a raster graphic, the PNG file format is generally preferred, though JPEG is acceptable. Very simple animations can be saved in the GIF file format. Other formats are strongly deprecated.
Upload your finished image to , giving the image an appropriate, descripive filename that can be understood at a glance.  Categorize it appropriately (it may be helpful to look at the pages of other, similar diagram or map images in Commons to see how they are categorized).
When possible, use   rather than diagrams to present simple tabluar data, and use   to produce formulas.
Avoid making a diagram or map so dense that it presents a readability or comprehensibilty problem.  On the other hand, diagrams should avoid the inclusion of big areas of empty, non-informative space inside the image.
Maps should present necessary geographic details, not every possible detail.  The level of detail on a map should be selected so as to make the map useful to experts familiar with the subject, and also to users who are not at all familiar with it. Some information that an expert may not deem necessary might be necessary to others.  For example, those with a geographical knowledge of Europe may not need to have neighbouring countries marked on a map of France, although this feature could be useful to those unfamiliar with the continent.
Maps showing a small geographic area should also have an inset locator map, locating that small geographic area in the context of a larger area, such as a continent or island chain.  ''For example, see  .''
Avoid blank space in the image around its main content to give the illusion of a margin around the image. Wikipedia's image displaying code already handles spacing of images in relation to text and other images.  A thin black border may be desirable as an element of the image itself, however, especially if the image is predominantly white or near-white.
The Wikimedia renderer only knows specific, free fonts, a list of which can be found  . Other, non-free fonts such as Arial, Verdana, Helvetica etc. are replaced by a similar one.
Diagrams and maps should not include the image title (e.g. "Map of Azerbaijan", "Timeline of Events", etc.) ''in'' the image itself. The title is given in the article with the image caption feature and in the image filename, so having the title inside the image is redundant. 
In general, labels of items within the diagram or map should use headline style, in which most words are capitalized. To quote the ''Chicago Manual of Style'', 14th Edition: 
In maps, bodies of water such as rivers, lakes, and oceans should be labeled in ''italics''.  Many map makers use a dark blue for the font. ''&#91;More recommendations are needed. Should capital cities be bold?  Regions in Small Caps?  What about use of letter and word spacing?  Serif font?  Etc.&#93;''
When inserting an image into an article, consider using the  template to include a legend in the image caption.
When considering what colors to use in diagrams and maps, try to use colors that are subtle and pleasant rather than bold and garish. Also, try to avoid using colors in a way that would cause difficulty for those with color blindness or black-and-white monitors.  Try viewing your image in greyscale to see if neighboring or overlapping colors could be indistinguishable to some.
The following colors are recommended for use in creating basic maps. 
Like articles, all maps and diagrams should include a complete set of references (see  ).  For maps, the image page should also include information on the map projection.
Except for the largest maps, maps should include a scale.