I'm beating my head against the wall. I want to come up with a simple script that will convert latitude and longitude coordinates to x,y coordinates on a given map in a Robinson projection of a given width with a given central meridian. Ideally this would be done in Actionscript but if I had it in any sort of code or pseudocode that would be fine (which is why I am asking here and not the computing desk   it is not a computational difficulty, it is a conceptual one. Once I have an idea of what I should be doing conceptually it will be trivial to code it). 
There are a few map projection projects out there but they are all extremely complicated since they are designed for exporting ALL projections; I _just_ want Robinson. I've read the article and I grok that it's about a lookup table but I still have no idea how I'm supposed to convert that table into x,y coordinates with a given map. 
Can anybody help? I just want instructions on the level of "take your number from column one, multiply it by something in column two, then do something else, do something with the central meridian and the width, and presto-chango you have x and y coordinates." I'm having trouble figuring out how to ''use'' the table. --  00:18, 9 November 2007 (UTC)
The general method will be to get a formula that maps the points from one projection to the other.  THen you invert the formula so that it maps the points in the reverse direction.  Then scan all the points on your new map, say from top left to right and then going down in a raster pattern, use the formula to get a new coordinate to look up the original map.  If the coordinates are on the map copy the pixel.  If its off the map stick in a "missing data " colour - perhaps white or blue.   01:19, 9 November 2007 (UTC)
If you're born mute due to brain damage rather than throat/vocal cord damage, as an infant, do you still cry? Assuming you can hear, what happens when you learn to understand language? Do you merely stop crying but not be able to communicate until someone teaches you sign language? In fact, is it even possible to be mute but not deaf as a result of brain damage? Or would it have to be throat/mouth damage?   |   02:06, 9 November 2007 (UTC)
Once fibers get in the lung, they can't be removed., sometimes leading to cancer. When re-modeling a house, asbestos that can't be removed is encapsulated with an impenetrable material. Why can't micro-encapsulization, biological or chemical, be used likewise to neutralize fibers in situ? Wiki articles on microen. and on 'self-healing' were good.  Comments?     Preceding   comment added by   ( ) 02:11, 9 November 2007 (UTC) 
Time recently has been going by so freaking fast. I worship seconds now.   02:27, 9 November 2007 (UTC)
Look at this  http://www.nh3tech.org/abs.html
Since absorption refrigerator uses heat to chill things down and since CPU generates a hot of heat. Why isn't absorption refrigerator uses the CPU heat to cool down hot CPUs?   04:15, 9 November 2007 (UTC)
If the brain of a dinosaur or other prehistoric organism were discovered, perfectly preserved so as to be in the same state as moments after its death, what facts about its behaviour, intelligence, memory capacity, etc. would neuroscientists & paleontologist be able to confidently infer from the brain & nothing else.
Hypothetically-speaking; please disregard whether such a brain could possibly be found in reality.
How would someone find out about the kind of society that existed among prehistoric humans 50,000 years ago?  I am not asking what the answer actually is but rather how you would find the information. I do not mean by like research but how would like scientists find out this information. Any help would be appreciated.     Preceding   comment added by   ( ) 05:16, 9 November 2007 (UTC) 
According to this
Does that mean I can buy a 65 watt solar panel from First Solar for only $78 dollars??? 
5kW worth of Solar Panels for only $6000 + installation cost?
Can two gyroscopes spinning in opposite directions counteract each other?     Preceding   comment added by   ( ) 07:05, 9 November 2007 (UTC) 
I looked at a table on your website which states the LEL and the UEL of various gases. How do I know that the information seen on your website is correct? Is this ever checked or is this just something that someone put together?
I'm keen to use your website but only if the information has been verified and is correct.
Thank you.
Mr Sangster.     Preceding   comment added by   (       ) 10:38, 9 November 2007 (UTC) 
The R.A. El-Zein study says it will cause chromosomal abberations. I'm no biologist and dont really understand these things, but does this just refer to normal body cells and the only problem is that it could possibly cause cancer, or will it mutate gamete cells as well and these mutations passed on to offspring... thank you   14:43, 9 November 2007 (UTC)
If you were to cook beef in an oxygen-free atmosphere, would it turn brown?       20:08, 9 November 2007 (UTC)
A person who worked with hearing impaired people remarked at a seminar recently that there was such a thing as what she termed "ear music," if I recall the term correctly. I haven't found it under similar terms or this, but anyway, she said that it was sounds, almost like phantom limb of the ear, that the nerve endings pick up when it's really quiet that aren't there, as if a low radio were playing in another room or something. I asked specifically if tis might be hypnagogia, and she said this was something different, it wasn't just when one was nearly asleep.
This isn't a joke, I am truly wondering why creatures with the same basic physiology have different colored meat. Respectfully, curious     Preceding   comment added by   ( ) 21:00, 9 November 2007 (UTC) 