CCI has  including Level I ("Open dormitories with a secure perimeter") housing; Level II ("Open dormitories with secure perimeter fences and armed coverage") housing; Level IV ("Cells, fenced or walled perimeters, electronic security, more staff and armed officers both inside and outside the installation") housing; a Security Housing Unit (SHU, which is "the most secure area within a Level IV prison designed to provide maximum coverage"); and a Reception Center (RC) which "provides short term housing to process, classify and evaluate incoming inmates." California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation.  Oct 15, 2007. As of Fiscal Year 2006/2007, CCI had 2,003 staff and an annual budget of $168 million.  As of September 2007, it had a design capacity of 2,785 but a total institution population of 5,806, for an occupancy rate of 208.5 percent.California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation. 
The original California Institution for Women, the first women   s facility in California, opened on the site of what is now CCI in 1932. It was sometimes referred to as "Tehachapi", as in the 1940s films ''Maltese Falcon'' and ''Double Indemnity''. The institution was "run for many years independently from the correctional system for men" but beginning in 1944 was gradually brought under the control of the California Department of Corrections. After the Kern County earthquake of July 21, 1952, "made the brick dormitories unsafe," the institution was closed and the 417 prisoners were sent to the new California Institution for Women in Corona.
The prison was rebuilt and reopened in 1954 as CCI, an all-men's prison. In 1985-1986, maximum and medium security facilities were added to it.  The Southern Maximum Security Complex at Tehachapi was "touted as the most advanced in the country," but was also "called a 'white elephant' and a 'Cadillac' because it took so long to build and cost so much."
Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger "directed inmate firefighters and staff from the California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation," including those from CCI, to help fight the October 2007 California wildfires.
It shows a caretaker physically abusing two mentally handicapped men.
The victim, described as a 38-year-old man with the mental capabilities of a 2-year-old, is hit repeatedly last April inside a bathroom Police alleged the abuser is the victim's caregiver, a 22-year-old facing a number of charges, including felony false imprisonment, for allegedly blocking the door as the victim tried to leave.
Shooting the video, police alleged.
Also on the cell phone was another video, showing a second victim -- a 38-year-old man with the mental capabilities of a toddler.
The video shows him being hit numerous times while the suspects laugh.
Police learned of the video after Rama sold his cell phone to another employee, who later discovered the videos and reported the incidents to facility officials.
Solis was arrested last week on felony false imprisonment and misdemeanor dependent abuse charges.
He pleaded not guilty last week and has been released on $25,000 bail.