Rick Jones first appeared in ''The Incredible Hulk'' #1, as a sidekick to the Incredible Hulk. Jones has also appeared as a sidekick to Captain America, Captain Marvel (Mar-Vell), Rom the Spaceknight, and Captain Marvel (Genis).
Rick Jones was born in Scarsdale, Arizona. He lost his parents at a young age and grew up at an orphanage. He gains notoriety when he accepts a dare to drive out to a bomb testing ground in New Mexico. As luck would have it, the gamma bomb designed by Dr. Bruce Banner is being tested. Dr. Banner pushes Rick into a protective trench, saving his life but absorbing the gamma rays that first transform him into the Hulk. Rick then becomes the sole confidant of the Hulk's true identity.
Rick's guilt over causing the incident (and lack of any other place to go) leads him to stay close to Dr. Banner and his alter ego, spending some time as the Hulk's sidekick. For a time, he even gains mental control over the Hulk. Eventually the dangerous unpredictability of the Hulk forces Rick to keep his distance. Rick forms the Teen Brigade, a loose network of teenagers with ham radios throughout the United States. The first Teen Brigade played a role in the origin of the Avengers, because it was the tampering of a radio transmission the Brigade intended to send to the Fantastic Four that brought the original Avengers (Iron Man, Ant-Man, Wasp, and Thor) together to fight the Hulk as part of a plan by Loki. Loki's plan backfires and the Avengers are formed.
After the Hulk's departure from the team, Rick remains close to the Avengers, earning a position as an honorary Avenger. He became close to the recently revived Captain America although his guilt leads him to leave the Avengers and seek out Banner and the Hulk for a time. Captain America rescues Rick from one of the Hulk's rampages, and Rick becomes Captain America's sidekick. Rick briefly takes the title and uniform of Bucky, Cap's long-dead partner. This was on Jones' own insistence: Cap continues to have guilty objections, noting that others have lost partners and it was time to move on. Rick's brief time as Bucky gave him the training to survive around superheroes to this day.
Shortly after his split with Captain America, Rick joined with the Kree Captain Marvel when he finds himself drawn to the mystical Nega-Bands. Donning the Bands, he is immediately linked to Captain Marvel. Once joined, one of the two remains in a protective bubble in the Negative Zone. After either the person not in the negative zone strikes the Nega-Bands together or a certain amount of time passes, the two switch places.
Rick and Mar-Vell play a critical part in the Kree-Skrull War. Rick is freed from the Negative Zone through a portal in the Fantastic Four headquarters. Mar-Vell is released from the Negative Zone while Rick is still in the regular world without the use of the Nega-Bands. The bond between the two is broken. At the height of the conflict, the Kree Supreme Intelligence briefly unleashes the Destiny Force from within Rick. Rick uses his newfound ability to summon images of various Golden Age heroes. While at full power, Rick single-handedly stops both the Kree and Skrull fleets long enough to put an end to the conflict. Injuries that Rick sustains lead Mar-Vell to willingly bond with Rick in order to save his life. Shortly after this the Captain Marvel series was re-launched and we found that Rick wasn't able to contain the energy of Mar-Vell. He was then bombarded with photonic energy which saved him and enabled him to contain Mar-Vell safely. A consequence of this was that Mar-Vell gained the ability to absorb energy in addition to the nega-band energies to boost his strength and could fly with the photonic energy now.
Rick and Mar-Vell serve as a duo for several years while Rick pursues his musical career and love life. Eventually, the two are again freed from their bond while aiding the Avengers against the Super-Adaptoid. Rick then parts company with Mar-Vell. Rick begins to spend his time with the Hulk again and briefly forms a new Teen Brigade, after which Rick finds himself again teamed with Mar-Vell, though not merged with him as they deal with a legacy left by the Mad Titan Thanos. Sometime after, Mar-Vell dies of cancer that he received when he was exposed to a deadly nerve gas stolen by the villain Nitro. Note: Mar-Vell collapsed from the gas and was comatose until he was given an antidote to the gas. However despite the antidote, Mar-Vell still developed cancer and there was some momentary concern that the link Rick shared with him could have caused himself to contract the condition. Rick was at Mar-Vell's bedside when he died.
After Mar-Vell's death, Rick began to team with the Hulk again. Guilt over causing Banner to be hit with the gamma rays made Rick decide to expose himself to gamma rays in an attempt to become another Hulk-like being that could stop the Hulk. However this plan backfired and Rick was dying of Gamma poisoning until Banner cured him. However, this too led to the consequence of Rick developing a form of blood cancer. Rick was stunned at the irony of this, considering what happened to his old friend Mar-Vell. Rick was going to undergo a massive blood transfusion to treat this ailment when the hospital was attacked by monsters created by the Dire Wraiths. Rick was saved by the Spaceknight Rom and began to team with Rom despite the fact that Rick was slowly dying. Upon the final defeat of the Wraiths, Rom banished them all to Limbo and then bade farewell to Rick Jones and Earth. Shortly after Rom left, Rick Jones and Brandy Clark, the woman who loved Rom, met the alien called The Beyonder (a ''Secret Wars II'' tie-in issue of ROM). The Beyonder briefly granted Rick superhuman powers, but Rick realized he couldn't handle them, and the Beyonder stripped him of his powers but left him cured of his cancer.
Shortly after the encounter with the Beyonder, Rick once again teamed with the Hulk. This time, the Hulk had been split into two beings, Banner and the Hulk, but the experiment was a failure and both were dying. General Ross tried to stop the process of remerging the two, and Rick intervened only to be dumped into the chemical nutrient bath that was fusing Banner and the Hulk again. This resulted in Rick somehow becoming a Hulk-like creature of his own and he took off into the desert on a savage rampage. Rick would be human at day and be his own green-skinned near mindless Hulk at night.
The other effect of Rick becoming a Hulk is that Banner is reverted from Green Hulk into the Grey Hulk. During this time, the Rick-Hulk battled the Grey Hulk, Zzzax, the Hulkbusters, and the Outcasts. The Grey Hulk is manipulated by Sam Sterns, along with Banner, into siphoning the radiation from Rick into Sterns. Sterns is then turned back into the Leader, drastically altering his appearance, and Rick is cured of his Hulk transformations.
Rick stays with Banner, the Grey Hulk, Betty Banner, and Clay Quartermain for several months as they travel the country looking for a government supply of gamma bombs. The group splits after the apparent death of the Hulk at the hands of the Leader.
At one point, Rick's psionic potential was released by Moondragon against Atlantean invaders.
Rick authors the book "Sidekick," an autobiography of his time with super-heroes. While on a book tour, he meets Marlo Chandler without realizing that she had only recently broken up with the Hulk (then acting as a Las Vegas leg breaker with the alias "Mr. Fixit"). Rick is kidnapped by a Skrull vessel and the Hulk aids in Rick's rescue. This starts another period with Rick and the Hulk, this time with Marlo and Betty.
Rick came in touch with death in several ways during this time with the Hulk. First, Rick dies at the hands of Thanos, along with half of the universe, when Thanos uses the Infinity Gauntlet to impress Death. Rick and the others are brought back in ensuing events. Rick remembers meeting several deceased rock stars.
Rick assisted the Hulk many times during his tenure with the Pantheon. During the time, he guns down an insane killer, but is still wracked with remorse. Over time he bonds with Wolfsbane of X-Factor, who also killed another insane murderer during the same debacle (he even ends up inviting her to his wedding).
Another major encounter with death occurs when Jackie Shorr (who is revealed to be a demented mass murderer) comes into his life and claims to be his mother. It is still not known for sure whether this claim is true or not, as the same claim is made by many others. She, however, insists that those she killed and left mummified in her basement were substitutes for Rick, and that he is her real son. Shorr is discovered to be insane, but not until after she kills Marlo by stabbing her with a kitchen knife. A horrified Rick refuses to test her DNA, saying that he doesn't want to know, especially if she is truly his mother.
Rick attempts to bring Marlo back using a resurrection device known as the "deus ex machina" that the Leader developed, but the Hulk destroys the equipment part way through the process. Marlo is left in a catatonic state. Fortunately, Rick's care eventually helps Marlo return to full health despite the intervention of many other well-meaning friends and family.
Shortly after Marlo is revived, the two become engaged and quickly marry. Neither of them realizes, however, that a portion of Death remains ''in'' Marlo. This piece of Death attracted many strange visitors to the wedding, including Mephisto and Death herself.
The married couple soon finds success in a popular talk show called "Keeping Up with the Joneses", cut short when Rick is crippled by a Banner-less Hulk that made a deal to work for Apocalypse and become his Horseman "War" if he would remove the shrapnel from the Hulk's brain. The injury confines Rick to a wheelchair and the debilitation strains his relationship with Marlo. The strain increases with the death of Betty Banner by radiation poisoning to the point that the couple split shortly thereafter.
Rick joins Dr. Banner again after his reappearance. His serious health problems force him to be brought by the Avengers to the now-captive Supreme Intelligence for aid. This marks the beginning of the Destiny War. Over the course of these events, Rick's injury is healed and he is joined with Genis-Vell (the recently endowed Captain Marvel and son of Mar-Vell).
Rick's bond with Genis works in about the same way as his bond with Mar-Vell. The biggest difference is that the two switch in and out of the Microverse rather than the Negative Zone. Genis-Vell's unique birth and accelerated aging makes him the opposite of Rick: full of power but without experience. They compensate for each other's weaknesses with Rick taking on the role of mentor. He helped Genis learn to control his Cosmic Awareness and accept his role as a superhero. As Rick's confidence grew, he also attempted to rekindle his romance with Marlo.
It wasn't until this point that Marlo's connection with Death is finally revealed. Thanos aids in separating the two, but Rick is prematurely aged and loses an arm in the process. He is later yanked back in time to the Destiny War, where he aids his younger self in the conflict leading to his bond with Genis.
Marlo tries to aid the elderly Rick the way he had helped her when she was catatonic. Rick's pride, however, just causes more problems. The Supreme Intelligence attempts and fails to restore Rick to his normal condition, but he is spontaneously restored to his normal age and health shortly thereafter. Rick believes this was divine aid while Genis believes it was a delayed reaction to the Supreme Intelligence's procedure. No definitive explanation has yet been determined.
For a while, Rick and Genis are yanked back and forth through time. Rick encounters two older versions of himself: one an aging collector surviving under the rule of the Maestro; the other a super-villain named Thanatos. The super-villain Rick was in the process of creating the "ultimate Rick Jones". He is stopped by the elder Rick's ability to wield Thor's hammer, Rick having been judged worthy for things the present Rick had yet to do and things that Thanatos would never achieve.
It is, however, unclear if Rick will become either of these older versions of himself. It has been established that the ''specific'' timeline that the old Rick lived in will not come to pass due to the Hulk having been drawn into the future to defeat his future self.
Rick and Marlo again split when Marlo becomes romantically involved with Moondragon. Shortly after, Genis goes insane when his cosmic awareness reaches its peak. Rick's attempts to continue as Genis' guide are fairly unsuccessful. Genis becomes a callous, homicidal maniac believing himself a god. Rick's friend even destroys the universe just to rebuild it with Rick and Genis as sole survivors.
In the rebuilt reality, Genis again loses his mind. Rick develops an ability to mentally attack Genis through their psychic bond (although the pain is reciprocal). For a time, Genis uses this same link to control Rick. He goes as far as 'convincing' Rick to kill himself on a whim. Genis brings Rick right back to life just as easily.
In part due to Rick's influence, Genis' madness calmed to a point where he was able to maintain a veneer of sanity, albeit with some unpredictability. He creates a recording studio for Rick that allows for fame and fortune at the sake of Internet based sales of a song written for Marlo. The same song also acts as a catalyst for the two to reunite, with Marlo ending her relationship with Moondragon.
At the end of the series, it is revealed that Rick has a "comic awareness" that the ''Captain Marvel'' comic series was coming to an end. He pushed for several of the loose ends of the series to be resolved: Rick and Genis were separated again, and Rick was reunited with Marlo at last report. This ability was primarily created for the needs of this one issue, and it seems unlikely that it will see future usage.
Rick was recently revealed to be the mysterious benefactor of Excelsior. The group is composed of former teenage superheroes dedicated to reforming other super-powered kids from following down the same path. Their first targets are the underage Runaways patrolling Los Angeles in the wake of the supervillain power vacuum since the defeat of the Runaways' evil parents, The Pride, who once controlled the city. Rick tells Excelsior that he wanted the Runaways back in foster care because he didn't want them to go through the same experiences he went through.
Rick appeared at Cap's funeral in Arlington, Virginia. When Sam Wilson (The Falcon) made a speech, he mentioned that Rick would know what it's like to have called Captain America a partner. He replied by saying "Right on."
Rick re-connects with the Hulk during the ''World War Hulk'' mini-series. He seeks out the Hulk and attempts to talk him down, telling his friend that, while he recognised that the Illuminati had been out of line in their decision to exile him to Sakaar and their apparent involvement with the deaths of thousands of innocent people on that planet, including the Hulk's wife and unborn child, his current blind quest for vengeance wasn't him, using Hulk's willingness to protect innocent people caught in the fight between him and a Zom-possessed Doctor Strange as proof that the Hulk was still a hero rather than a man blindly seeking vengeance. After the Hulk's climactic battle with the Sentry resulted in him reverting to Bruce Banner, one of the Hulk's associates, Miek (who was the true cause of the deaths on Sakaar), impales Rick through the chest to provoke Bruce into turning back into the Hulk. Rick is seen being loaded into an ambulance.
In the aftermath of "World War Hulk", a new Red Hulk emerged,Loeb, Jeph. ''Hulk'' #1 (March 2008) brutally beating and then shooting the Abomination to death. After this occurred, Jones escaped from a secret base in Alaska that had been destroyed in a "Hulk-like" manner.
Following this, Red Hulk confronts Jones at Gamma Base, where Bruce Banner is being held. In defense, Jones turns into a creature resembling Abomination, calling himself '''A-Bomb'''.Loeb, Jeph. '' Hulk'' vol. 2; #2 (April 2008) During the fight, the base security measures activate, and giant android harpies (with the face of Betty Ross) attack the two, and attempt to remove them from the base. A-Bomb manages to disable one mid-flight, and they both crash to earth, the robot exploding as it does.'' Hulk'' #3 (May 2008)
A-Bomb joined with several heroes including the Avengers, the Fantastic Four, She-Hulk and the Hulk to help stop an impending earthquake in San Francisco which was caused by Red Hulk. After the Red Hulk was defeated, A-Bomb reverted back to Rick. He attempted to reveal who Red Hulk really was, but was shot and dragged away by Doc Samson.
In ''Incredible Hulk'' #600 it is revealed the reason Doc Samson shot Rick Jones is because he now has multiple personality syndrome. It's also revealed that MODOK was involved in Rick's new condition. After Red Hulk drained the gamma energy from Hulk, A-Bomb had enough intelligence to get Bruce Banner to safety.
In ''Incredible Hulk'' #604, A-Bomb was shown to be fully healed, participating along with Korg as Skaar's sparring partner to prepare him for the time when the Hulk will return. In the same issue, Rick was reunited with Marlo, who was transformed by the Leader into Harpy, whom Bruce mistakes for Betty Ross.
It was eventually revealed that Rick was transformed into A-Bomb by the Intelligencia under command of the Leader and MODOK. Using Abomination's blood they changed him to become their weapon, but soon learned that he could not be controlled as easily as they planned. Instead, they gave him one simple command with a certain trigger - kill Bruce Banner. Suspecting this, Bruce was able to trigger Rick at an appropriate time and talk him down, making it so Rick would not be triggered in the future when his plans were to be carried out.
During the ''Chaos War'' storyline, A-Bomb and Korg assist the Hulks in fighting Abomination, a Zom-possessed Doctor Strange, and the forces of Amatsu-Mikaboshi.
Rick Jones is an athletic man that previously had no superhuman powers. He has received training in combat gymnastics by Captain America. He is also a skilled self-taught folk and rock n' roll singer and guitarist.
At one point Jones wielded the Destiny Force, a powerful ability utilized during the Kree-Skrull War storyline. With this power, through focus, he was able to perform amazing feats such as pull various members of the superhero team Avengers from the past, present and future, although this assault is generally random unless another controlling influence, such as Libra, is assisting him.
Jones's latent psionic potential was once unleashed by the Kree Supreme Intelligence, but he cannot utilize it at will. He was also for a time able to shift spacial/temporal positions with Mar-Vell, and later Genis-Vell.
Thanatos originally appeared in ''Spider-Man 2099'' in issues 11 and 12, chasing a confused, amnesiac man known as the 'Net Prophet'. It was only established years after the series was cancelled that Thanatos was actually Rick Jones. Thanatos' plan to create the "ultimate Rick Jones" was author Peter David's attempt to poke fun at the Ultimate Marvel universe. Shortly after this story finished, another issue of ''Captain Marvel'' had the cover text ''The Ultimate Captain Marvel'' and imitated the cover style of the Ultimate books.
Thanatos was eventually defeated in a confrontation between the Rick of the present and the Rick of the ''Future Imperfect'' timeline.
In the dark alternate future where the Hulk had become the insane megolomaniac known as the Maestro after two nuclear wars, the elderly Rick Jones was the leader of the last bastion of resistance against the Maestro, despite being near-senile and confined to Professor X's old hoverchair for mobility. He spent his time in a 'museum' that he had collected over the years featuring the relics of the various deceased superhumans, including Wolverine's skeleton, Captain America's shield and Mjolnir (A confrontation with two other versions of himself, including Thanatos, revealing that this Rick had gained the ability to wield Mjolnir over the years).
When the resistance were able to salvage Doctor Doom's old time machine, Rick recommended that they use the machine to "fight fire with fire", arranging for his group to go back in time and recruit the Hulk to defeat the Maestro, giving the resistance members - including his granddaughter, Janis Jones - a note to convince his past self to vouch for them. When the Maestro launched a final attack on the resistance base, Rick's attempt to defend himself with Captain America's shield resulted in him being thrown back into Wolverine's skeleton when Maestro punched him with such force that even the shield couldn't absorb all the impact, Rick hanging on to life long enough for the Hulk to vanquish his future self. Beofre he returned to the past, the Hulk used an adhesive to spread Rick's ashes over Captain America's shield before throwing it into the air, hoping that it would land somewhere exciting so that Rick would have a shot at one last adventure, noting that, despite the Maestro's words to the contrary, Rick had always been his best friend.
Pvt. Genis-Vell stumbled upon a tombstone that stated that Rick Jones died at a young age from some unknown tragic accident.
In ''Ultimate Origins'' #5, the Ultimate Watchers, having determined that Earth is on the brink of devastation, reveal themselves to the Fantastic Four. Uatu announces that they "will now pick a herald to help you with your new world order." They select Rick Jones, hitherto unknown in the Ultimate Marvel universe, who is found glowing golden in his back yard. Rick's story is later followed up beginning in   #7. Immediately after being granted power by the Watchers, Rick goes into a coma for several months, waking up after the events of Ultimatum. It is revealed that he lives across the street from Peter Parker. Spider-Man, Iceman, and the Human Torch learn about his powers and attempt to help him. After a mission to Detroit, Johnny Storm realizes the origins of Rick's powers and the four travel to Wyoming in search of the Watchers. The four become engaged in a superpower battle against the Ultimate Serpent Squad in the ruins of Project Pegasus. Rick realizes that he actually enjoys having superpowers and chooses to become this universe's version of Nova.