The airport is the largest in eastern India and one of only two international airports operating in West Bengal, the other being in Bagdogra. It is a major centre for all flights to North-East India, Bangladesh and Bangkok.
The airport is now being provided with a face-lift by the Airports Authority of India (AAI), which is currently building a fourth terminal for the airport, due to massive increase in passenger volume during the past three to four years. The modernisation plan also includes the lengthening of the runways. The airport is also linked by the suburban railway system. It handles about 360 flights a day.
The increase in air traffic has forced the government to plan a second airport for the city. The Chief Minister of West Bengal, Buddhadeb Bhattacharya, is considering using the services of specialised private firms to carry out the task. A Thai-based consortium along with Kolkata-based Sikka Associates have been hired to carry out the modernisation of the airport.
The existing domestic terminal building will continue to be used with appropriate modifications and facade treatment.
The former airport hotel 'Ashok' has been demolished to give way to two new five-star luxury hotels and a shopping mall in its place. This will cater to the passengers and citizens alike. There has been a huge jump in the number of international passengers following recovery from recession, it is expected that the airport will handle additional 4 million passengers every year from 2012, up from 1.01 million now it handles.
AAI has recently added cargo-handling capacity to the airport, which is sufficient to cater to the demand up to 2015-16. In 2006-07 there were 65,687 aircraft movements of which 9,414 were international and 56,273 domestic. There has been a 25 per cent growth in international cargo movement to and from Kolkata airport and a 15 per cent increase in outward transit. Automobile parts accounted for the bulk of the growth in the movement of cargo from the city to other countries. International cargo movement to and from Kolkata airport has increased by around 25 per cent in the past year, prompting foreign airlines to add more freighters on certain routes. In November 2008 the first Centre for Perishable Cargo (CPC) in West Bengal was opened at the airport. The CPC has an area of  and an annual storage capacity of 12,000 million tonnes. The CPC had been undergoing trials that started in June 2008 and was built with a  grant-in-aid from the Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority (APEDA) part of the Commerce Ministry. The volume of export was 21,683 ton in 2008-09, during the current fiscal more than 23,042 ton of cargo were handled by the NSCBI authorities. Similarly the volume of import cargo was increased from 16,863 ton to 18,733 ton recording more than ten per cent jump during the same period. However, in 2008-09 the total volume of cargo handled by the airport declined by 4.8% from the previous year
Work on a secondary runway extension, rapid exit taxiways and parking bays are in progress. The secondary runway has already been extended by  on the northern side. On the south side about 1000&nbsp;ft extension work is going on along with rapid exit taxi way. The secondary runway is being fitted with CAT-I facilities for night use. The primary runway is being upgraded from CAT-I to CAT-II ILS facility to help aircraft landing under poor visibility.
The work on the new integrated terminal started in November 2008. The new integrated terminal will be an L-shaped structure with two-tiers for arrivals and departures. The  of the first phase of modernisation is designed to accommodate a peak flow of 1,800 passengers per hour. Once completed, the total capacity of the airport will be increased to 20 million passengers per annum. The new terminal building will have 104 check-in counters, 44 immigration counters, 25 security gates, five conveyor belts and 15 aerobridges post development. It will also get an inline baggage system which will make it unnecessary for the passenger to go for pre-check through x-ray machines. The walls will have writings by the Bengali poet and Nobel laureate Rabindranath Tagore. Natural day lighting is maximized while keeping cooling systems to a minimum. The form of the roof is also devised to harvest rainwater for landscape irrigation. An underground parking for cars is under construction. The work that was already completed included piling of cement in the basement area of the proposed terminal building, construction of columns at the passenger arrival area and parts of the upper arrival area, development of the descending and ascending path for a proposed flyover from VIP road, construction of taxiways and aprons and a large portion of the secondary runway extension. Of 180,000 square metre space likely to come up at the passenger terminal, construction of about 50,000 sq metre has been completed till date. The airport will be commissioned for commercial use by December 2011 or January 2012
Air India and Indian have hangar facilities at Kolkata airport.
Domestic departure lounges are provided by:
The airport is connected to the Kolkata Suburban Railway system, and is also accessible by taxi and bus. Low floor Volvo buses regularly run between the airport and the city. Recently air conditioned Volvo bus services to the city have been introduced. Metered yellow cabs, Kolkata cabs, Radio cabs and Mega cabs can be availed through pre-paid procedure. The  proposed Kolkata Metro route from Noapara to Barasat  will have a station at the airport by the name of Jai Hind. Also, a flyover is under construction to prevent traffic congestion near the airport.
During 1942, the United States Army Air Force 7th Bombardment Group flew B-24 Liberator bombers from the airport on combat missions over Burma. The airfield was also used as a cargo aerial port throughout the war for supplies and equipment by Air Transport Command and as a communication center for Tenth Air Force, largely due to its proximity to Calcutta.
Image:VECC-intl-kerb.jpg|A kerbside view of NSCBI Airport International Terminal
Image:VECC-intl-boarding-area.jpg|The boarding area of NSCBI Airport International Terminal
Image:VECC-intl-gate-01.jpg|Boarding Gate 1 at International Terminal, NSCBI Airport
Image:VECC-intl-airside.jpg|Airside of International Terminal, NSCBI Airport
Image:CCU Departure gate.jpg|Domestic gate one
Image:CCU Domestic Entry.jpg|The entry to the domestic terminal