The success of ''The Batman Adventures'' has also led to a set of "Adventures" titles mirroring the animated series that followed ''Batman: The Animated Series'', including ''Superman Adventures'' (based on '' '') and ''Justice League Adventures'' (based on ''Justice League'').
Based on '' '', the first series ran for 36 issues, 2 annuals, and 3 specials (''Mad Love'' and ''Holiday Special'', which were both adapted into episodes for ''The New Batman Adventures'', plus an adaptation of the '' '' movie). The first annual introduces Roxy Rocket, who would later appear in ''The New Batman Adventures'' episode "The Ultimate Thrill" and the '' '' episode "Knight Time". Most of the issues were written by Kelley Puckett, and illustrated by Mike Parobeck and Rick Burchett, though Ty Templeton did the writing and art on a few issues. ''Mad Love'' was written by Paul Dini and illustrated by Bruce Timm, while the holiday special was written and illustrated by a number of creative people who had worked on the animated series, including Paul Dini, Bruce Timm, Glen Murakami, Dan Riba, and Kevin Altieri.
Following the re-branding of the animated series as ''The Adventures of Batman and Robin'', the comic series was relaunched. It ran for 25 issues and 2 annuals, as well as 2 specials (an adaptation of '' ''; and ''Dark Claw Adventures'', a non-canon Amalgam comic featuring the Batman-Wolverine hybrid). Ty Templeton was the regular writer, with Rick Burchett as the artist.
Shortly after ''The New Batman Adventures'' began airing on Kids WB!, DC Comics published a five issue miniseries titled ''The Batman Adventures: The Lost Years''. This series bridged the gap between the end of ''Batman: The Animated Series'' and the start of the new show. Additionally, the first two issues were later adapted into the "Old Wounds" episode, and issue #4 is an adaptation of the episode "Sins of the Father".
A new series based on ''The New Batman Adventures'' titled ''Batman: Gotham Adventures'' ran for 60 issues. This was the longest running series in the ''Batman Adventures'' line. Early issues were written by Ty Templeton and illustrated by Rick Burchett, while the team of Scott Peterson, Tim Levins, and Terry Beatty did most of the later issues. Batgirl and Nightwing appeared in most of the later issues. This series received a lot of positive reviews and was praised for its level of characterization.
In 2003, DC Comics launched ''Batman Adventures'', shortly after the cancellation of ''Batman: Gotham Adventures''. The first issue was made available through regular purchases and Free Comic Book Day (May 3, 2003). It ran for 17 issues before being canceled to make way for ''The Batman Strikes!'', a new title based on the new, unrelated, animated series ''The Batman''. Every issue had two stories, one by Dan Slott and Ty Templeton, while the other was by Ty Templeton and Rick Burchett.
Issue #15, written by Jason Hall, bridges the gap between Mr. Freeze's appearances in ''Batman: The Animated Series'' and ''Batman Beyond''. Issue #17 ends the series with Batman confronting Joe Chill, the man who murdered his parents, although he is unaware of Chill's true identity.
In ''Batman Adventures'' vol. 2, #15, a character named Warren Powers originally appeared as head of Powers Technology. As a sort of prequel to the ''Batman Beyond'' episode "Meltdown", Warren would have been shown acquiring the head of Mr. Freeze and locking it away in his vault, believing it holds the secrets of immortality. It has been confirmed that Warren is the father of Derek.
The issue would also have shown the Mr. Freeze robot killing Ferris Boyle (from the ''Batman: The Animated Series'' episode "Heart of Ice") and Grant Walker (from the episode "Deep Freeze", and from ''Batman: Gotham Adventures'' #5). Other differences include Nora's visit with Koonak (from '' '') happening earlier in the issue, as well as focus on the deterioration of Nightwing and Batgirl's relationship.
An animated version of the Red Hood appears at the end of ''Batman Adventures'' vol. 2, #8. It was meant to be a subplot to be resolved later, but the cancellation of the ongoing series prevented that. Though the creative team behind the story (Dan Slott and Ty Templeton) are hoping for a chance to resolve it, they have yet to do so. It has been stated that this Red Hood is someone crucial to the DC animated universe.
Dan Slott mentioned that the background of the character would tie into subplots concerning Lucius Fox, the Valestra crime family (from '' ''), and the Powers family (including an infant Derek Powers from ''Batman Beyond'').
While there were many characters who never appeared in ''Batman: The Animated Series'', the ''Batman Adventures'' series would occasionally introduce and feature characters who never made it to the screen.