Barbour was a renowned statesman and orator. His abilities to persuade by speech were noted by several of his peers, including John Quincy Adams. Barboursville, Virginia located in Orange County was named after James Barbour.  The ruin of Barbour's mansion, Barboursville, is listed on the National Register of Historic Places and can be found on the grounds of Barboursville Vineyards in the Madison-Barbour Rural Historic District in Barboursville, Virginia. The mansion was designed by James Barbour's friend, Thomas Jefferson. Barbour County, Alabama is named in his honor. Barbour county in West Virginia, as well as Barbourville, Kentucky and Barboursville, West Virginia are all named in honor of James Barbour. He was the brother of Philip Pendleton Barbour, as Speaker of the United States House of Representatives and Associate Justice of the Supreme Court as well as the first cousin of John S. Barbour and first cousin, once removed of John S. Barbour, Jr..
James Barbour was born in Barboursville, Virginia in Orange County on June 10, 1775. Barbour was the son of Thomas Barbour, who held a seat in the Virginia House of Burgesses, and Mary Pendleton Thomas, both of Orange County, Virginia. His family was one of the first to settle in Orange County, which proved to be lucrative for the family. By the time of James   s birth, the Barbour family owned over 2,000 acres (8&nbsp;km  ) and held several slaves. Much of that wealth, however, dissipated before James could acquire a formal education. James was educated, in part, at Gordonsville, Virginia by James Waddell. He served as deputy sheriff of Orange County, beginning in 1792. Shortly thereafter, in 1794, he was admitted to the Virginia Bar. On October 29, 1792, Barbour married Lucy Johnson, who was the daughter of Benjamin Johnson who served in the House of Burgesses. With wedding gifts from his father, James was able to slowly acquire his own personal wealth. By 1798, he owned several slaves and was prepared to begin his own plantation.
Barbour was elected to the Virginia House of Delegates in 1796. He
House and even as chairman on several committees, including the
Committee of Privileges and Elections and the Finance Committee. He
During these years, Barbour held strong to his Virginian Republican
Barbour refused to support any act he believed to give the Executive
Fund of Virginia. The Act, passed on February 2, 1810, provided funding
Barbour later requested that the only inscription on his tombstone be a
In 1811, Barbour declared his candidacy for the governorship. However,
Barbour lost to the incumbent governor, George William Smith. On December 26, 1811, Smith died in a fire at the
Richmond Theatre. On January 3, the Legislature convened and appointed
Barbour governor. At the time, the country was on the verge of war with
Britain. Barbour was in favor of the war, which he viewed as the only
U.S. As such, he began preparing the state for war. Barbour, whose
Virginia   s militia. Accordingly, he sought appropriations for training
Treaty of Ghent brought the war to an end.
Barbour   s governorship also included many other acts, including
Governor to inhabit the Virginia Governor   s Mansion, designed by
Alexander Parris.
His contemporaries praised Barbour for his leadership. Barbour was
On December 1, 1814, the Legislature of Virginia voted to appoint Barbour as the successor to Richard Brent (Virginia) to the United States Senate. Barbour, who had previously opposed its formation, now voted in favor of a national Bank. Bill after bill failed to pass or survive veto. President James Madison, fearing bankruptcy, sought the assistance of his friend, James Barbour. Barbour introduced into the Senate a bill composed by Secretary of the Treasury Alexander James Dallas. This Bill, calling for $50,000,000 in capital, passed. Interestingly, Barbour served in the Senate contemporaneously with his brother Philip Pendleton Barbour, who served in the House. Often, their votes opposed each other, as Barbour began to vote in line with Senators such as John C. Calhoun and Henry Clay. Barbour   s actions during his service as Senator include:
Barbour was elected President pro tempore of the Senate in 1819. The 16th Congress, over which Barbour presided, decided on the Missouri Compromise. Barbour sought to have the bill admitting Missouri combined with the bill admitting Maine in an attempt to deny the Northern Senators an opportunity to gain 4 anti-slavery Senators. Barbour   s speech focused on the rights of the people of Missouri to decide for themselves whether to be a free or slave state. Perhaps foreseeing the future or perhaps merely engaging in his verbose nature, Barbour stated,  Over President Monroe   s advice, Barbour introduced his motion to combine the two bills. Thus, a compromise was met     for better or worse.
During his term of service, Barbour persuaded the Senate to pass a resolution giving an honorary sword to Colonel Richard Mentor Johnson of Kentucky for his efforts in the Battle of the Thames in 1813. Johnson and Barbour would become quick friends following Barbour   s efforts. This friendship proved important for Barbour, who was appointed Secretary of War by President John Quincy Adams at the behest of Johnson.
Barbour was confirmed as the Secretary of War following Adams   s
Barbour successfully purchased most of the land from the Creeks. Troup
During the 1820s, Barbour was a member of the prestigious society, Columbian Institute for the Promotion of Arts and Sciences, who counted among their members former presidents Andrew Jackson and John Quincy Adams and many prominent men of the day, including well-known representatives of the military, government service, medical and other professions.
In 1826, Barbour was considered for the vice-presidential nomination in
Barbour sought an appointment as Minister to England. Critics claimed
Barbour was seeking a    harbor in the storm    from the approaching
In December 1831 he attended the first national convention of the National Republican Party in Baltimore and was made the presiding officer (called "President") of that body. The nominations made there for the coming 1832 campaign were Henry Clay for President and John Sergeant for Vice President.
After his retirement from the Assembly, Barbour sought refuge in his
Barbour presented an imposing appearance, with striking face, long,
Barbour   s health began to decline. His last months of life were spent