Tilly was born '''Jennifer E. Chan''' in Harbor City, Los Angeles, California. She is the second of four children of Harry Chan, a used car salesman, and Patricia (nee Tilly), a schoolteacher and former stage actress. Her father was Chinese American and her mother was of Irish and Finnish ancestry. Following her parents' divorce when she was five, she was raised by her mother and stepfather, John Ward, on rural Texada Island, British Columbia, Canada. Her mother divorced again when Tilly was a teenager, and moved to Victoria, where Tilly attended Belmont High School. Jennifer Tilly began her acting career in her teenage years through a theatre program at Stephens College in Missouri.
Tilly had small roles in TV shows and movies beginning in 1983. She had a recurring guest role on ''Hill Street Blues'' as Gina Srignoli, a mobster's widow who becomes romantically involved with detective Henry Goldblume. She played Frasier Crane's seductive-but-ditzy date on an episode of the fourth season of ''Cheers'' and also appears as a similar character on the eleventh season of ''Frasier'' . She appeared as Garry's girlfriend on ''It's Garry Shandling's Show'', which aired on Showtime. She was also cast as a high end prostitute in the short lived comedy, ''Key West'', alongside Fisher Stevens. Tilly's breakthrough film role was as a singing waitress in ''The Fabulous Baker Boys'' in a part that was specially written for her by Steve Kloves. That same year, she played a small part in the cult classic horse racing movie, ''Let it Ride'' with Richard Dreyfuss and Teri Garr, that Tilly later said "should have done better."
She was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress for her role as a hopelessly bad actress in Woody Allen's ''Bullets Over Broadway'' (1994). In 1994, she also had a small role in ''The Getaway'' with Alec Baldwin and Kim Basinger.
Tilly starred in ''Bound'', which portrays a lesbian relationship her character has with Gina Gershon. She played Samantha Cole in the Jim Carrey hit ''Liar Liar''. In 2000's ''Dancing at the Blue Iguana'' she played a stripper and part-time dominatrix. She portrayed gossip columnist Louella Parsons in the 2001 Peter Bogdanovich film ''The Cat's Meow''.
Tilly gained some additional popularity in recent years for providing voice-over work as killer doll Tiffany for two of the ''Child's Play'' series. In the most recent installment, ''Seed of Chucky'', she plays a dual role, providing the voice for Tiffany and also playing an exaggerated version of herself.
Tilly is a semi-regular cast member on ''Family Guy'', voicing the Griffin family's neighbor, Bonnie Swanson. She has also done vocal work for the films ''Monsters, Inc.'', ''Stuart Little, and ''''Home on the Range'', as well as the children's series ''Hey Arnold''. In Disney's ''The Haunted Mansion'', she does the voice-over for Madame Leota. She has been active in the theatre, winning a Theater World Award for her performance in the off-Broadway play ''One Shoe Off''. Tilly had a starring role in the US television comedy ''Out of Practice'' starring Henry Winkler and Stockard Channing. The cancellation of that series was announced in May 2006. About this time, Tilly started dividing her time between her film career and professional poker (see below). By the end of 2008 she had returned more or less full time to her film and television career. In 2009 Tilly made her Chinese film debut in the Christina Yao directed 'Empire of Silver' playing the supporting character of Mrs. Landock, who like herself is also Eurasian.
In a television interview in 2005, Tilly stated that at that point in her career she was more interested in pursuing poker than acting. By December 2008, Tilly announced her retirement from poker as a career. In her monthly column in ''Bluff Magazine'' she said: "I love poker but greatness in poker is an elusive dream. There are too many variants. Trying to find validation in poker is like trying to find a virgin in a whorehouse. I   m not giving up poker entirely     gambling is an addiction after all. I   m just going to treat it more like a hobby and less like a career." Since January 2010, Tilly appears to have resumed her poker career.
As of 2010, Tilly's live tournament wins exceed $660,000.
Tilly married Sam Simon, developer and producer of ''The Simpsons'', in 1984. They divorced in 1991.
She is currently dating poker professional Phil Laak, who she met in 2005 at the World Poker Tour Invitational tournament at Los Angeles's Commerce Casino.
She has a brother, Steve, and two sisters, Rebecca and actress Meg.