Namesake, 1977
West Orange, Texas
It was constructed in 1966, as a part of the West Orange ISD. West Orange ISD and Orange ISD consolidated the following year. WO-SHS consolidated with the high school in Orange, Lutcher-Stark High School, in 1977, which meant having 2 grades per high school campus, as opposed to 4 grades at 2 campuses. West Orange-Stark High School served grades 11 & 12 until the mid-1990s, when it was again necessary to close campuses due to drops in enrollment. Before this change was made, the building was added on to. The new 2-story sections included 2 halls, a library, a second cafeteria, and enclosed the outside of the existing 600-hall. Along with this came a new Athletic, Band, and Theater building, on the west side of the campus, and a Career and Technology Center on the east side of the campus.
In 2009, as a part of the 2007 Bond, the high school was renovated and remodeled. It got a new facade, which allowed more organized and safer entrances. The high school received the least amount of renovations, as it was in the best shape. The high school renovations were the first to be completed. 
Due to minor local fund balance shortfalls, and projected state fund balance shortfalls, the West Orange-Cove CISD offered district staff a 10% (of annual pay) sign-off bonus. Retirees and resignees include; longtime coach and Athletic director Dan Hooks; 3 Industrial Trade teachers, which includes 1 Drivers Education teacher; Food Production staff , and many core class teachers. The district also decided to lay off 15 probationary employees, whom have less than 2 years of service. The district decided also to cut the business program, allowing the 2 remaining Business teachers to teach Technology courses.
As of August 2010, the principal is Mr. Hutcherson Hill, who served in the same position Sul Ross Elementary, and Lake Air Middle School, both of the Waco Independent School District. Mr. Hill also served as an Assistant Principal at Waco High School. Other administrators include;
Having new administration throughout the district, new/renovated facilities, higher TAKS scores, and increased enrollment, the WO-CCISD Administrative Officials, along with West Orange-Stark High School Administration, are working to bring community support and involvement levels to new heights. Although a slow process, Hutcherson Hill, WO-SHS principal, is determined to rid of the negative attitude towards the school that is present in the Greater Orange area.
The WOSHS Career Center is highly successful. Students from all 5 districts in Orange County utilize the Career Center, which offers many trades needed in the job market. These courses include; Concepts of Engineering & Technology, Principles of Architecture & Construction, Construction Management, Construction Technology, Practicum in Construction Management, (Principles of Art, A/V Technology, and Communication), Animation, Practicum in A/V Production, Graphic Design and Illustration, Principles of Informative Technology, Digital & Interactive Media, Research in Informative Technology Solutions, Touch Systems Data Entry, Principles of Education, Interpersonal Studies, Practicum in Health Science, Gerontology, Medical Terminology, Pharmacy Technology, Principles of Hospitality and Tourism, Culinary Arts, Principles of Manufacturing, Building Maintenance Technology, Precision Metal Manufacturing, Scientific Research & Design, Robotics & Automation, Principles of Transportation & Logistics, Energy Power and Transportation Systems, and many more. (It should be noted that course availability is based on student interest,)
The Mustangs have several state and regional championships in all sports. The Mustangs Home stadium is named after Coach Dan Hooks, whom has been WOCCISD Athletic Director for 20+ years. Many WO-S High alumnae become successful in both college and professional sports, such as recent graduate Earl Thomas, whom was drafted in 2010 by the Seattle Seahawks.
During a Sept.17, 2010 game, team Quarterback Reginald Garrett walked to the sidelines and fell to the ground. It was rumored that he was having a seizure and also rumored that he had a history of seizures.  His mother explained that he only had one seizure when he was three years old from a high fever and none since. While still conscious, he was removed from the field by paramedics. He was later pronounced dead at Memorial-Hermann Baptist Hospital - Orange. As the word of his death made its way across the stadium, fans poured out of Hooks Stadium to go visit the player's family at the hospital. The following game was cancelled.
In 2011, as a part of the reitrement incentive plan, longtime Athletic Director Dan R Hooks retired. Coach Cornel Thompson was selected to take his place.
The school offers many AP and Dual-Enrollment classes, (Lamar State College- Orange Courses) for Juniors and Seniors. Along with the Career Center courses, and core education classes, other electives offered include; Drivers Education, Individual Sports, Team Sports, Aerboic Activities, Foundations of Personal Fitness, Dance, Art, Theatre Production, Technical Theater, Musical Theory, Choral Music, Instrumental Ensemble, and others.
West Orange-Stark High School was rated 'Academically Acceptable' by the Texas Education Agency, for the Accountability Year of 2010.
West Orange-Stark High School was named a 'Mentor High School' in 2000.
WO-SHS has also been named a part of "High Schools that Work" for several years.
Far out on the coastal prairie
Hail! All hail, our Alma Mater,
We bear thee a love so fervent