During the 1970s, Mitchell began playing with local bands in Sarnia. After going through a few name changes with essentially the same band, Mitchell and "Zooom" headed for Toronto, Ontario. Zooom eventually dissolved, with Mitchell travelling to the Greek islands.
On his return to Canada, he formed the band Max Webster with fellow Sarnia native Pye Dubois. Max Webster toured extensively and built a string of hits. Mitchell's solo career began after his departure from Max Webster, with session work and a succession of solo albums.
In early 1985, the song "Go For Soda" from the ''Akimbo Alogo'' album became an international hit and remains his best known song outside of his native Canada. The song was also featured in the opening scene of the 1985 Miami Vice episode ''Buddies''.  More recently, it was also featured by American Dad, in the episode A.T. the Abusive Terrestrial. The song was later used by Trailer Park Boys in the episode "We Can't Call People Without Wings Angels So We Call Them Friends". His most successful Canadian album was the follow-up, 1986's ''Shakin' Like a Human Being'', featuring the hits "Alana Loves Me", "Easy to Tame", and the biggest hit of his career, "Patio Lanterns".
In 1992, Mitchell played guitar on the track "Brave and Crazy" from Tom Cochrane's album Mad Mad World. In that same year he also made a cameo appearance (as himself) on the third season finale of the popular Canadian sketch program ''The Kids in the Hall''.
In 2004, Mitchell entered the radio broadcasting industry, becoming afternoon drivetime host on Toronto classic rock radio station Q107 (CILQ-FM). He also opened for Def Leppard at the Molson Amphitheatre in Toronto on July 16, 2007.  His eighth studio album, entitled "Ain't Life Amazing" was released on July 17, 2007.
In 2006, Mitchell provided a guitar solo on the song "Wind It Up" from the Barenaked Ladies' album ''Barenaked Ladies Are Me''.
The Kim Mitchell Band is his longtime musical partner of 26 years, Peter Fredette on bass and vocals, Chris Sutherland on drums, and Don Breithaupt on keyboards and vocals.
Mitchell has been awarded several Juno Awards for his work:
Kim Mitchell has two sons, Josh and Jesse. Jesse works for his father as a drum tech and road manager.