Dinant is the son of Bruce and Cheryl Dinant. He grew up in Baldwinsville, New York a suburb of Syracuse, New York. He nearly died at birth; his lung collapsed and his heart stopped.
In December 2001 Dinant moved back to New York to be closer to his family. While there he began writing theatrical plays and created the ''Got Theater?'' Project, a charitable theater company. The Project raised money for various charities,  including Susan G. Komen for the Cure, Children's Miracle Network and several others. The creation of this company earned Dinant the Jefferson Award for outstanding community and public service in 2004.
Dinant started his comedy career with his first show at the Planet Hollywood Resort and Casino (formerly the Aladdin Hotel & Casino) in December 2005. The show called "The Laugh Corner of Comedy" was created by Dinant and was the collaboration of several comedians. The show included stand up, ''Saturday Night Live''-style skits and improv. He hosted a weekly show by the same name at a smaller venue in Las Vegas. Dinant was the MC/host of the Weekly THURSTdaze party at Krave nightclub in Las Vegas located inside the Planet Hollywood Resort and Casino from September 2008 to August 2009.
Dinant's comedy is a mix of MC/Host, StandUp, improv, parody, political and celebrity humor. Dinant was named a "Hot 12 Comedian" by the World Comedy Network.
From the time Dinant was in first grade and telling people to vote for Michael Dukakis he had a love for American politics. At a very young age he stated "I'm going to be President someday".
Dinant did a publicity stunt in New York's Times Square on November 2, 2008 in which he stood naked asking people whether he should vote for McCain or Obama. International media including ''Radio2 Holland'' and ''AftonBladet'' on Swedish TV interviewed him during the stunt.
Dinant has appeared on ''Fear'' (MTV), ''Faces of Fear'' (MTV), ''Caesars 24/7'' (A&E), ''Real World Vegas: Reunited'' (MTV) ''Inked'' (A&E), ''Open Call: The Next Will & Grace'' (TV Guide Network), ''Choose or Loose'' (MTV), and ''One Tree Hill'' (WB).
From Summer 2007 to Spring 2008 Dinant hosted a live web TV show on the Blog TV network entitled the ''J Dot Report''. On May 21, 2008 Dinant launched ''Naked Boy News'', an online TV show where Dinant talks about celebrity gossip and political news. The tag line for the show is: "The NAKED Truth About Today's Hottest Headlines!"
Dinant started posting his ''Naked Boy News'' videos to CNN's iReport during the 2008 election cycle. He quickly became an iReport Superstar and has since been a regularly featured iReporter for CNN TV and online news coverage. To date more than 40 of Dinant's videos have been used in CNN news coverage. Dinant has been seen on "American Morning" - "News to Me" - "MOOSt Unusual" - "This Week in iReport!" - Today in iReport!" and several other CNN.com articles. Dinant was one of fifteen voters that CNN profiled on Election Day, November 4, 2008. CNN used his video footage on air throughout the day as well as on CNN.com. Dinant was profiled as an undecided voter, who stood Naked in Times Square asking people who to vote for. In the End Dinant voted for Barack Obama.
Starting in January 2009, Dinant was followed by CNN Health as he follows his 2009 resolution of getting six-pack abs by summer. Going from 500 sit ups a day to a well regulated diet and fitness plan, Dinant saw results after three months. The CNN Health series concluded in June 2009.
On March 1, 2011 Dinant launched Sin City Times, a completely digital magazine. The magazine is geared towards LGBT Las Vegas and features pop-culture, nightlife, politics, fashion and other Sin City topics.