  He is known as the first artist in exhibiting a work of art that included a video game console, the Atari 2600, back in 1985Monfront Nick; Bogost, Ian  Boston: The MIT Press.Monfront Nick; Bogost, Ian  Boston: The MIT Press.. As the pioneer of Digital Art in VenezuelaSilvera, Yohana. ,''Tal Cual'', October 6, 2010, Merhi has produced a wide body of works that engage electronic circuits, computers, video game systems, touch screens, and other devices in the presentation of his written words, like the ''Poetic Clock'', a machine that converts time into poetry which generates 86.400 different poems daily . The resulting artworks expand the limitations of language and the traditional context of poetry, proposing a bold new role for the poet in our culture.
Merhi's career encompasses a world wide exhibition record in places such as the New Museum of Contemporary Art; Bronx Museum of the ArtsHolland Cotter, , ''The New York Times'', Sept 2, 2005.; El Museo del Barrio;Eyebeam Art and Technology CenterAnette Gallo, , ''Rhizome Digest'', October 31, 2002. and Exit Art, all located in New York; as well as the Orange County Museum of Art (California); De Appel (Amsterdam); Museo Michetti,''ExibArt News'', July 23, 2005. (Rome); Borusan Culture & Art CenterButun Haberler,,''Zaman Turk Gazetesi'', October 20, 2002. (Istanbul); Paco das Artes (Sao Paulo); Museo del Chopo (Mexico DF); Museo de Arte Contemporaneo de Yucatan (Yucatan); Museo de Bellas ArtesFelix Suazo, , ''ArtNexus'', February, 2001 (Caracas); Museo de Arte Contemporaneo, ''Museos Nuestros'',October, 2006. (Caracas); Science World British ColumbiaPamela Findling, , ''Science World British Columbia'', October 27, 2008(Vancouver); among many others. He also participated in the official selections of the 7th International Festival of New Film, Split, Croatia; the 2007 Bienal de Sao Paulo - Valencia; and the 10th Istanbul Biennial.
His work is documented in more than 40 catalogs, encyclopedias, dictionaries, movies, text books, PhD thesis and academic volumes. He is currently represented in the collections of the Orange County Museum of Art (California); Museo Alejandro Otero (Caracas); Museo de Arte Contemporaneo de Caracas (Caracas); Ateneo de Valencia (Valencia); and private collections in New York, Miami, Caracas, Madrid and Tel Aviv.
Merhi has received several grants and awards including the New York Foundation for the Arts in Digital/Electronic Arts, as well as numerous commissions and residencies from institutions such as the Orange County Museum of Art, Bronx Museum of the Arts, and Eyebeam Art and Technology Center, among others.