Sales of automobiles and motorcycles in China and several South American nations comprise the majority of its business and Geely has four brand names including its own. One of its models is named the ''Jingang'' or King Kong.
In 2010, Geely sold less than its 680,000 units/year manufacturing capacity reuters.com, Fri Nov 12, 2010 12:20pm EST and bought Volvo Cars from Ford. Total sales in 2010 were 415,286 units an increase of 27.1 percent over the prior year. This exceeded a 400,000 unit sales goal. theindonesiatoday.com, 14 February 2011
Founding Geely in 1986 as a refrigerator-maker with money borrowed from family, Li Shufu transformed his company into a successful private automaker selling cheap products in tier-3 and 4 inland Chinese cities.
Geely started manufacturing motorcycles in 1994 after the purchase of a failing, state-run firm. economist.com, Aug 5th 2010 Small van production began in 1998, Geely official site and in 2001 Geely received state approval to manufacture automobiles.
Geely had its IPO on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange in 2004.
Between 2006 and 2008 Geely expressed its desire to sell in the EU and United States markets, and in pursuit of this goal it presented at the 2005 Frankfurt Motor Show. It followed with a 2006 showing at the Detroit auto show.
Export to the EU and US has been postponed.
 probably from semi-complete or complete knock-down kits. These facilities are located in: Indonesia (some of its production has been imported back to China), Malaysia, Russia (with cooperation from local firm Derways), and Ukraine. With the exception of the Russian factory, these locations are not necessarily affiliated with or owned by Geely.
Geely models are sold in Turkey and may be assembled there as well.
Geely has made several major foreign acquisitions and participates in a joint venture.
Established in 2007, Shanghai LTI Automobile Components Co Ltd makes the TX4, a licensed London Black Cab, in China and is a joint venture with Manganese Bronze Holdings. The company exports semi-complete knock-down kits for assembly in the UK.
In 2009 Geely bought Drivetrain Systems International Pty Ltd, a global transmission developer headquartered in Australia.
Geely approached Ford in mid-2008 about a possible takeover of Volvo Cars. On October 28, 2009, Geely was named as the preferred buyer of Volvo by the American automaker. A deal was reached in late March and completed in early August, 2010.
Volvo continues to operate independent of its new owners, but Geely wants to make Volvo-branded cars in China something Volvo (but not the Chinese State) has agreed to, desires synergy and nowadays communicates with the company via a special, twice-yearly meeting.
Geely () means "auspicious" or "lucky" in Mandarin Chinese. reuters.com, Thu Jul 22, 2010 10:27pm EDT
Geely brand names include: Emgrand, Englon, Gleagle, and its own. Geely official site
Geely's medium to high-end luxury brand, Emgrand () was launched in 2009.
Launched in 2010, and replacing the Shanghai Maple brand, chinacartimes.com, November 29, 2010 Englon () emulates classic, British style, and its model line includes a TX4 sold on the Chinese market. Geely official site Some of its cars are built by Geely subsidiary Shanghai LTI.
Considered a "goofy" word by native English speakers,
Gleagle cars, such as the Gleagle Panda, are available for sale on the Internet in China via the Taobao Mall, a popular e-commerce site.
The brand is also developing a $2,250 model that may replace the Tata Nano as the world's cheapest car.
No longer used by Geely this was the brand name of a Geely subsidiary company, Shanghai Maple Automobile, established in 1999. It was replaced by the Englon brand in 2010.
Geely refers to its dealer network as 4S stores and also sells some models online.
In Peru, Uruguay and Venezuela, Geely sells automobiles and motorcycles. Geely has also entered the Bangladeshi, Cuban, Indonesia, New Zealand, Pakistani, Romanian, Turkish and South African car markets. These exports may be in the form of complete knock-down kits.
Cuba has purchased several lots of Geely vehicles, Geely Official Site, Feb. 6, 2010 and a considerable number of Geely cars can be seen in Havana, Cuba, notably as police patrol cars or tourist taxis.
Geely makes SUVs and passenger cars.
Like many private Chinese automakers, some Geely models are criticised for too-closely resembling those of famous-name foreign manufacturers. 
In Western media, the Geely GE has seen such opprobrium for looking like a Rolls-Royce
Geely is, alongside many of its counterparts, seeking to sell electric vehicles in the future. China subsidies oil,
Geely is involved in determining the feasibility of developing electric-powered London Black Cabs. The maker of these taxis, which Geely holds part ownership of and a joint venture with, Manganese Bronze, says it has held talks with UK government officials about this and has signed a research and development agreement with Tanfield Group.
A possible upcoming electric model, the Nanoq could be developed in the future with cooperation from a Danish firm, Lynx.
Geely manufactures a number of motor scooters and motorcycles from 50 to 250&nbsp;cc displacement.
A small Geely sedan, the CK, performed badly in an informal crash test done by a Russian magazine sometime prior to 2008. Economist.com, Nov 13th 2008
A 2009 1.3-liter Geely CK 1 model without airbags earned a zero-star rating in a Latin-NCAP crash-test on protecting adult occupants in front seats.
 and it is subsequently the safest Chinese hatchback as of 2011. chinadaily.com.cn, 2011-01-14
 Geely construction in the region continued as of Aug., 2010, either for expanding the existing facility or on a new semi-complete knock-down factory.); Xiangtan, Hunan; 40 minutes south of Shanghai; Jinan, Shandong province; and Linhai, Luqiao and Ningbo, in Zhejiang.