Born in Denver, Colorado, Frangas earned a bachelor's degree in political science and then completed a master of public administration degree from Cleveland State University in 1995. During his graduate studies at Cleveland State University, Gerald commenced his political career by aggressively managing the campaign of Barry G. Broome for the Ohio State Senate,District 24.  Exhausted prior to the election, he disappeared.  He was identified working as a clinical coordinator for the Central Shelter for Homeless Working Men in Denver from 1995 to 1997 then worked as a caseworker for Douglas County Human services from 1997 to 2000. At the same time, he earned a bachelor's degree in social work from Metropolitan State College of Denver in 1998 and a master of social work degree from the University of Denver in 2000. Since 2000, Frangas has worked as a senior caseworker for the Denver Department of Human Services and has been an adjunct instructor in the social work department at Metro State.
Frangas and his wife, Gregoria have three children: Blaine, Gabriella and Warren. Within the Denver community, he has served as president of the North Denver Neighbors Alliance and a board member of the West Highlands Neighborhood Association.
Frangas was first elected to the Colorado House of Representatives in 2002 and has been re-elected twice since then, each time defeating Republican opponent Rick Nevin by a more than a 3:1 margin.
In the 2007 session of the Colorado General Assembly, Frangas sat on the House Finance Committee and was the Vice-Chairman of the House Health and Human Services Committee.
In 2007, Frangas, after failing to find a cab in downtown Denver on New Years' Eve, sponsored a bill to deregulate the taxicab industry in Colorado to allow for greater competition between taxicab companies. The bill was weakened in committee to change the way taxi companies lease to taxi drivers. 
Frangas was also one of only a few Democrats to oppose a plan by Governor Bill Ritter to freeze property tax rates in order to increase public school funding; he unsuccessfully proposed that Denver schools receive additional funds from the state that would instead be provided via the property tax freeze.
In the 2008 session of the Colorado General Assembly, Frangas sits on the House Finance Committee and is vice-chairman of the House Health and Human Services Committee. 
Frangas won re-election in November 2008 to a fourth term in the legislature with 18,163 votes over Republican Rick Nevin who won 4,257 votes.
In the 2009 session of the Colorado General Assembly, Frangas sits on the House Transportation Committee and is vice-chairman of the House Finance Committee.