Although Warren is often referred to as a fertilizer salesman, he was in fact manager of the American Founder's Life Insurance Co. in El Paso at the time he made ''Manos''.
Warren made ''Manos'' on a bet. He had met Stirling Silliphant, who was in the area scouting locations for a film. Warren bet Silliphant (who would later write the award winning screenplay for ''In the Heat of the Night'') that he could make a successful horror movie on a limited budget.
Warren raised about $19,000. He managed to find an old 16-millimeter Bell & Howell camera to use on the film. Because the camera was spring wound, it could only shoot just over 30 seconds of film at a time. After casting himself in the starring role of Michael, he approached locals to play the other roles, as well as fill crew positions. He did not pay anyone, instead promising people a percentage of the profits. Warren and two others also dubbed all the voices, as the camera was not capable of capturing sound.
For two months, Warren, the cast and crew filmed at County Judge Colbert Coldwell's ranch. Warren's ''prima donna'' attitude caused much friction among those working on the film, who began calling the film ''Mangos: The Cans of Fruit'' behind his back.
When the time came to premiere the film in El Paso, Warren turned the premiere into a media event.  He hired a limousine to carry the cast to the theater.  But a few minutes into the film, the audience began heckling it, and soon broke down into hysterics.  Warren and the others who worked on the film snuck out before the film was over.
Warren did manage to convince Emerson Releasing Corporation to distribute the film.  As a result, ''Manos'' had a short run on some drive-in theaters in West Texas.  Afterwards, the movie was largely forgotten until it was featured in ''Mystery Science Theater 3000'' in 1993.
Warren worked as a fertilizer salesman for some time after making ''Manos''.  He tried pitching a sequel to ''Manos'' and another script named ''Wild Desert Bikers'' but failed.  Warren then tried turning the script of ''Wild Desert Bikers'' into a book named ''Satan Rides a Bike'', but was unable to find a willing publisher.  Hal Warren died in December 1985.  His widow moved to Colorado. A documentary on Warren and the making of MANOS is in production from Mind Bender Motion Pictures: 