Although credited, John Doman, Neal Huff, and Corey Parker Robinson do not appear in this episode.
Brendan Walsh's name is misspelled in the credits as Brandon Walsh. Tony Small is miscredited as Tony Smalls. Guest stars Denise Francine Boyd, known as Fran Boyd, and Larry Andrews, known as Donnie Andrews, married in August 2007. Andrews is a convicted murderer who now works for a gang outreach program at the AME Bethel Church. His criminal past is part of the inspiration for the Omar Little character and the two share several scenes in this episode. Fran Boyd, a recovering drug addict who works for an AIDS prevention clinic, appears in the episode as a nurse taking blood from Bubbles for an AIDS test.  Boyd was one of the subjects of the non-fiction book '' '' written by series creator David Simon and writer Ed Burns.
Former state legislator Larry Young, who was expelled from the Senate in 1998, appears as a talk-show host interviewing Senator Clay Davis on WOLB-AM, the Baltimore station where Young now works as a host.
Marlo Stanfield assumes Proposition Joe's position as The Greek's narcotics distributor in Baltimore. Stanfield is given a phone and is shown how to communicate with The Greeks without speaking by Spiros "Vondas" Vondopoulos. Stanfield continues to use Maurice Levy to launder money and gives Levy his new cell phone number. Levy is optimistic, seeing Stanfields use of cell phones as an indicator of future wiretap cases, which Levy would profit from defending. Defense investigator Thomas "Herc" Hauk copies the number after hours.
Chris Partlow tells his family he is going away and then prepares an ambush in "Monk" Metcalf's apartment for Omar Little.
Duquan "Dukie" Weems gets beaten up by Spider. Michael Lee takes him to Dennis "Cutty" Wise's gym to learn how to defend himself. Cutty tries to explain to Dukie that his intelligence gives him some prospects and that even if he learns how to fight it won't necessarily stop him from being attacked. Michael also tries to teach Dukie how to shoot but recommends that his friend avoid using guns.
Rupert Bond holds a press conference to announce the Clay Davis corruption charges. Nerese Campbell convinces Davis to take the weight of the charges himself and Davis begins a publicity campaign trying to discredit the charges as being based on his race. 
Bubbles is concerned about serving food at Viva House and takes an AIDS test. He is disbelieving when he gets the all clear and Walon tells him to let go of his shame over Sherrod's death.
Herc gives Marlo's cell phone number to his friend and old partner in the police department Ellis Carver. Carver delivers the number to Lester Freamon, but Freamon is unsuccessful in convincing Cedric Daniels to approach the Mayor and request a new investigation into Stanfield. 
Jimmy McNulty invents more details about his fake serial killer and leaks the story to Alma Gutierrez who involves Scott Templeton. The resulting story draws some attention to the case and Daniels appeals to Mayor Tommy Carcetti for resources. Carcetti is reluctant to spend money on it and only Kima Greggs is assigned to assist McNulty. McNulty tells Greggs to keep working her own cases. Freamon approaches McNulty with Stanfield's cell phone number and the two decide to stage a phone call from the killer to give them probable cause for a wiretap. When Templeton fakes a call from the serial killer to his cell phone McNulty seizes on the opportunity to get the wiretap and the story takes the front page. Freamon sets up a disconnected wiretap in the homicide unit that they believe is monitoring the fake killer's cell phone while Freamon uses the court paperwork to set up his own wiretap on Stanfield's phone. Templeton is assigned to canvass the homeless but has little success and invents a family of four using one man's name.
Elena confronts McNulty about his failing relationship with Beadie Russell while Russell seeks advice from Bunk Moreland as she is not quite ready to give up on McNulty.
Omar spends several nights watching Monk's home with Butchie's friend Donnie, while both are unaware of the ambush. Omar breaks in to the apartment with Donnie when he believes Monk is alone. Donnie is shot and killed and Omar shoots O-Dog in the leg. Omar is trapped by a hail of fire from Partlow, Snoop and Michael.  Omar defenestrates himself onto the apartment balcony and disappears, having apparently jumped from the third floor balcony. When Chris, Snoop and Michael look down from the balcony, Omar is gone.