I started collecting music at that unfortunate time when audio tapes were considered to be the most convenient way to collect music, and then quickly switched to CDs when the players became affordable.  CDs were described as being higher quality than vinyl, so I never bothered collecting records.  I bought my first iPod about three years ago and loved it for travel and home.  However, there was a noticeable decrease in sound quality over CDs, especially when using headphones, so I've kept up on my CD collecting and avoided music downloads
I understand why MP3s are of lower quality than CDs (due to compression, if I understand correctly), and I've skimmed Analog sound vs. digital sound.  Can someone explain to me why a CD is superior in quality, but to some a record still sounds better?  I know I'm asking for opinions, but I've been musing on this for over a year now, and I'm thinking of taking the plunge and becoming a record collector.  My tastes tend to run toward punk, post-punk, and indie rock, and a lot of these artists did and still do vinyl-only releases.  So that's one reason to start collecting at this late date (also, everytime I look at a Big Black or Shellac CD, I feel like Steve Albini is disappointed in me).
Is it too late for me, or is record collecting still worthwhile?  I know I'll never own ''Yesterday and Today'' with the butcher cover, but Thrill Jockey just released a vinyl-only set of singles that I'd like to get.  Are there are any record collectors out there who can recommend a good way to get started?
Back to audio quality for a minute, how come you can sometimes hear that little squeak of the fingers moving on the guitar strings and sometimes you can't?  Do record producers edit that out? 
Sorry about the length of this question, but as I said I've been considering this for a long time.  One last question I suppose I should ask: can anyone recommend a good record player?  --  ( ) 03:27, 29 December 2007 (UTC)
I have written the following letter to yahoo question bank, but they say that my letter cannot be delivered to the addressee; here the addressee is yahoo itself. I write letter to yahoo about my opinion about their question-answer-point-vote. My free e-mail address is also yahoo. The situation seems to be like "I don't know who I am". Please given your comments about this situation.I think my letter is a kind of harsh criticsm about the question bank points getting competition. 
My dear Yahoo wonderful  answers-giving people,
I am an old lady and I con't understand many of the computer jargons and cluttering home page of many web-site including yahoo. There are at least fifty linkings in one home page and once clicked somewhere by mistake, the clicker willbe taken to unknown destination from where nobody can return to his original home. He will wander all the places like a vagbond aimlessly; at least begger gets some money while begging, but the wanderer in the web gets nothing; only frustration to see all unwanting ad and other alluring pictures, which have no meaning except wasting one's precious time.if the time is considered to be precious. 
Now about your question and answer session: you speak about many points, level 1, level 2, and level 3 to level infinity.not allowed to level 4,5,5, I don't need any point from you and I am asking question for satisfying my foolish curiosity and  create more confusion in a confusing  world which to my view is running after the shadows in order to satisfy their momentary sentiment and feelings. In other words, what is the point in getting points in the question answer series?. Let people ask question and let somebody gives any answer she thinks fit. Giving points to people simply create a competition in their minds which on the other hand create tension in the individual to get more points and more points, points, points; so the real thrilling of asking question and aswering question lose its real value. People ask question to get more point and more points. Why don't you throw out this old way of doing things! Internet is not a testing ground as in all other fields, it is a place where people feel free. not to be entangled thmselves with points and points, votes, and votes. Don't follow man made rules and regulation to control the internet! Let freedom prevail! freedom  from custom, convention, religion, unwanting testing, points, votes, etc. 
Yours thankamma     Preceding   comment added by   ( ) 07:30, 29 December 2007 (UTC) 
Hello,
I want to buy a HDV camcorder like the Canon HV20 but I have a Standard-definition television set. My question is could I view content from that camcorder on my TV? The reason I want to buy a HDV camcorder is, down the line I will get a HDTV but want to preserve my memories for now on digital video. I can live with viewing the video I shoot for now as 'standard' on my TV. I am concerned I might not be able to view it at all. Please help!!! Thank you!     Preceding   comment added by   ( ) 08:50, 29 December 2007 (UTC) 
Sorry just checking something     Preceding   comment added by   (       ) 23:40, 29 December 2007 (UTC) 
This is worry I have. I'm wondering if all guitars sound the same through modeling amps. I don't have a modeling amp myself, but I do have 2 solid state Crate practice amps. I can't afford to buy and maintain a real tube. So what is the case?   ( ) 16:41, 29 December 2007 (UTC)
How do the athletes qualify for the "show"? Are they invited? Or does whoever is leading the World Cup og World Championship automatically qualify?     Preceding   comment added by   ( ) 20:03, 29 December 2007 (UTC) 