The spacecraft was of the Ranger Block 1 design and consisted of a hexagonal base 1.5 m across upon which was mounted a cone-shaped 4 m high tower of aluminum struts and braces. Two solar panel wings measuring 5.2 m from tip to tip extended from the base. A high-gain directional dish antenna was attached to the bottom of the base. Spacecraft experiments and other equipment were mounted on the base and tower. Instruments aboard the spacecraft included a Lyman-alpha telescope, a rubidium-vapor magnetometer, electrostatic analyzers, medium-energy range particle detectors, two triple coincidence telescopes, a cosmic-ray integrating ionization chamber, cosmic dust detectors, and solar X-ray scintillation counters.
The communications system included the high gain antenna and an omni-directional medium gain antenna and two transmitters, one at 960.1 MHz with 0.25 W power output and the other at 960.05&nbsp;MHz with 3 W power output. Power was to be furnished by 8680 solar cells on the two panels, a 57&nbsp;kg silver-zinc battery, and smaller batteries on some of the experiments. Attitude control was provided by a solid-state timing controller, Sun and Earth sensors, and pitch and roll jets. The temperature was controlled passively by gold plating, white paint, and polished aluminum surfaces.
The Ranger 1 spacecraft was designed to go into an Earth parking orbit and then move into a 60,000 by 1,100,000&nbsp;km Earth orbit. The purpose was to test systems and strategies for future lunar missions.
In the evening of August 22, 1961, Ranger 1 was successfully launched into the parking orbit as planned. However, its Agena B engine failed to restart to put it into the higher trajectory orbit, so that when Ranger 1 separated from its Agena stage it went into a low Earth orbit and began tumbling. The satellite re-entered Earth's atmosphere on August 30, 1961. The mission was partially successful, in that much of the primary objective of flight testing the equipment was accomplished; however, little scientific data was returned.