The '''Dynamic Tower''' (also known as '''Dynamic Architecture Building''' or the '''Da Vinci Tower''') is a planned , 80-floor moving skyscraper in Dubai, United Arab Emirates, designed by architect David Fisher.
The tower is expected to be architecturally innovative for several reasons:
Uniquely, each floor will be able to rotate independently.  This will result in a constantly changing shape of the tower.  Each floor will rotate a maximum of  per minute, or one full rotation in 90 minutes.
It will also be the world's first prefabricated skyscraper  with 40 factory-built modules for each floor. 90% of the tower will be built in a factory and shipped to the construction site. This will allow the entire building to be built in only 22 months. The only part of the tower that will be built at the construction site will be the core.  Part of this prefabrication will be the decrease in cost and number of workers (90 at the work site and 600 in the factory instead of 2,000 needed). The total construction time will be over 30% less than a normal skyscraper of the same size. The majority of the workers will be in factories, where it will be much safer. The modules will be preinstalled including kitchen and bathroom fixtures. The core will serve each floor with a special, patented connection for clean water, based on technology used to refuel airplanes in mid-flight.
The entire tower will be powered from wind turbines and solar panels. Enough surplus electricity should be produced to power five other similar sized buildings in the vicinity.  The turbines will be located between each of the rotating floors.  They could generate up to 1,200,000 kilowatt-hours of energy.  The solar panels will be located on the roof and the top of each floor.
In 2008, the designer of the Dynamic Tower said that he expected it to be completed in 2010. Due to the global financial crisis, delays in acquiring land in Dubai, and patent issues , in 2009 Fisher claimed to finish construction late 2011.  However, construction has not started yet, and there has been no official announcement of the building site. Fisher did not "say where the tower would be built,  because he wanted to keep it a surprise."
Fisher distributed a biography which said he received an honorary doctorate from "The Prodeo Institute at Columbia University in New York". No such institution exists, and Columbia said it had never awarded Fisher an honorary degree. Fisher acknowledges that he is not well known, has never built a skyscraper before and hasn't practiced architecture regularly in decades.
TIME's Best Inventions of 2008 #16 The Dynamic Tower 