On the "tssi" yahoo mailing list, a user signed in as "Jeffry with one e" posted a call for help with  .  The two users above appeared shortly after, as well as   who has posted to that yahoo! thread. I would expect the above users to have at least posted in the yahoo thread if they were real people.  It is possible that they are sock puppets of  , or even that they are real people who lurk on that forum.  However, even if they are, they are here at the request of  . The two listed user accounts should be investigated to see if they are sock puppets of either   or  .  I had planned to list this at requests for checkuser after the AFD closed, but now I have evidence that they are at least meat puppets I thought this was the appropriate avenue.   ( ) 17:05, 5 January 2008 (UTC)
I take great offence at being accused of recruiting either sock puppets or meat puppets. I feel that this accusation has been filed purely because the accuser doesn't like the conversation in the AFD. Regardless, this entire situation has sullied my opinion of Wikipedia. It appears that ''might makes right'' here and the person with the most contributions over the years is, obviously, allowed to besmirch the character and integrity of any other user they wish.   ( ) 18:14, 5 January 2008 (UTC)
I'm confident that however you investigate, you will find that   is my only user account. I apologize to the users who gave support to the articles and have been effected by my asking for help on the yahoo group. It is my opinion that since the consensus was not going in the accuser's favor, they revert to character attacks. It saddens me to see Wikipedia effected by people who seem to be hell bent on adding to their contribution list. It wasn't my intention to create a conflict, it was simply to add information about a fictional universe that I enjoy on to the world wide web, because I haven't seen it anywhere else. Seemed like Wikipedia used to be the place to do just that.   ( ) 01:43, 6 January 2008 (UTC)
I am a webmaster for Top Secret the Role Playing game.  My site is http://www.cm4.com/topsecret/
I have been to the Top Secret sites before, but have not contributed to them.   ( ) 11:51, 8 January 2008 (UTC)
Clearly meat puppetry here. However the AFD has ended so the purpose of blocking being preventative is rather moot here. The question is will these users violate   again? We don't know. Therefore I'm issuing warnings to all three and entering notional 1 second blocks in there block logs.                   00:25, 14 January 2008 (UTC)