This is a '''family tree of Chinese emperors''' from 221 BC till AD 581, the first of three periods of 700 years, from the First Emperor to the re-unification of China by the Sui.
Chinese emperors family tree (ancient)     ''Chinese emperors family tree (early)''     Chinese emperors family tree (middle)     Chinese emperors family tree (late)
The Qin Dynasty (      ) was established in 221 BC after the King of Qin conquered his final independent neighbour, the state of Qi. It is now recognised as the first Chinese imperial dynasty in the modern sense of the term; in recognition of this, its rulers were for the first time titled "Emperor" (      ), a title of which the components are drawn from legend, higher than the previous title "King" (   ). The ancestral name of the family was Ying (   ), although it is anachronistic to regard this as a family name in the modern sense: it would not have been used together with a given name. The titles of the Qin emperors were literally monarchical ordinals: "Qin Shi Huang" (         ), in full "Qin Shi Huangdi" (            ) means literally "the first Emperor of Qin", "Qin Er Shi" (         ), in full "Qin Er Shi Huangdi" (               ) means "the second Emperor of Qin", and so forth.
Emperor Xian, the last emperor of the Han Dynasty, was a descendant of the first emperor Liu Bang. Lasting for over 400 years, the Han Dynasty is regarded as one of the golden ages of Chinese history. The Han Dynasty was interrupted by the reign of the usurper Wang Mang, who declared the Xin Dynasty (9   23 AD); on this basis, the Han Dynasty is generally divided into the Western Han (206BC   9AD and 23   25 AD) and the Eastern Han (25   220 AD). The rulers of the Shu Han, one of the three successor states to the Han Dynasty during the Three Kingdoms period, were descended from the Han imperial family, and considered themselves a continuation of the Han Dynasty; they are included below.
The following is a family tree for the Jin Dynasty, which ruled a unified China during the Western Jin Dynasty (265   316 AD). Although greatly weakened by the War of the Eight Princes during the reign of the developmentally disabled Emperor Hui, when members of the clan fought among themselves for imperial control, and forced Eastwards after the conquest of their capital in 316 AD, the dynasty nonetheless continued in the form of the Eastern Jin Dynasty until 420 AD.