Goodwin began as an artist drawing cartoons for magazines and as a freelance "writer and occasional art assistant" to Leonard Starr's newspaper comic strip ''Mary Perkins, On Stage''. His first editorial work was for ''Redbook'' magazine, on which he worked both before and after his Army service as a draftee.
After his departure from Warren in 1967, Goodwin would occasionally contribute stories over the next 15 years and even returned for a short stint as editor in 1974., ''Comic Book Artist'' #4 (Winter 1999). .
Archie Goodwin's first prose story was published by ''Ellery Queen's Mystery Magazine'' which warned him he could not use Archie Goodwin as a pen name because it was a Rex Stout character in the Nero Wolfe books.  According to Goodwin's wife, the magazine "then  were so delighted when he wrote back to say that it was his real name that they used the ancedote as the introduction to the story, which ran in the July 1962 issue."
From 1967 to 1980, Goodwin also wrote scripts for King Features Syndicate, including the daily strip Secret Agent X-9, drawn by Al Williamson, as well as working on other strips including ''Captain Kate''. His experience ghost writing ''Dan Flagg'' inspired "The Success Story" (drawn by Williamson, who also ghosted on Flagg) for ''Creepy'' #1 (1964), famed among comic strip fans for its EC style dark humor in depicting a creator whose only contribution to the strip that made him rich was his signature. Not limited to newspaper strips, he found work at the major comics companies as both writer and editor, working for Marvel Comics on titles including ''Fantastic Four'' and ''Iron Man''. Goodwin worked briefly for DC Comics during the 1970s, where he edited the war comics ''G.I. Combat'',Archie Goodwin's editorial credits at DC Comics  and  at the Grand Comics Database ''Our Fighting Forces'', and ''Star Spangled War Stories'', and replaced Julius Schwartz as editor of ''Detective Comics'' for one year.  Goodwin's collaboration with Walt Simonson on the ''Manhunter'' back-up feature in ''Detective Comics'' won several awards.
In 1976, Goodwin replaced Gerry Conway to become the eighth Editor-in-Chief of Marvel Comics, with the understanding that it would only be temporary until a permanent replacement could be found. He ultimately resigned at the end of 1977 and was replaced by Jim Shooter. While Editor-in-Chief, Marvel secured the rights to publish the ''Star Wars'' adaptation and tie-in series, which then sold phenomenally well (helped by a dearth of other ''Star Wars'' merchandise at the time) at a point when the comics industry was in severe decline. Goodwin recalled about the ''Star Wars'' comic book, "That really worked ... but I can't take any credit for it. Roy Thomas is the one who brought it to Marvel, and he had to push a little bit to get them to do it." He followed Thomas in adapting the ''Star Wars'' characters into an ongoing comic book,  as well as continuing the story (pre-''Return of the Jedi'') in a daily comic strip. Goodwin wrote the strips under the pseudonyms '''R.S. Helm''' and '''Russ Helm'''. He wrote comic book adaptations for Marvel of the two ''Star Wars'' sequels as well as other science-fiction films such as ''Close Encounters of the Third Kind'' and ''Blade Runner''. In 1979, Goodwin wrote an adaptation of the first ''Alien'' movie which was drawn by Walt Simonson and published by Heavy Metal.
After Marvel Comics passed on publishing the American incarnation of ''Metal Hurlant'' (''Heavy Metal''), Editor-in-chief Jim Shooter was charged with producing an alternate title, which became ''Epic Illustrated''. It was initially edited by Rick Marschall, but Shooter in 2000 recalled approaching publisher Stan Lee to urge a replacement. "I told Stan, 'There's one guy who could do this. I don't know if we can get him.' He said, 'Who's that?' 'Archie Goodwin.' The reason I didn't think we could get him is because he used to be my boss and I didn't know how he'd feel about coming back and me being his boss."Thomas, Michael.  ''Comic Book Resources'', October 6, 2000. Accessed August 2, 2008. Shooter on Goodwin:  "First and foremost, everyone loved Archie. Archie had a manner about him that you just couldn't not like him. While he was tough as nails, and he was probably the best that passed through this business, he managed to do it without offending anyone. He managed to be respected and remain friends with everyone and do his job."
Goodwin was at the time still working for Marvel as a writer, and Shooter recalls concocting a plan whereby the company "pretended that Archie reported to Stan. In fact, I was doing all the paperwork and all the employee reviews and the budgets" so that Goodwin could have the illusion of not working for his successor. In the autumn of 1979, Marschall was fired and Goodwin hired as ''Epic'''s editor.
In addition to Marvel's first creator-owned imprint ''Epic Illustrated'', Goodwin set up the Marvel Graphic Novel series, giving a number of artists and writers their first break as well as allowing established Marvel staff to work with material too difficult or 'adult' for the monthly titles.
As Shooter recalls events, he approached Goodwin after the moderate success of the ''Epic'' magazine and creator-owned graphic novels to produce a full-fledged line of creator-owned comics, Epic Comics. Goodwin initially balked at the additional workload, and Shooter turned the line over to Al Milgrom before Goodwin ultimately accepted editorship.
Goodwin also introduced the first English translation of Katsuhiro Otomo's Akira and published English translations of the work of Jean Giraud aka Moebius.
Goodwin returned to DC Comics as an editor and writer in 1989. He wrote the graphic novel '' '' painted by Scott Hampton and published in 1992. Throughout the 1990s, Goodwin edited a number of Batman projects, including the Elseworlds miniseries '' '', and the Alan Grant-written/Kevin O'Neill-illustrated parody one-shot ''Batman: Mitefall'', a take-off of the   saga, filtered through the character of Bat-Mite.
Among Goodwin's most notable last editorial projects were Starman, written by James Robinson and first published by DC in 1994 and DC's '' '' by Tim Sale and Jeph Loeb. It is a testament to Goodwin that Loeb has said that Goodwin inspired their portrayal of Gotham police chief Jim Gordon in ''The Long Halloween'' and its sequel '' '', while Robinson (who considered Goodwin both a mentor and close personal friend), continued to list Goodwin as a "Guiding Light" on later issues of ''Starman''. Goodwin also edited '' '', and ''Azrael''. Goodwin's ''Creepy'' work is cited by editor Mark Chiarello as informing the creation of the   comics.Chiarello, Mark. "Introduction" in Chiarello, Mark and Peterson, Scott (ed.s) ''Batman: Black and White'' (DC Comics, 1998) ISBN 1-56389-439-4. Chiarello on Goodwin: "...probably the very best editor ever to work in comics, probably the very best writer ever to work in comics."
Goodwin died of cancer in 1998. Goodwin was honored in a tribute issue of the magazine ''Comic Book Profiles''.
Goodwin's work won him a good deal of recognition in the industry, including both the 1973 Shazam Award for Best Writer (Dramatic Division), and the 1974 Shazam Award for Best Writer (Dramatic Division) for the Manhunter series running in ''Detective Comics'' #437 - 443, in addition to winning Shazam Awards for Best Individual Short Story for "The Himalayan Incident" in ''Detective Comics'' #437, "Cathedral Perilous" in ''Detective Comics'' #441 and "Gotterdammerung" in ''Detective Comics'' #443 (all with Walt Simonson; all for ''Manhunter'' episodes). Goodwin's work on ''Manhunter'', in which he both updated an obscure Golden Age hero, and, in the series' last episode, took the daring approach of killing him off (one of the few comic book deaths that has actually "taken" and not been reversed or retconned away in the decades since it occurred) is very well regarded by both fans and other comics professionals.
Goodwin stated in his final interview, "I think that ''Manhunter'' is one of just several projects that I've worked on that I consider a highlight in my career. It is something that I may never be able to top in a lot of ways. To have done that and for DC to have given me the opportunity to do that was great."
He won the 1992 "Bob Clampett Humanitarian" Eisner Award, and was named Best Editor by the Eisners in 1993. San Diego Comic-Con International In 1998 he was entered into the Eisner Hall of Fame.
In 2007, Goodwin was inducted into the Oklahoma Cartoonists Hall of Fame in Pauls Valley, Oklahoma, located in the Toy and Action Figure Museum.
In ''The Batman Adventures''     the first DC Comics spinoff of '' ''     Goodwin appears as Mr. Nice, a super-strong but childishly-innocent super-villain. He is one of a screwball trio of incompetent super-villains that also includes The Mastermind (a caricature of Mike Carlin) and The Perfessor (a caricature of Dennis O'Neil). ''Batman: Gotham Adventures'' #13 (June 1999) features the last appearance of the characters with Mr. Nice leaving the group to fulfill a prophecy, with the issue being dedicated to Archie Goodwin.
He is also name-checked in issues of Marvel's ''Star Wars'' comics (later rebranded "Classic Star Wars"), including in the Alien-language words "Niwdoog Eihcra," his name in reverse.
A character based on him also appears in issue #82 of ''Cerebus''. He stands at the foot of the giant, living stone statue Thrunk and repeats everything Thrunk says - as if he is passing Thrunk's commands to the masses. Thrunk kills him when he steps on him.
The airport in fictional Gotham City, home of Batman, is named Goodwin, after Archie.
Stiles, Steve , SteveStiles.com, n.d. .