A '''Sun-synchronous orbit''' (sometimes incorrectly called a heliosynchronous orbit) is a geocentric orbit which combines altitude and inclination in such a way that an object on that orbit ascends or descends over any given point of the Earth's surface at the same local mean solar time.  The surface illumination angle will be nearly the same every time.  This consistent lighting is a useful characteristic for satellites that image the Earth's surface in visible or infrared wavelengths (e.g. weather and spy satellites) and for other remote sensing satellites (e.g. those carrying ocean and atmospheric remote sensing instruments that require sunlight).  For example, a satellite in sun-synchronous orbit might ascend across the equator twelve times a day each time at approximately 15:00 mean local time. This is achieved by having the osculating orbital plane precess (rotate) approximately one degree each day with respect to the celestial sphere, eastward, to keep pace with the Earth's revolution around the Sun.
Special cases of the sun-synchronous orbit are the '''noon/midnight orbit''', where the local mean solar time of passage for equatorial longitudes is around noon or midnight, and the '''dawn/dusk orbit''', where the local mean solar time of passage for equatorial longitudes is around sunrise or sunset, so that the satellite rides the terminator between day and night. Riding the terminator is useful for active radar satellites as the satellites' solar panels can always see the Sun, without being shadowed by the Earth. It is also useful for some satellites with passive instruments which need to limit the Sun's influence on the measurements, as it is possible to always point the instruments towards the night side of the Earth.  The dawn/dusk orbit has been used for solar observing scientific satellites such as Yohkoh, TRACE and Hinode, affording them a nearly continuous view of the Sun.
Sun-synchronous orbits are possible around other planets, such as Mars.
As the orbital period of a spacecraft is 2\pi\ a\sqrt{\frac{a}{\mu}}\, and as a \approx p\, for a circular or almost circular orbit it follows that such an orbit is sun-synchronus if and only if
As an example, for a=7200 km (the spacecraft about 800 km over the Earth surface) one gets with this formula a sun-synchronous inclination of 98.696 deg.
The definition of the '''Local time of the ascending node''' concept for Sun-synchronous spacecraft is only related to the position of the Sun ''indirectly'' through Newcomb's formula which gives the angle between the Greenwich meridian and the Vernal equinox in the form
Nowadays one uses 2000/01/01 00:00:00 corresponding to Modified Julian Day zero. This then means (counting angles in radians) that the angle from Vernal equinox to the direction '''away''' from the Sun projected down to the equatorial plane must be approximately
The right ascension of the ascending node (\Omega\,) for a sun-synchronous orbit increases with precisely this rate 
The local time of the ascending node in hours is then the constant value
The local time of the descending node is obtained by adding (or subtracting) 12 hours