Win Scott Eckert first read Philip Jose Farmer's "fictional biography" '' '', and become hooked by the concept of the Wold Newton family. In 1997, he coined the term "Wold Newton Universe" on his website, An Expansion of Philip Jose Farmer's Wold Newton Universe.
Farmer's original concept of the '''Wold Newton family''' was of a literary merging between novels, a crossover between multiple works, linking standout fictional characters into a deliberate family and coherent chronology. Farmer's two fictional "biographies" of the fictional characters '''Tarzan''' (''Tarzan Alive'')(Right) and '''Clark Savage, Jr.''' ('' '') proposed that actual meteorite which landed in Wold Newton, Yorkshire, England, on December 13, 1795 caused a genetic mutation in the occupants of a passing coach.
Their (fictional) descendants, therefore, became the stalwarts of fantastic fiction. Farmer's initial family trees include such luminaries (and their ancestors and descendants) as Sherlock Holmes, Lord Greystoke, A.J. Raffles, (Conan Doyle's) Professor Challenger, Sir Percy Blakeney, (Poe's) C. Auguste Dupin, Lord Peter Wimsey, Bulldog Drummond and Nero Wolfe; James Bond, Mr Moto, Philip Marlowe, Kilgore Trout, Sam Spade, Professor Moriarty (A.K.A. Captain Nemo), Phileas Fogg, Wells' Time Traveller and Fu Manchu.
Eckert and others expanded upon Farmer's concept of the Wold Newton ''Family'', using the family trees as a central device to expand the fictional universe that the family inhabits, by documenting crossovers between said fictional characters in various media. Thus, the original core, related Wold Newton '''Family''' became a '''Universe''', no longer tied to being the relatives, descendants and ancestors of those present at the 1795 Wold Newton meteor strike. (Eckert also expanded the 'main' family tree in 2002.
The presumption from the family trees was that most - if not all - fictional characters could be said to share the same universe. Farmer himself penned a number of crossover fiction stories and novels set in what is now termed the Wold Newton Universe, largely based around the three central pillars of ''Tarzan'', ''Holmes'' and ''Savage'', but also incorporating (among others) Lovecraft's Cthulhu mythos into the universe. Subsequently, the early history of the WNU has been expanded forwards and backwards in time to incorporate the very early history of Conan the Barbarian (through the works of Robert E. Howard, L. Sprague de Camp, Roy Thomas and others), right through to the far-future exploits of the many characters in the Star Trek universe.
Eckert (and others)'s work in bringing together diverse articles and references by, and from works by, such individuals as Alan Moore, William S. Baring-Gould, Michael Moorcock, Kim Newman, John Pearson and Jess Nevins have expanded the idea. With the blessing and approval of P.J. Farmer, the primary Wold Newton website features details on various fictional biographies (including those of Biggles and John Steed); details on Farmer's own contributions to the WNU and a comprehensive chronology of the WNU from "Prehistory" to the future.
Eckert served as an expert consultant on "crossovers involving characters from pulp fiction and Victorian literature" for the lawsuit brought against Twentieth Century Fox over their similarities between their adaptation of Alan Moore and Kevin O'Neill's comic ''The League of Extraordinary Gentlemen'', and an earlier screenplay entitled ''Cast of Characters''. (Famously, this lawsuit proved to be another nail in the coffin of Alan Moore's disillusionment with the film industry - not least since many of the similarities between the two screenplays were not present in Moore's original work, and yet part of the allegation was directed squarely at him.)
He has written pulp tales for a yearly anthology of Wold-Newtonish stories edited by Jean Marc and Randy Lofficier, ''Tales of the Shadowmen'' volumes 1-5 (Black Coat Press, 2005   2009), mostly centered on the adventures of Doc Ardan, a French version of Doc Savage. He has also written stories for ''Lance Star - Sky Ranger'' (Wild Cat Books, 2006) and ''The Avenger Chronicles'' (Moonstone Books, 2008). He is a regular contributor of Wold Newton essays and stories to the pro-zine dedicated to and authorized by Farmer, '' ''.
In 2006, he wrote the forward to Bison Books' new edition of Philip Jose Farmer's original Wold Newtonian work ''  (Bison Books, 2006).
Eckert's "Crossover Chronology" of the WNU, detailing in large part the full history of the Wold Newton Universe, largely (although not entirely) through the use of literary/film/TV crossovers between members of the core Wold Newton family and other fictional individuals is due to be published in book form, greatly expanded, by Black Coat Press in 2010 as ''Crossovers: A Secret Chronology of the World''.