Narre Warren Post Office, located on what is now Heatherton Road, opened on 21 January 1869. In 1900 it was renamed Narre Warren North, and Narre Warren Railway Station Post Office (open since 1886) was renamed Narre Warren.
Over the years Narre Warren has grown from a semi-rural residential town to become a part of a major growth corridor in the south east of Melbourne. In recent years a multitude of new housing developments have seen Narre Warren expand to such an extent that it now adjoins neighbouring suburbs such as Berwick. An estimated eight houses are built every day in the area with young, lower middle class families making up the majority of new residents.
Schools in Narre Warren include , , Maramba Primary School, , Mary Mackillop Primary School, Fountain Gate Secondary College, Alkira Secondary College, Fountain Gate Primary School, Dandenong Valley Special School , Fountain Gate Secondary College and Fleetwood Primary School (Formerly known as: Hallam Valley Primary School). Narre Warren Station Primary School was closed at the end of 2001 and moved to Narre Warren South (to suit the change in growth areas) where it became Hillsmeade Primary School.  There is also a large community education centre, Narre Community Learning Centre Inc, located in Malcolm Court.
Westfield Fountain Gate (named after one of the earlier subdivisions) is at the heart of the main commercial precinct in Narre Warren. It is one of the largest shopping centres in Australia, housing many of Australia's major retailers. The centre has been made famous by the popular Australian television show Kath and Kim, parts of which were also filmed at Westfield Southland.
There is also a local shopping strip that developed around the Narre Warren Railway Station in Webb Street.
The civic precinct is located inside the boundary of Westfield, and includes the City of Casey municipal offices, Narre Warren Library and the Casey ARC (Aquatic and Recreation Centre). This precinct is currently being considered for a $300 million redevelopment by the Casey Council.