The '''contiguous United States''' are the 48 U.S. states on the continent of North America that are south of Canada and north of Mexico, plus the District of Columbia.
The term excludes the states of Alaska and Hawaii, and all off-shore U.S. territories and possessions, such as Puerto Rico.'''', adj., "being the part of the United States on the North American continent; ''also'' : being the part of the United States comprising the lower 48 states"
These maps show the contiguous 48 states and D.C., but not Alaska and Hawaii.
Together, the 48 contiguous states and D.C. have an area of .  Of this,  is land, comprising 83.65% of U.S. land area. Officially,  is water area, comprising 62.66% of the nation's water area. Its 2000 census population was 279,583,437, comprising 99.35% of the nation's population. Its population density was 94.484 inhabitants/sq mi (36.480/km  ), compared to 79.555/sq mi (30.716/km  ) for the nation as a whole.
While '''coterminous U.S.''' and '''conterminous U.S.''' have the same precise meaning as '''contiguous U.S.''' (all three adjectives meaning "sharing a common boundary"), other terms commonly used to describe the 48 contiguous states have a greater degree of ambiguity.
Because Alaska is also on the North American continent, the term ''continental United States'', if interpreted literally, should also include that state,
The term was in use prior to the admission of Alaska and Hawaii as states of the United States, and at that time usually excluded outlying territories of the U.S.
The District of Columbia is not always specifically mentioned as being part of ''CONUS''.
The term ''lower 48'' may or may not include the District of Columbia (which is not part of any of the 48 states).  The National Geographic style guide recommends the use of ''contiguous'' or ''conterminous United States'' instead of ''lower 48'' when the 48 states are meant, unless used in the context of Alaska.
Both Alaska and Hawaii have their own unique labels for the contiguous United States because of their own locations relative to them.
Alaska became the 49th state of the United States on January 3, 1959. Alaska is on the northwest end of the North American continent, but separated from the rest of the United States by Canada. In Alaska, given the ambiguity surrounding the usage of ''continental'', the term "continental United States" is almost unheard of when referring to the contiguous 48 states. Several other terms have been used over the years.  The term ''Lower 48'' was for many years the most common Alaskan equivalent for "contiguous United States".  However, since the 1980s Alaskans have increasingly adopted the term ''Outside'' to refer to the rest of the United States.  Alaskans will speak of going Outside to vacation or will refer to being born Outside.
Hawaii became the 50th state of the United States on August 21, 1959. The Hawaiian Islands are located in Oceania and are about  from the North American continent. In Hawaii and overseas American territories, for instance, the terms ''the Mainland''  or ''U.S. Mainland'' are used to refer to the continental United States.
Some parts of the contiguous United States are accessible by road only by travelling on Canadian soil. Point Roberts, Washington, Elm Point, Minnesota, and the Northwest Angle in Minnesota are three such places. Alburgh, Vermont is not directly connected by land, but is accessible by road via bridges from New York and Vermont. 