Stephen Barry  Paul Shufflebotham  Atiye Bayman  Jason Corneille
Based in Santa Clara, California, the company is focused on large-scale commercial and utility projects,
Industry research expects the market for solar panels that use thin-film technology instead of traditional silicon-based materials to more than double by 2013. Thin-film now represents 20% of the solar market.
To date, the company has raised $350 million in investment from investors including Kleiner Perkins Caulfield & Byers and VantagePoint Venture Partners.
MiaSole was founded by veterans of the hard disk industry who leveraged their expertise in hard disk manufacturing to introduce new manufacturing processes into the thin-film solar industry.
In December 2006, the company's CEO, Dave Pearce, announced that 50MW of manufacturing capacity as well as an imminent IPO but failed to deliver on those milestones. Pearce was replaced in September 2007 and has since moved onto startup Nuvosun. Semiconductor equipment executive Joseph Laia was brought in as CEO to move the company from R&D stage into volume production. Under Laia, MiaSole worked on re-engineering the manufacturing process to improve efficiency and cost.
Laia spent much of his career figuring out how to deposit chemicals very carefully on substrates, first at the Los Alamos National Laboratory and later at semiconductor machinery companies Novellus and KLA-Tencor. He brought former KLA-Tencor colleague, Paul Shufflebotham, into MiaSole specifically to address the key process of sputtering.
Currently, MiaSole has a manufacturing factory in California and plans to open a second, larger factory in the United States.
MiaSole initial raise was in 2004 and led by VantagePoint Venture Partners.  The B round raised $16 million in venture capital investment in June 2005, in a round led by Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers,
The company raised $50 million in a fourth round of financing in September 2007, bringing total financing to $100 million.
MiaSole currently has roughly $350 million in investment from investors from ,,   and . In addition, the company received about $100 million federal tax credit from the United States Department of Energy.
Miasole's development of  a new production process leverages its executives    experience in the hard disk and semiconductor industries.
In this unique process, MiaSole lays Copper indium gallium selenide (CIGS), on a flexible stainless steel substrate entirely through a continuous sputtering process.
CIGS is among the most efficient solar cell materials with a maximum solar conversion efficiency of 20.2% in the laboratory     better than the best lab cells using amorphous silicon or cadmium telluride,
The US National Renewable Energy Laboratory has since independently verified two 10% Miasole CIGS modules.
In 2010, the company plans to expand capacity to 140 megawatts from about 60 megawatts. The company projects it will have shipped 20 to 30 megawatts of capacity by December 2010.