The  '''Phoenix Convention Center''', in the heart of Downtown Phoenix, has been hosting national and regional conventions and trade shows as well as consumer events and theatrical productions since it opened in 1972. And, as Phoenix has undergone tremendous growth through the years by attracting high-technology businesses, transplants from other states, and an increase in tourism, so has Phoenix Convention Center.
The concept for a performing arts auditorium developed as early as 1959. At that time, cultural and theatrical events were being held in outdated high school auditoriums. It was determined that the Phoenix metropolitan area would benefit, not only from having an entertainment facility, but also from a facility that could accommodate regional and national convention business.
A citizens group was formed in the early 60's to study the development of a convention center and the idea for Phoenix Civic Plaza became reality. In 1963, in order to finance construction, the non-profit Phoenix Civic Plaza Building Corporation was created. On April 15, 1969, the city of Phoenix and Phoenix Civic Plaza Building Corporation signed legal agreements for the initial construction of the convention center. 
The Phoenix Civic Plaza Department was created in November 1969 to oversee the operational aspects of the construction, purchase equipment and hire and train staff. Construction of Phoenix Civic Plaza began the same year and was completed in 1972 at a cost of $28 million and occupying . The original project included Phoenix Symphony Hall, which opened at the same time.
Six years later, the demand for additional space created a need for expansion. During that time, several conventions were bumped because of previous commitments and conflicting dates. When construction was completed in 1985, Phoenix Civic Plaza had more than doubled its available space to over .
In the mid-1990s Phoenix Convention Center embarked on an ambitious $32 million renovation project to update and enhance its image and keep the facility competitive for convention and trade show business.
A multi-phased $600 million expansion project has nearly tripled the size of the Phoenix Convention Center, making it one of the top 20 convention venues in North America.  Phase I opened in 2006, with Populous (formerly HOK Sport Venue Event) as the design architect and Leo A. Daly as the prime and managing architect.  Populous served as both design architect and architect of record for Phase II of the expansion, which was completed in 2008.
The design of the  new  convention  center aims to reference the unique Arizona landscape.  Steel canopies extend over third Street to create shade. The large glass and stone atrium in the West Building  represents the  unique  angles  and  light  of  an  Arizona  slot canyon.  Colors,  textures  and  finishes  capture  the  warm  hues  of  the  Sonoran Desert and the cool tones of an Arizona desert sky.
The Convention Center is served by METRO Rail's Washington at 3rd Street station when service began on December 26, 2008.