Sidhu was elected to the Anaheim City Council in November 2004. He is the first person of Sikh and Indian heritage to achieve the position of Anaheim City Councilman. Prior to his election, Sidhu served as Chairman of the Anaheim Budget Committee. He also currently serves as: the Orange County Republican Party's Deputy Chairman for the City of Anaheim and Republican Convention Delegate; City of Anaheim Audit Committee Member; Orange County Sanitation District Director; Boys and Girls Clubs of Anaheim Board Member; and Anaheim Family YMCA Advisory Board Member.
Having been born and raised in India, Sidhu immigrated to the United States in 1974, earned a Bachelor of Science in Mechanical Engineering from Drexel University, and became a U.S. citizen in 1979.
In 1980, he moved from Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, to Southern California gaining employment in the aerospace industry during the nation's peak defense build-up period. During that time, Sidhu also became licensed in the State of California as a Professional Engineer, Real Estate Broker, and General Contractor. He is a California businessman owning El Pollo Loco franchises in Orange and Riverside Counties.
Prior to the U.S. Supreme Court decision in ''Kelo v. New London'', Sidhu led the fight against eminent domain with his colleagues on the Anaheim City Council. To ensure that their policy could not be reversed by a future city council on a simple majority vote, a charter amendment, Measure P, was placed on the November 2006 ballot and unanimously passed by the voters to forever prohibit ''Kelo''-type eminent domain in Anaheim.
In 2008, Sidhu ran for the California State Senate, but lost the Republican primary to state Assemblywoman Mimi Walters (61% - 39%) , who went on to win the general election.
In 2010, Harry ran for Orange County Supervisor in the lower-income 4th district despite having lived in the affluent Anaheim Hills for 16 years in the 3rd district.  Due to this, signs labeling Sidhu as a carpetbagger were put up by his opponents.  Harry went on to lose the election with 36.9% of the vote to Shawn Nelson's 63.1%. 
Sidhu and his wife, Gin, live in Anaheim with their two children.