Under the law of the sea, an '''exclusive economic zone''' ('''EEZ''') is a seazone over which a state has special rights over the exploration and use of marine resources. It stretches from the seaward edge of the state's territorial sea out to 200&nbsp;nautical miles from its coast. In casual usage, the term may include the territorial sea and even the continental shelf beyond the 200-mile limit.
 Generally, any point within an overlapping area defaults to the nearest state.
A state's exclusive economic zone starts at the seaward edge of its territorial sea and extends outward to a distance of 200 nautical miles (370,4&nbsp;km) from the baseline. Thus, the EEZ includes the contiguous zone. States also have rights to the seabed of what is called the continental shelf up to 350 nautical miles (648&nbsp;km) from the coastal baseline, beyond the EEZ, but such areas are not part of their EEZ. The legal definition of the continental shelf does not directly correspond to the geological meaning of the term, as it also includes the continental rise and slope, and the entire seabed within the EEZ.
The idea of allotting nations EEZs to give better control of maritime affairs outside territorial limits gained acceptance in the late 20th century.
Initially, a country's sovereign territorial waters extended 3 nautical miles or 6&nbsp;km (range of cannon shot) beyond the shore.  In modern times traditionally, a country's sovereign territorial waters extend to 12 nautical miles (~19&nbsp;km) beyond the shore. In the early 1970s, Ecuador claimed territorial waters extending to 200 nautical miles. They began seizing U.S. tuna-fishing boats and charging heavy fines (that the U.S. government paid). Eventually the U.S. agreed to submit the issue to the International Court of Justice at The Hague. This eventually led to the recognition of 12 nautical miles as normal for the territorial sea/waters and international recognition of the 200 mile exclusive economic zone by the Third United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea in 1982.
Part V, Article 55 of the Convention states:
The exact extent of exclusive economic zones is a common source of conflicts between states over marine waters.
Regions where a permanent ice shelf extends beyond the coastline are also a source of potential dispute.
Fisheries management, usually adhering to guidelines set by the FAO, provides significant practical mechanisms for the control of EEZs. Transboundary fish stocks are an important concept in this control.
Transboundary stocks are fish stocks that range in the EEZs of at least two countries. Straddling stocks, on the other hand, range both within an EEZ as well as in the high seas, outside any EEZ. A stock can be both transboundary and straddling.FAO (2007)  Rome, Fisheries Report No. 829.
The area is 1,159,063&nbsp;km2.
Australia has the third largest exclusive economic zone, behind the United States and France, but ahead of Russia, with the total area actually exceeding that of its land territory. As per the UN convention, Australia's EEZ generally extends 200 nautical miles (370&nbsp;km) from the coastline of Australia and its external territories, except where a maritime delimitation agreement exists with another state.Geoscience Australia. 2005. .
The United Nations Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf confirmed, in April 2008, Australia's rights over an additional 2.5 million square kilometres of seabed beyond the limits of Australia's EEZ. Australia also claimed, in its submission to the UN Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf, an EEZ of 200 nautical miles (370&nbsp;km) from its Antarctic Territory, but has requested it not be acted upon at the time in accordance with the spirit of cooperation embodied in the Antarctic Treaty.Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea. Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf,  Nevertheless, Australia maintains the right to explore and exploit the seabed and water column within its EEZ.
Brazil's exclusive economic zone covers 3,660,995&nbsp;km2.
In 2004, the country submitted its claims to the United Nations Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf (CLCS) to extend its '''maritime continental margin'''.
Canada is unusual in that its exclusive economic zone, covering 2,755,564&nbsp;km2, is slightly smaller than its territorial waters.Wildlife Habitat Canada. . The latter generally extend only 12 nautical miles from the shore, but also include inland marine waters such as Hudson Bay (about  across), the Gulf of Saint Lawrence and the internal waters of the Arctic archipelago.
Chile's EEZ includes areas around the Desventuradas Islands, Easter Island and the Juan Fernandez Islands.
The Kingdom of Denmark includes the two autonomous provinces of Greenland and the Faroe Islands. The EEZs of the latter two do not form part of the EEZ of the European Union.
Due to its numerous Overseas departments and territories scattered on all oceans of the planet, France possesses the second-largest EEZ in the world, covering 11,035,000&nbsp;km2 (4,260,000&nbsp;mi2), just behind the EEZ of the United States (11,351,000&nbsp;km2 / 4,383,000&nbsp;mi2), but ahead of the EEZ of Australia (8,148,250&nbsp;km2 / 4,111,312&nbsp;mi2).
The EEZ of France covers approximately 8% of the total surface of all the EEZs of the world, whereas the land area of the French Republic is only 0.45% of the total land area of the Earth.
Greece has not yet claimed an exclusive economic zone, although it is entitled to do so, as per UNCLOS 1982 as well as customary international law. This had led to direct threat by Turkey of casus belli if Greece was to declare her exclusive economic zone, although Greece restrained from any kind of declaration so far.
Turkey's declaration of casus belli is not related to the EEZ issue. Turkey claims that the Aegean Sea's status as a semi-closed sea affords it a special nature (unlike other semi-closed seas as the Adriatic or even fully enclosed seas as the Black Sea). Moreover, Turkey is not among the signatories of UNCLOS which allows countries to expand the width of their territorial waters up to . Even though Turkey is a persistent objector to the relevant article of UNCLOS, it has expanded its own territorial waters in the Black Sea to . And moreover, in 1995 just after Greek parliament ratifications of UNCLOS (as every signatory state was entitled) , Turkey declared that if Greece expands the width of her territorial waters over , Turkey would conceive this action as a containment attempt and a direct offense to her sovereignty and thus threatened Greece with a war (casus belli).
According to published maps, the Israeli government has recognized the Exclusive Economic Zones (EEZ) of Greece and Cyprus. They describe the course of the gas pipeline which will transfer gas produced by American   oble   nergy Ltd. from the Leviathan reservoir  to Europe, through an undersea pipeline crossing Greece. The gas pipeline should traverse the sea area, which according to international law, is part of the  Greek EEZ. By this proposal, Israel recognizes the Greek EEZ in the area and offers an advantage that Greece can use during negotiation procedures to support its claims on the area. In practice, this cooperation will set up a powerful energy coalition between Greece, Cyprus and Israel.  The mining and operating part will be undertaken by an American company. "The substance of the issue is that in an effort to protect and secure vital Israeli interests in the Mediterranean Sea, Israel has been left with no choice other than to officially delimit its maritime borders," an Israeli diplomat told the Hurriyet Daily News & Economic Review.
Japan has disputes over its EEZ boundaries with all its Asian neighbors (Russia, Republic of Korea, PRC and ROC). The above, and relevant maps at the Sea Around Us Project both indicate Japan's claimed boundaries, and do not take into account neighboring powers' claims.
Mexico's exclusive economic zones comprise a total surface area of 5,144,295&nbsp;km2, and places Mexico among the countries with the largest areas in the world.
Norway has a large exclusive economic zone of 819 620&nbsp;km2 around its coast. The country has a fishing zone of 1,878,953&nbsp;km2, including fishing zones around Svalbard and Jan Mayen . The fact that the European Union shares its economic zones was a big reason why Norway did not enter the EU as a member.
In April 2009, the United Nations Commission for the Limits of the Continental Shelf approved Norway's claim to an additional 235,000 square kilometres of continental shelf. The commission found that Norway and Russia both had valid claims over a portion of shelf in the Barents Sea.
The Polish EEZ covers the area of 30,533&nbsp;km2 within the Baltic Sea., European marine sand and gravel&nbsp;    shaping the future, EMSAGG Conference 20   21 February 2003, Delft University, The Netherlands
Portugal has the 20th largest EEZ in the world.
Portugal submitted a claim to extend its jurisdiction over 1.2 million square kilometres of the neighbouring continental shelf in May 2009.
South Africa's EEZ includes both that next to the African mainland and that around the Prince Edward Islands, totalling 1 535 538&nbsp;km2.
The United Kingdom's exclusive economic zone is the fifth largest in the world at 6,805,586 square km. It comprises the exclusive economic zones surrounding the United Kingdom, the Crown Dependencies, and the British Overseas Territories. The figure does not include the EEZ of the British Antarctic Territory.
Only the United Kingdom (including Rockall) and Gibraltar are part of the EU. The Channel Islands, the Isle of Man and the remaining overseas territories (that is, all except Gibraltar) are not part of the EU.
The United States' exclusive economic zone is the largest in the world, covering 11,351,000&nbsp;km2. Areas of its EEZ are located not only along the eastern and western seaboards and Gulf of Mexico-bordering region of the continental United States, but are also located in the Caribbean Sea, Pacific Ocean and Arctic Ocean.
This list includes dependent territories within their sovereign states (including uninhabited territories), but does not include claims on Antarctica.  EEZ+TIA is exclusive economic zone (EEZ) plus total internal area (TIA).