These factories include GCL-Poly Energy Holdings Limited, which has a polysilicon production capacity of 18,000 MT (YE2009); Suntech Power, which produces approximately 50 MW/year of solar cells and photovoltaic modules; Yunnan Semi-conductor Parts Plant, which manufactures approximately 2 MW/year of monocrystalline cells; the Yingli Solar, which manufactures approximately 600 MW/year of polycrystalline cells and modules; Guofei Green Energy Source, which produces approximately 1 MW/year of modules; and Shanghai Poly-Vision Energy Science & Technology, which produces approximately 5 MW/year of modules.
China is a large producer of polysilicon, for use in first generation solar cells around the world.  A byproduct of the process is silicon tetrachloride, which is normally processed and recycled at a higher cost in the developed world, is often dumped by Chinese green startups.  This substance is described as poisonous, polluting, and "like dynamite".  These polluting polysilicon plants are said to be the new dot-coms in China. With proper recycling the polysilicon would cost $84,500 per tonne, but the Chinese companies are making it at $21,000 to $56,000 a ton.
ENN Solar Group is the Chinese amorphous silicon thin-film cell maker.
In March 2010 Anwell Technologies Limited began its mass production of the 1.1    1.4-metre amorphous silicon thin-film solar panel from its plant in Henan, China, marking a milestone on a journey that began about two years ago. A triple-junction thin-film silicon cell structure that is claimed to have produced conversion efficiencies of 14.8% is also in development phase at Mitsubishi Electric.
The amount of  electricity generated with solar power within China itself is so far comparatively small:  as of the end of 2008, the solar power capacity attached to the national grid (i.e., excluding autonomous systems) was under 100 MW, i..e merely  0.01% of the nation's power generation capacity.
About 50 MW of installed solar capacity was added in 2008, more than double the 20 MW in 2007, but still a relatively small amount. According to some studies, the demand in China for new solar modules could be as high as 232 MW each year from now on until  2012. The government has announced plans to expand the installed capacity to 1,800 MW by 2020. If Chinese companies manage to develop low cost, reliable solar modules, then the sky is the limit for a country that is desperate to reduce its dependence on coal and oil imports as well as the pressure on its environment by using renewable energy.