Yingli Green Energy was founded by Liansheng Miao, who is the chair of the board and chief executive officer. Yingli Green Energy has been adopting a Vertical integration business model since 2004 and started with an initial annual capacity of 6 MW in ingot, wafer and cell, and 50 MW in module . In July 2009, the annual production capacity of each stage of the value chain reached 600MW. As a final step to make Yingli a completely vertically integrated business model, the company, through its wholly owned subsidiary, Fine Silicon Company Limited, began the trial production of high quality solar-grade and electronic-grade polysilicon in December 2009.
The company released an IPO on the New York Stock Exchange on June 8, 2007.
Yingli Green Energy markets the brandname Yingli Solar. 
Yingli's products include both the raw material and the end product, including polysilicon ingots, wafers, photovoltaic cells, photovoltaic modules, and photovoltaic integrated systems.  The production of ingots and wafers is a vital part of Yingli's control of cost and quality.  Although the manufacturing model is vertically integrated, the company, unlike many competitors, does not develop solar projects.
It sells photovoltaic modules to markets in Germany, Spain, Italy, Greece, France, South Korea, China, and the United States.  The company held 27% of the California market in 2009, the largest United States market.  This performance contrasts with the 10% share held by Suntech, another Chinese manufacturer, and the 16% position of all American companies combined.
Yingli is the first Chinese company to sponsor the 2010 FIFA World Cup. The company will actively support FIFA's "Football for Hope" movement and "Green Goal" concept first by providing solar panels for FIFA's "20 Centres for 2010" campaign.  The company hopes the sponsorship helps reach viewers in Europe, a primary market.  Terms of the sponsorship deal, particularly the sponsorship fee, were not disclosed due to confidentiality agreement between the company and FIFA.