Sunlight is by far the world's most abundant energy resource. A 1993 report by the DOE found that available domestic resources from solar, that would be theoretically accessible regardless of cost, represented 586,687 Quadrillion BTUs (Quads). Coal represented the second largest resource, a distant 38,147 Quads. The report stipulated that 95% of this potentially recoverable energy was from burning biomass. Predictions of how much solar power was economically feasible to collect amounted to 352 quads, compared with 5,266 quads from coal. The assumptions used in the report were based on a predicted 2010 price of a barrel of oil being $38. The total annual energy consumption of the United States in 2007 was approximately 100 Quads, less than 0.5% of that theoretically available from sunlight.
Solar energy deployment increased at a record pace in the United States and throughout the world in 2008, according to industry reports. The Solar Energy Industries Association's "2008 U.S. Solar Industry Year in Review" found that U.S. solar energy capacity increased by 17% in 2007, reaching the total equivalent of 8,775 megawatts (MW). The SEIA report tallies all types of solar energy, and in 2007 the United States installed 342 MW of solar photovoltaic (PV) electric power, 139 thermal megawatts (MWTh) of solar water heating, 762 MWTh of pool heating, and 21 MWTh of solar space heating and cooling.
A report finds that solar power's contribution could grow to 10% of the nation's power needs by 2025. The report, prepared by research and publishing firm Clean Edge and the nonprofit Co-op America, projects nearly 2% of the nation's electricity coming from concentrating solar power systems, while solar photovoltaic systems will provide more than 8% of the nation's electricity. Those figures correlate to nearly 50,000 megawatts of solar photovoltaic systems and more than 6,600&nbsp;megawatts of concentrating solar power. June 25, 2008 retrieved 25 June 2009
As noted in the report, solar power has been expanding rapidly in the past eight years, growing at an average pace of 40% per year. The cost per kilowatt-hour of solar photovoltaic systems has also been dropping, while electricity generated from fossil fuels is becoming more expensive. As a result, the report projects that solar power will reach cost parity with conventional power sources in many U.S. markets by 2015. But to reach the 10%&nbsp;goal, solar photovoltaic companies will also need to streamline installations and make solar power a "plug-and-play" technology, that is, it must be simple and straightforward to buy the components of the system, connect them together, and connect the system to the power grid.
The report also places some of the responsibility with electric utilities, which will need to take advantage of the benefits of solar power, incorporate it into future "smart grid" technologies, and create new business models for building solar power capacity. The report also calls for establishing long-term extensions of today's investment and production tax credits, creating open standards for connecting solar power systems to the grid, and giving utilities the ability to include solar power in their rate base.
According to a study by the Solar Energy Industries Association and GTM Research, 878 megawatts (MW) of photovoltaic (PV) capacity and 78 MW of concentrating solar power (CSP) were installed in the U.S. in 2010, enough to power roughly 200,000 homes. In addition, more than 65,000 homes and businesses added solar water heating (SWH) or solar pool heating (SPH) systems. This was double the 435 megawatts installed in 2009 around the U.S.
The U.S. pioneered solar tower and trough technologies. A number of different solar thermal technologies are in use in the U.S. The largest and oldest solar power plant in the world is the 354&nbsp;MW SEGS thermal power plant, in California. The 64MW Nevada Solar One uses parabolic trough technology in one of the largest solar plants in the world.
The 5 MW Kimberlina Solar Thermal Energy Plant demonstrates a fresnel reflector technology. Sierra SunTower is a 5 MW commercial concentrating solar power tower in Lancaster, California and is the only CSP tower facility operating in North America. The 1.5 MW Maricopa Solar is the first Dish Stirling power plant. The 2 MW Holaniku MicroCSP Solar Thermal Plant in Hawaii is the world's first MicroCSP power plant. 
In mid-2010, the U.S. produces more than half of all solar thermal power in the world, although Spain has a rapidly increasing number of plants.
The Ivanpah Solar Power Facility is a 392 megawatt (MW) solar power facility which is under construction. It will consist of three separate solar thermal power plants in south-eastern California. The facility will consist of fields of heliostat mirrors focusing solar energy on boilers located on centralized power towers. The first phase of the Ivanpah facility began construction in late 2010.
The Martin Next Generation Solar Energy Center is a hybrid 75-megawatt (MW) parabolic trough solar energy plant which is being built by Florida Power & Light Company (FPL). The solar plant is a component of the 3,705&nbsp;MW Martin County Power Plant, which is currently the single largest fossil fuel burning power plant in the United States.
Scheduled for completion by the end of 2010,
The Blythe Solar Power Project is a proposed 968 MW solar thermal power station to be located in Riverside County, California. It will be of parabolic trough design, and the companies involved are Solar Millennium and Chevron. ''Renewable Energy World'', September 1, 2010.
The Calico Solar Energy Project is a proposed 850 MW solar thermal power station to be located in San Bernardino County, California. It will be of stirling engine design and the company involved is Tessera Solar. 
The Imperial Valley Solar Project (formerly SES Solar Two) is  a proposed 709 MW solar thermal power station to be located in Imperial County, California.  It will be of stirling engine design and the company involved is Tessera Solar.
Solel has signed a contract with Pacific Gas and Electric (PG&E) to build the world's largest solar plant in the Mojave Desert. When fully operational in 2011, the proposed Mojave Solar Park will have an installed capacity of 553&nbsp;megawatts of solar power, calculated to power 400,000&nbsp;homes, to PG&E   s customers in northern and central California. The plant will cover up to  of land. ''Ynetnews'', July 26, 2007. Retrieved December 18, 2008., Tom Parry, Canadian Broadcasting Corporation, August 15, 2007.
The Genesis Solar Energy Project is a proposed 250 MW solar thermal power station to be located in Riverside County, California.  It will be of parabolic trough design, and the company involved is NextEra Energy Resources.
The US photovoltaic market amounted to 440 megawatts peak in 2009. Of this, 372
New manufacturing facilities for solar cells and modules in Massachusetts, Michigan, Ohio, Oregon, and Texas promise to add enough capacity to produce thousands of megawatts of solar devices per year within the next few years from 2008:
In late September 2008, Sanyo Electric Company, Ltd. announced its decision to build a manufacturing plant for solar ingots and wafers (the building blocks for silicon solar cells) in Salem, Oregon. The plant will begin operating in October 2009 and will reach its full production capacity of 70 megawatts (MW) of solar wafers per year by April 2010.
In early October 2008, First Solar, Inc. broke ground on an expansion of its Perrysburg, Ohio, facility that will add enough capacity to produce another 57 MW per year of solar modules at the facility, bringing its total capacity to roughly 192 MW per year. The company expects to complete construction early next year and reach full production by mid-2010.
And in mid-October 2008, SolarWorld AG opened a manufacturing plant in Hillsboro, Oregon, that is expected to produce 500 MW of solar cells per year when it reaches full production in 2011.
Production is also growing for manufacturers of flexible thin-film solar modules. Energy Conversion Devices, Inc. (ECD)   a manufacturer of thin-film modules deposited on flexible stainless steel   has announced plans to build a facility in Battle Creek, Michigan, that will produce 120 MW of solar modules per year. ECD will start construction in fall 2008, with production starting by the end of 2009. ECD has the option of doubling its production capacity in Battle Creek and has plans to reach 1,000 MW of annual production by 2012. Konarka Technologies, Inc. deposits its solar modules onto a flexible plastic substrate, and the company has just reopened a former Polaroid Corporation facility in New Bedford, Massachusetts, that has been converted into a production facility for Konarka's "Power Plastic" solar modules. Konarka expects the facility to reach its capacity to produce of 1,000 MW of solar modules per year by 2011. Both companies employ a roll-to-roll processing, similar to a newspaper printing press, for the manufacture of their solar modules. The manufacturing process offers the possibility of achieving high production capacities at a lower cost than most solar cell manufacturing plants.
HelioVolt Corporation opened a manufacturing facility in Austin, Texas, that will have an initial capacity to produce 20 MW of solar cells per year. Starting with solar "inks" developed at DOE's National Renewable Energy Laboratory that are deposited with ink jets, HelioVolt employs a proprietary "printing" process to produce solar cells consisting of thin films of copper indium gallium selenide, or CIGS. The technology won an R&D 100 Award in 2008 and  it earned an Editor's Choice Award for Most Revolutionary Technology. HelioVolt's "FASST" reactive transfer printing process is 10-100 times faster than other CIGS production processes and can also be combined with vacuum evaporation or ultrasonic spray deposition techniques. At its new Austin manufacturing plant, HelioVolt plans to produce both solar modules and next-generation building-integrated solar products using its FASST process.
The DeSoto Next Generation Solar Energy Center is a photovoltaic solar power facility in Arcadia, DeSoto County, Florida owned by Florida Power & Light (FPL). 
President Barack Obama attended the plant's commissioning on October&nbsp;27, 2009.
It has a nameplate capacity of 25&nbsp;megawatts (MW) DC
The 21 megawatt Blythe Photovoltaic Power Plant is the largest photovoltaic (PV) solar project in California. It is located in  Blythe, California, in Riverside County about 200 miles east of Los Angeles. Commercial operation began in December 2009. Electricity generated by the power plant is being sold to Southern California Edison under a 20-year power purchase agreement. ''Renewable Energy World'', December 22, 2009.
 The system was inaugurated in a ceremony on December&nbsp;17, 2007, with Nevada Governor Jim Gibbons activating full operation of the 14&nbsp;megawatt (MW) array.
Other PV power plants include:
A complete list of incentives is maintained at the Database of State Incentives for Renewable Energy (DSIRE) (see external link).
Most are grid connected and use net metering laws to allow use of electricity in the evening that was generated during the daytime. New Jersey leads the nation with the least restrictive net metering law, while California leads in total number of homes which have solar panels installed. Many were installed because of the million solar roof initiative.
The federal tax credit for solar was extended for eight years as part of the financial bail out bill, H.R.&nbsp;1424, until the end of 2016. It was estimated this will create 440,000 jobs, 28&nbsp;gigawatts of solar power, and lead to a $300&nbsp;billion market for solar panels. This estimate did not take into account the removal of the $2,000 cap on residential tax credits at the end of 2008.
The United States Department of Energy (DOE) announced on September&nbsp;29, 2008 that it will invest $17.6&nbsp;million, subject to annual appropriations, in six company-led, early-stage photovoltaic (PV) projects under the Solar America Initiative's "PV&nbsp;Incubator" funding opportunity. The "PV&nbsp;Incubator" project is designed to fund prototype PV components and systems with the goal of moving them through the commercialization process by 2010. The 2008 award will be the second funding opportunity released under the PV&nbsp;Incubator project. With the cost share from industry, which will be at least 20%, up to $35.4&nbsp;million will be invested in these projects. The projects will run for 18&nbsp;months, and will be subcontracted through DOE's National Renewable Energy Laboratory.
Most of the projects will receive up to $3&nbsp;million in funding, with the exception of Solasta and Spire Semiconductor, which will receive up to $2.6&nbsp;million and $2.97&nbsp;million, respectively. Massachusetts-based 1366 Technologies will develop a new cell architecture for low-cost, multi-crystalline silicon cells, which will enhance cell performance through improved light-trapping texturing and grooves for self-aligned metallization fingers. California's Innovalight will useink-jet printing to transfer their "silicon&nbsp;ink" onto thin-crystalline silicon wafers to produce high-efficiency, low-cost solar cells and modules. Skyline Solar, also in California, will develop an integrated, lightweight, single-axis tracked system that reflects and concentrates sunlight over 10&nbsp;times onto silicon cells. Solasta, in Massachusetts, is working on a novel cell design that increases currents and lowers the materials cost. Solexel, another California-based company, will commercialize a disruptive, 3D&nbsp;high-efficiency mono-crystalline silicon cell technology that dramatically reduces manufacturing cost per watt. Finally, Spire Semiconductor in New Hampshire will develop three-junction tandem solar cells that better optimize the optical properties of their device layers; the company is targeting cell efficiencies over 42% using a low-cost manufacturing method.
The PV Incubator project is part of the Solar America Initiative, which aims to make solar energy cost-competitive with conventional forms of electricity by 2015 (grid parity).
The Solar America Initiative (SAI) is a part of the Federal Advanced Energy Initiative to accelerate the development of advanced photovoltaic materials with the goal of making it cost-competitive with grid electricity by 2015 (grid parity).
The U.S. Department of Energy Solar Energy Technology Program (SETP) will achieve the goals of the SAI through partnerships and strategic alliances by focusing primarily on four areas:
The Solar America Showcases activity is part of the Solar America Initiative (SAI), and preference is given to large-scale, highly visible, highly replicable installations that involve cutting-edge solar technologies or novel applications of solar.
California decided that it was not moving forward fast enough on photovoltaic generation and has enacted a Feed-in Tariff. Washington state has a feed-in tariff of 15&nbsp;   /kWh which increases to 54&nbsp;   /kWh if components are manufactured in the state. Hawaii and Michigan are also considering feed in tariffs. A comparison of the 38&nbsp;states plus Washington D.C. which have net metering gives five an A and five an F.
In 2010, the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) ruled that states were unable to implement above-market feed-in tariffs because setting wholesale electricity rates was pre-empted by the Federal Power Act (FPA).
In recent years, states that have passed Renewable Portfolio Standard (RPS) or Renewable Electricity Standard (RES) laws have relied on the use of Solar Renewable Energy Certificates (SRECs) to meet state requirements. This is done by adding a specific solar carve-out to the state Renewable Portfolio Standard (RPS). The first SREC program was developed in 2004 by the state of New Jersey and has since expanded to several other states, including Maryland, Delaware, Pennsylvania, Ohio, Massachusetts, North Carolina and Pennsylvania.
An SREC program is an alternative to the feed-in tariff model popular in Europe. The key difference between the two models is the market-based mechanism that drives the value of the SRECs, and therefore the value of the subsidy for solar. In a feed-in tariff model, the government sets the value for the electricity produced by a solar facility. If the level is too high, too much solar power is built and the program is more costly. If the feed-in tariff is set too low, not enough solar power is built and the program is ineffective.