Proponents of the concept point out that Jesus often spent time alone in prayer: Luke 5:16 says that "Jesus often withdrew to lonely places and prayed" (NIV). Leslie Hardin suggests that this was Jesus' Quiet Time: spending time in prayer and fellowship with God.
 They suggest that it is a "time of complete focus on God" that "continues throughout a person   s entire life."
Keith Newman suggests that as well as including conscious study and expressive prayer, a quiet time is a time of open-minded listening and waiting for guidance.
Rick Warren argues that there is a difference between reading the Bible during Quiet Time and Bible Study.
Many devotional books, or devotionals, are available in retail stores today. These books contain directed Bible studies often incorporating stories or anecdotes that convey Biblical principles, similar to the parables used by Jesus in his ministry. A notable example is ''My Utmost for His Highest'', written by Oswald Chambers. Many Christian stores dedicate an entire section to these types of books, but in some countries they are available at secular stores as well, often shelved in the "inspirational" section.
Some Christian communities (e.g. Christadelphians) have Bible reading schedules, like the one suggested in the Bible Companion, for example, as one tool to help them with their study of the Bible.  Such schedules take people systematically through the entire Bible, reading approximately four chapters per day (in the case of the Bible Companion), which allows the reader to keep context in their studies through the different books of the Bible, and ensures different areas are not neglected.
The use of study Bibles is also popular.
Evangelical theologian Greg Johnson criticizes the way the concept is treated by evangelicals as an almost obligatory part of a relationship with God.  He emphasize that the practice is not commanded in the Bible, and was not even possible for many centuries, until the printing press and certain economic conditions enabled most Christians to own their own copies of the Bible.