The guidance at   has been rewritten after extensive discussion on the talk page.  Editors not involved or aware are invited to review the rewrite, edit it and (of course) comment on the talk page. The version at  represented the broad consensus of participants so far.      11:57, 30 January 2008 (UTC)
I was just thinking this morning, and I think we need to have an actual systems for admins, should they make several mistakes while they are admins (some admins I know inthe past in have made mistakes). I am therefore proposing a proposal, named   (Subpage will be created if admins support the proposal. Should an admin do a wrong action once, they would be given a first strike. Should they commit an offence again, they will receive a second strike. Should they yet again do a wrong action (or it even could be simply edit warring - to something such as using the tools to harrass others); they will recieve a third and final warning. Because of this they will be notified via their third warning that an   will open on them. Should they fail the RFA, their admin tools will be taken off them. However only strikes should be given by un-involved administrators or good-faith editors. If any strikes are found to be in bad-faith the strike should be discussed and removed in due course if found to be in bad-faith.
Opinions on the above?   ( ) 13:09, 26 January 2008 (UTC)
I think we should hire a bunch of Hungarian villagers with torches and pitchforks to do it. Whenever an admin does anything bad, they can chase them around, hurling fruit and other things at them. Admins which are particularly nasty can be tied to a pole and set on fire. &#9775;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;( ) 14:22, 26 January 2008 (UTC)
My concern is that - even under the best of circumstances - mistakes happen. Doctors make mistakes, lawyers make mistakes, construction workers make mistakes, and admins make mistakes. Many admins deal with - literally - THOUSANDS of administrative actions a month. Mistakes are going to happen, particularly with that high volume. Under your proposed system, how would you deal with legitimate mistakes versus actions taken with malice? How do you prove malice? Who judges them? I'm open to admin accountability, but I am not open to a system that runs off some of our very best contributors because they happen to make more edits than others and thus have a higher propensity for a RAW number of mistakes (which may actually be a much lower ratio of mistakes to administrative actions). -   &#124;   17:06, 26 January 2008 (UTC)
This comment:
That's a red herring aka irrelevant conclusion. The claim that increasing oversight of administrators would be a good thing has absolutely nothing to do with the claim that they don't have a lot of authority ("no big deal"). In fact, your premise implies the exact opposite conclusion: It's precisely because being an admin is "no big deal," that it doesn't come with that much greater amount of authority, that increased oversight seems necessary.
Furthermore, I have to ask: Who is going to oversee the overseers? &#9775;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;( ) 18:38, 26 January 2008 (UTC)
Deadminship is a perennial proposal. Note that in theory everyone should be able to get admin rights, and all users should be able to balance each other out that way. IMHO RFA is just simply slightly backlogged :-P --  ( ) 07:30, 31 January 2008 (UTC) ''that's one approach, I reserve the right to flipflop to the other approach as required. :-)''
Am I the only one who thinks the speedy deletion policy is dominated by a small group of people trying to become admins? It seems the more they try to 'clean up' articles by nominating them, the more they get kudos points from others, helping their eventual run for election to adminship.   ( ) 13:57, 26 January 2008 (UTC)
I wish I got kudo points for deleting articles -- one of the thousands of articles on Wikipedia created every day that need to be zapped out of existence. Where do I go to get these kudo points and who is handing them out?
Also,   means exactly what it says. You shouldn't require "evidence that they are working in good faith," because you're supposed to assume that until there's evidence that demonstrates the contrary. &#9775;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;( ) 14:28, 26 January 2008 (UTC)
I see nothing wrong with editors practising deletion in order to become admins. It's excellent training for when they ''are'' admins. (Note: I'm not being satirical, I actually do think it's good training)       (       ) 15:19, 26 January 2008 (UTC)
I saw the article   on Meta and it occurred to me that Anti-Wikipedian sentiment is rampant on Wikipedia.
So, I wrote an essay. See  . &#9775;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;( ) 10:21, 27 January 2008 (UTC)
I'm guessing I'm not the first to raise this, but could not find anything related with a search so decided to bug this page.. sorry..
I keep on seeing paragraphs in articles where there has been a steady drip of people adding their favourite widget to the end of the list.. For instance, if there was an article on the 'X key' I bet it would only take a short time before a succession of people add 'The X key is also present on BlackBerries, OSX, Devorak, my forehead' etc... 
The general policies should be sufficient for people to realise this is not really the most productive way to contribute to Wikipedia, but I understand the temptation, indeed I have probably been guilty of it myself in the past. 
What I was wondering about was if there should be a policy statement about this, and a tag that can be easily used to both mark any sections where this is excessive, and to make it easier for anybody reworking such a 'list' to explain why they have not included every possible example. As an example it was seeing the 'list' in the initial section of OpenEXR that got me thinking about this again.   ( ) 14:19, 31 January 2008 (UTC)
As part of the rewrite of  , we have created a   to assist with helping with content issues regarding fiction topics.  (Even if the WP:FICT proposal doesn't stick, I think this noticeboard will remain since it's still a good idea and hopefully will help reduce the stress on AfDs.)  --  16:16, 31 January 2008 (UTC)
Looking around, I can not find any evidence of such but I was wondering if there has ever been a policy proposal regarding notability guidelines for cell phones. Almost daily, at least one AfD late to close is a listing for some model of a cell phone, often a Nokia or a Sony Ericsson. They are late to close because finding consensus about cell phone AfDs is often difficult, it is rare that agreement is found on these AfDs. Keep seems to be the most common result of these, but no consensus is common as well, and even on those which are kept it is often unclear if the references cited are actually reliable sources as defined by  . So I was wondering if the community feels as though a notability guideline in regards to cell phones is worth drafting or if   and   suffice. In general, I feel a guideline would be useful, but am not really sure what such would look like. Warm regards,     00:40, 27 January 2008 (UTC)
We have a page for requesting additions or removals from the spam blacklist.  The page has a brief heading regarding itself.  But is there a policy page that address, in more full detail, how this process is supposed to work? Thanks.   ( ) 21:30, 30 January 2008 (UTC)
If you're proposing we create an article entitled, "Why was my spam-link blacklisted? ASDFASRASEFASDF" I'd have to oppose that proposal, Wjhonson, for promoting wikilawyering. The brief summary of criteria works well enough. If we create an article more in detail, the community would probably churn out an article which, like many other policy pages, negates itself through ambiguity of language, which spammers could then use to say, "You can't do this, because the detailed explanation on   says, 'X'!"
Could you cite anything, in particular, which isn't covered by the summary or any examples of confused users? &#9775;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;( ) 01:27, 31 January 2008 (UTC)
You see the problem above.  Hu12 and I are diametrically-opposed and cannot seem to form any  . So... where do we go from here?  ( ) 09:39, 31 January 2008 (UTC)
Does that draw a line under it now?      14:08, 1 February 2008 (UTC)
Being a senior editor, I feel stupid for asking this, but what's the deal with  ?  I have a site as a reference for an article that been blacklisted, apparently for being spam.  The link is to an interview and doesn't have any ads or other spam material (and the interview doesn't exist anywhere else but the one site).  What can I do about it?  Looking in the blacklist archives was inconclusive.  I couldn't find a justification for banning the site.  Thanks! &mdash;   |   15:57, 31 January 2008 (UTC)
On my watchlist this morning I see that some helpful soul set BetaCommandBot to add disputed image tags to a
Here is the one added to  
In this particular case it probably never occurred to any of the human beings involved that the  justification for the '''image Red Tory''' had to explicitly name the '''article Red Tory'''.
I know there is a template for explicitly offering a fair use justification, to be used once per article the image is included in.  My problem with this use of this bot is that it gives no hints to anyone who reads the dispute tag how to '''''FIND''''' that explicitly-named-fair-use tag.
If this instance of the bot is still running, it should be immediately halted.  Every article it modified should have the message it left modified to give the name of the tag those who wanted to address the problem should use.
I'd like to suggest bot users consider this an example of how bots can be mis-used.
Cheers!    ( ) 16:34, 21 January 2008 (UTC)