Republican and conservative supporters of Obama included elected officials, former elected officials, academics, commentators, and retired military officers. According to exit polls on Election Day, 9% of those who identified themselves as Republicans voted for Barack Obama, up slightly from the 6% of self-identified Republicans who voted for John Kerry in 2004.
On February 12 2008, Barack Obama mentioned Obama Republicans in his Potomac primary victory speech: "We are bringing together Democrats and independents, and yes, some Republicans. I know there's     I meet them when I'm shaking hands afterwards. There's one right there. An Obamacan, that's what we call them." In another speech, he said, "We, as Democrats right now, should tap into the discontent of Republicans. I want some Obama Republicans!" In his call for Republican votes, Obama referred to Ronald Reagan, who he says "was able to tap into the discontent of the American people...to get Democrats to vote Republican    they were called Reagan Democrats."
RepublicansforObama.org was founded in December 2006 by John Martin, a US Navy reservist. The organization grew to include over 2,500 registered members from across the United States, and was featured in ''USA Today'', ''The New Yorker'' and other media throughout the 2008 Presidential Campaign.
Conservative praise for Obama was highlighted in the conservative ''Insight Magazine'' in July 2007. ''Insight's'' story focused on Obama's character as contrasted with the then Democratic front-runner Hillary Clinton. In January 2008, Andrew Sullivan of ''The Atlantic'' also praised Obama's character and personality. In March 2008, Andrew Bacevich, writing in ''The American Conservative'', said that "principled conservatives" should consider voting for Obama since he promised a quick end to the Iraq war; which Bacevich said had contributed to the growth of federal and presidential power. Bruce Bartlett, writing in the ''New Republic'', cited Obama's opposition to the Iraq war as the main issue which appealed to conservatives. Also mentioned were his opposition to some parts of the PATRIOT Act and his possible support for school vouchers. 
On October 19, 2008, Colin Powell, who served as President George W. Bush's first Secretary of State, endorsed Obama in an appearance on Meet the Press. Calling Obama a "transformational figure," Powell cited John McCain's selection of Sarah Palin (who Powell believed is not "ready to be president"), Republican personal attacks on Obama, and Obama's ability to improve strained relations between the U.S. and its allies as reasons for his choice.
 Polls in late February 2008, the height of the Democratic primaries and the point at which the Republicans had virtually decided on John McCain, showed that up to 14% of Republicans supported Obama. Some disenchanted or moderate Republican donors who contributed to the George Bush campaign in 2004 have donated to the Obama campaign.
Following General Powell's endorsement, other prominent republicans continued to join the ranks of Republicans who had decided to vote for Senator Obama, including: Former Massachusetts Governor William Weld, former Minnesota Gov. Arne Carlson, former spokesman for President George W. Bush, Scott McClellan, and prominent conservatives Ken Adelman and Charles Fried.
This wave of endorsements led ''The Economist'' to publish an in-depth examination of "The Rise of the Obamacons" and their influence:
The biggest brigade in the Obamacon army consists of libertarians, furious with Mr Bush   s big-government conservatism, worried about his commitment to an open-ended    war on terror   , and disgusted by his cavalier way with civil rights. ... For many conservatives, Mr Obama embodies qualities that their party has abandoned: pragmatism, competence and respect for the head rather than the heart. Mr Obama   s calm and collected response to the turmoil on Wall Street contrasted sharply with Mr. McCain   s grandstanding. ... How much do these Obamacons matter? More than Mr McCain would like to think. The Obamacons are manifestations of a deeper turmoil in the Republican rank-and-file, as the old coalition of small-government activists, social conservatives and business Republicans falls apart. They also influence opinion. ... The more tantalising question is whether the rise of the Obamacons signals a lasting political realignment. ... If the Republican Party continues to think that the problem lies with the rats, rather than the seaworthiness of the ship, then the Obamacons are here to stay.
The rush of Republicans and other conservatives openly endorsing Barack Obama was the subject of satire on the television show ''The Colbert Report'' on October 29, 2008, which drew record ratings with a self-serving endorsement by the conservative host character played by comedian Stephen Colbert.
The ''Wall Street Journal'' characterized the Obamacans as "the latest sign that the Republican Party's coalition is fracturing."
The final election Gallup Poll, from October 27 to November 2, indicated 10% of Republicans supported Obama instead of McCain, compared to 7% of "McCain Democrats." Gallup also indicated his support among self-described conservatives, although stronger than John Kerry's, was weaker than what Al Gore received. In August, Andrew Romano of ''Newsweek'' stated that the polls he had read indicate the cross-over voters "cancel each other out."  However ''The Economist'' cited a poll in late October 2008 that indicated Obama was "winning 22% of self-described conservatives, a higher proportion than any Democratic nominee since 1980."