Cellular telephones have become very popular with professionals and consumers as a way to communicate while away from their regular, wire-based phone, creating a niche for software makers to meet demands (and create new ones). The large investment by Amazon.com, buying a 7% stake in GeoWorks     a California company that makes software for cellular phones, shows how the market has attracted different companies4.
Mobile telephones use radio waves to send and receive calls, this makes a portable battery a necessity     and the cell phone must include a power source. Rechargeable batteries provide the usual source of power, but most cell phones can also be attached to the cigarette lighter in a vehicle or to some other external power device. chargebox
Although the idea of radiant energy has been around not long after the discovery of electricity, new changes of    radiant energy    and advanced uses of lithium-ion batteries are gaining ground in the industrial market:
Various news quotes show how much the industry has grown and is expected to grow:
The newest trend in cell phone accessories are skins and design covers.  
These decals can be made of hard plastic or in the newer market adhesive-backed vinyl pieces.  These vinyl skins can be ordered on many websites and come pre-cut to fit your cell phone or even another electronic device.
There exist two different types of vinyl material, calendared or cast, with the latter being more expensive.  In short, calendared vinyl is expected to only be used for short durations while cast vinyl is used on a more long term basis.  Calendared vinyl also tends to shrink in the heat, and fade in color.  On the other hand, cast vinyl can cure all of these problems, yet costs up to 250% more (which still is a very cheap total cost).  While the technology of these adhesive-backed skins continues to improve, the most up to date technology comes from 3M.  The company has manufactured a cast vinyl product that they call "Controltac".  This vinyl cover maintains a more glossy look and provides an air release channel that prevents bubbles during placement.