Menounos, a Greek American, was born in Medford, Massachusetts to immigrant parents Costas and Litsa Menounos. She has a younger brother, Peter, and is fluent in the Greek language. At age 17, she was an employee of Dunkin' Donuts. Menounos attended the Holy Trinity Greek Orthodox Church. Menounos attended Medford High School in Medford, MA. In 1995, Menounos began to compete in beauty pageants. The following year, she won the title of Miss Massachusetts Teen USA and competed at Miss Teen USA where she placed in the top 15, receiving an honorary mention, during the preliminary competition; Menounos placed 13th in preliminaries. The pageant was won by Christie Lee Woods. Maria competed for the title of Miss Massachusetts USA 2000; she was the 1st runner up.
Later Menounos attended Boston's Emerson College where she participated in the now award winning organization, Emerson Independent Video. During her senior year, she was hired as a reporter for Channel One News. Her work for Channel One's 10-minute segments included traveling to El Salvador to report on the earthquake of 2001 and interviewing then President George W. Bush.  ''Entertainment Tonight'' hired Menounos as a correspondent in 2002, where she reported on movies, music and fashion. ''ET'' executives offered her a hosting gig for ''ET'' on MTV & VH1; she left the program in 2005 to focus on her acting career, though she would eventually join rival program ''Access Hollywood'' later that Fall as a special correspondent. She went on to co-host a few episodes of the ''Today'' show in the late summer and fall of 2006 as well as in April 2007. In 2003, Menounos appeared on the November 30 episode of ''Punk'd'' where she was one of many celebrities caught in the awkward and embarrassing "Red Carpet Interviews".
In 2004, Menounos briefly appeared in an episode of the UPN series ''One on One'' as Glinda, an eccentric, self-proclaimed "Fairy Godmother to the Stars". In the summer of 2005, she appeared in the comic book film ''Fantastic Four'', where she played a nurse who is romanced by the "Human Torch", played by Chris Evans. Her likeness and voice was featured in the 2005 Electronic Arts video game, ''From Russia with Love'' as Eva Adara, Red Grant's henchwoman, which stars Sean Connery as James Bond. She is also the spokesperson for Pantene hair products.  Menounos presented the 2006 ''Eurovision Song Contest'' (along with Greek singer Sakis Rouvas) that took place in Athens. 
She is a correspondent for ''Today'' as well as ''Access Hollywood'' in an overall deal with NBC Universal to act in films and television shows. She also has recurring roles on CBS' ''Without a Trace'' and as Jules in the second season of The CW's ''One Tree Hill'' (during its run on The WB). Menounos also appeared on the ''Scrubs'' episode "My Extra Mile", which aired in May 2006 where she is attracted to John Dorian because she likes his hair. In 2006, Menounos appeared in the music video for "A Public Affair" by Jessica Simpson. On April 27, 2007, Maria starred in ''Kickin' It Old Skool''. In 2007, Menounos continued in her run as international spokesperson doing print and television commercials for Pantene hair products as well as print ads for New York & Company. From December 17 to December 20, 2007, Menounos hosted the reality game show miniseries ''Clash of the Choirs''.
In 2008, she became the host of "Hollywood Green" on the "Planet Green" network. "Maria Menounos brings glamour to green living as the hostess of Hollywood Green. Both as the special correspondent for daily entertainment newsmagazine "Access Hollywood," and on Hollywood Green, Maria provides TV viewers with comprehensive coverage of entertainment and news personalities."  In 2008, she had a role in the movie ''Tropic Thunder''. In 2008, she became the first journalist to interview the entire Obama family as a whole. She is represented by  at WME (William Morris Endeavor) .
In May 2008, she played in the AVP Cuervo Gold Crown Huntington Beach Open, but was eliminated in the qualifying round. On July 13, 2008, Menounos starred in the celebrity softball game at Yankee Stadium in New York. In November 2008, when Richard Belzer fell ill, she filled in as host for the North Shore Animal League   s Dogcatemy Celebrity Gala, which takes place at NYC   s Capitale. Since 2009, she has hosted reunion specials of MTV's ''The Real World'' and the ''Real World/Road Rules Challenge''. Menounos appeared on the 2008 ''Knight Rider'' series episode "Fly By Knight", which aired on February 11, 2009 where she played a DEA agent who is in charge of investigating a plane crash. On October 12 Menounos joined Nancy O'Dell guest hosting ''WWE Raw''. She made her professional wrestling debut in a six diva tag team match with Kelly Kelly and Gail Kim against Beth Phoenix, Rosa Mendes, and Alicia Fox. Menounos's team was victorious, with the match highlighted by Menounos slapping the much larger-statured Phoenix.
At the age of 17, Menounos produced ''In the Land of Merry Misfits'', an independent film fairy tale. The 35&nbsp;mm feature film was produced by Menounos while attending Emerson College with director Keven Undergaro, then head writer for MTV's ''Singled Out''. The negative of the film was stolen and the film was never completed but her work on the film, and the film's director, helped her land her reporting job at Channel One News and at MTV (''ET on MTV''). Menounos, however, never forgot the film or the film's director. In 2005, Menounos personally funded the recovery and restoration of the film, which was narrated by John Waters and starred an eclectic group in the Waters vein&nbsp;    including former WWE champion Bob Backlund, actress Josie Davis from the TV show ''Charles in Charge'' and B-movie icon Randal Malone. The film premiered at the 2007 Tribeca Film Festival.
Menounos also directed ''Longtime Listener'' starring Wilmer Valderrama. The film was an official selection of the Tribeca Film Festival 2006.
Menounos appeared in ''FHM'' magazine and in ''People'' magazine in 2004 as one of the "50 Most Beautiful People." In another poll conducted by askmen.com, Menounos was voted one of the top five girls a guy would most want to marry, along with Angelina Jolie, Charlize Theron and Jessica Alba. She has also beaten Jessica Alba and Charlize Theron for "Cyber Vixen of the Year" on Spike TV's video game awards. On August 8, 2010 she won the Madden NFL Pro-AM MVP award.  She also won MadTV's "Smokin' Hot TV Personality" Award for 2010.
Menounos founded the charity "Take Action Hollywood!" after her trip to South Africa. Reporting on the devastating effects of the AIDS crisis she was inspired to create TAH!, a charity that utilizes the power of the entertainment industry and the medium of film to affect for positive social change.  Maria also created the Cosmo Girl Cup, a national, annual competition and award given to the group of teens who do the most in their communities to affect for positive social change.
Menounos also presented at the Earth Day Network's Climate Rally in Washington, DC on April 25, 2010.  She encouraged people to go green and threw carrots into the crowd.
Menounos acted as the Masters of Ceremony for the First Annual Los Angeles CureSearch Walk for Children's Cancer held at the Rose Bowl in Pasadena, California on October 24, 2010.