Until 1980 articulated buses were illegal for British roads due to their length. Following an exemption, the first trials in the UK used vehicles by MAN and Leyland-DAB.
The first to carry passengers on a scheduled service (albeit without charge, due to regulations) was a MAN Bendibus demonstrator with City of Oxford Motor Services in late 1979.
Leyland-DAB articulated buses, built by the British-Danish joint venture, Leyland-DAB bus, in Denmark, were the most intensively trialled first-generation vehicles introduced to the UK. Four models of their National bodied buses were imported, and used on extended trial by South Yorkshire Passenger Transport Executive (SYPTE), purchased in 1979. These vehicles wore a green, red and cream livery, and, as well as Yorkshire, were demonstrated to other UK operators including Maidstone Borough Council Transport. An example was also exhibited by private London operator Capital Citybus with route blinds and markings for Red Arrow service.
Two of these National types were later sold to McGills of Barrhead originally for their Barrhead-Paisley-Renfrew service, and later for their Barrhead-Glasgow service after a weight limit prevented their continued use on the Paisley Service, with the others going to Hampshire Bus in Winchester. Some later saw use as airport buses with British Airways, and then as non-PSV exhibit buses (in 2008); at least one of these buses was undergoing preservation by 2003.
Following the trials and demonstrations, no UK operators decided to place orders for the Leyland DABs, except for South Yorkshire Transport in 1985, the bus operating company now divested from the SYPTE. SYT placed an order for 13 buses of the DAB bodied type, which saw service in a blue and cream liveried ''City Clipper'' circular service and the X91 ''Fastline'' route. These buses survived privatisation of the PTEs and saw service with the privatised operator Mainline in Sheffield and Rotherham, lasting in Mainline service until 1999. They were also loaned for demonstration to London Buses, with one seeing service with the Selkent division in 1992.
A single November 1992 built articulated Mercedes-Benz O405G was bought by Grampian Regional Transport (GRT), the forerunner of First Group, as their bus RT1 (''K1 GRT''). This bus survived into 2008 as a unique member of the First Aberdeen fleet as their 10046.
Towards the new millennium, interest was revived in the more advanced, lighter, low-floor designs being introduced, and the first second-generation articulated buses were introduced by First Group in Manchester in 1998/1999 on route 135. Articulated buses were first introduced in London in the early 2000s. Later, First Group, in collaboration with Volvo Buses and Wrightbus, developed the Wright StreetCar. First Group branded this the ftr concept, for use in the introduction of new bus rapid transit schemes. The ftr is used in York, Leeds and Swansea.
Use of conventional articulated buses has extended beyond London, into the other English regions, as well as Scotland and Wales. Cardiff Bus secured the first Statutory Quality Bus Partnership in the UK which prompted the introduction of high technology artics. While Arriva has the largest single fleet, in London, First operates the most artics in the UK, across its subsidiary companies.
The majority of UK artics are based in London, driven by the tendering specification system of Transport for London, the regulation authority responsible for bus services in London. The introduction of 'bendy buses' in London caused several issues, including safety and fare evasion.
By 2008, the London fleet stood at 393 buses. In August 2008, following the election of Boris Johnson as Mayor of London, it was announced the bendy buses would be withdrawn as their 5-year operating contracts came to an end, starting from May 2009, and completed by 2013 (or 2015 depending on contract extensions),Buses Magazine, August 2008 issue, page 5, Ian Allan Publishing but likely the end of 2011. With the majority of London operators of bendy buses also having significant provincial fleets in the UK, namely Arriva and the Go-Ahead Group, it is possible these buses could find alternate usage elsewhere in the UK, although it is also possible they could be sold to the other countries where their usage is more prevalent, although this would be hampered by these buses being right hand drive.
In 2006, Cardiff Bus took delivery of 19 Scania OmniCitys valued at   4.5million or   235,000 each. Most are being used on the Capital City Red services to Ely to increase capacity on a route previously operated by Super Pointer Darts and to improve infrastructure on the route, and the aim is that the Ely corridor will become the first Statutory Quality Bus Partnership in Wales. The buses operate every five minutes.
The buses also operate every 10 minutes on the Baycar route between Cardiff city centre and Cardiff Bay in a blue livery.
In early 2000 Travel West Midlands (TWM) took delivery of 14 Mercedes-Benz O405 articulated buses for its route 67 between Castle Vale and Birmingham. In late 2003 TWM bought 15 articulated Mercedes-Benz Citaro vehicles for Primeline routes inCoventry; the earlier O405s joined the Citaros in Coventry, although one was scrapped after a depot fire. To replace the previous artculated vehicles on the 67 TWM purchased eleven  Scania OmniCitys branded for the route.
The majority of articulated buses in the UK are Mercedes Citaros, with the remainder being standard Scania and Volvos, and the Wright StreetCar.
The types in use are:
Volvo have demonstrated a Hispano-bodied articulated bus in London, as have Scania with the OmniCity, but neither has secured any orders.