Appelbaum has been an active member of the Cult of the Dead Cow hacker collective since 2008, and is the co-founder of the San Francisco hackerspace ''Noisebridge'' with Mitch Altman. He has worked for Greenpeace and has volunteered for the Ruckus Society and the Rainforest Action Network. He is also a photographer and ambassador for the art group monochrom.
In 2005, Appelbaum gave two talks at the 22nd Chaos Communication Congress, ''Personal Experiences: Bringing Technology and New Media to Disaster Areas'', and ''A Discussion About Modern Disk Encryption Systems''. The former covered his travels to Iraq - crossing the border by foot, the installing of Internet satellites in Kurdistan, and his visit of New Orleans post-Hurricane Katrina. The latter talk discussed the legal and technical aspects of full disk encryption. At the 2006 23rd Chaos Communication Congress, he gave a talk with Ralf-Philipp Weinmann titled ''Unlocking FileVault: An Analysis of Apple's Encrypted Disk Storage System''. The duo subsequently released the  free software program which broke Apple's FileVault security.
Appelbaum has also collaborated on several other high-profile research projects, including the cold boot attack, SSL certificate authorities and smart parking meters.
 On 31 July he spoke at DEF CON and mentioned his phone being "seized". After speaking, he was approached by two FBI agents and questioned.
According to CNET in an interview with Appelbaum, he told them that "other people who appeared in the address book of  seized cell phones also have encountered trouble at borders or in airports".
On December 14, 2010, the US Department of Justice obtained a court order compelling Twitter to provide data associated with the user accounts of Appelbaum, as well as several other individuals associated with Wikileaks, including Julian Assange and Birgitta Jonsdottir. While the order was originally sealed, Twitter successfully petitioned the court to unseal it, permitting the company to inform its users that their account information had been requested.
When Appelbaum returned from a vacation in Iceland on January 10, 2011, he was again detained by US Customs agents for 30 minutes at the Seattle airport. According to Appelbaum, the agents "specifically wanted laptops and cell phones and were visibly unhappy when they discovered nothing of the sort. I did however have a few USB thumb drives with a copy of the Bill of Rights encoded into the block device. They were unable to copy it."
Similarly, Applebaum was detained in Houston, Texas while returning from a trip to Siberia on April 12, 2011.
He was again subject to detention without charge on the orders of the US Homeland Security forces in Iceland and again on arrival in Seattle on June 14, 2011.
No charges have been filed against Appelbaum.