Masterson was born on Long Island, New York, to Carol, who was his manager, and Peter Masterson, a State Farm Insurance agent. His parents divorced in 1984. He is of Irish descent. Masterson's stepfather, Joe Reaiche, played professional rugby league on the Australian National Rugby League's Sydney City Roosters.
 Jordy and Alanna are both actors who have been credited professionally with their half-brothers' surname ''Masterson'', though it is not the surname of either of their parents.
Masterson attended Garden City High School until the tenth grade, because at the age of sixteen he moved to Hollywood. He finished his high school education with the use of independent home schooling, instead of a public school, because acting jobs became more frequent and lengthy. He later went to Pasadena Art Center, but dropped out after a semester because acting consumed too much of his time.
 Hardee's, Hostess, Tang, and Clearasil.
In the early 1990s, Masterson landed a role in ''Beethoven's 2nd''. He also starred as Justin in ''Cybill'' and Jimmy Girvin in ''Roseanne''. These roles launched a movie career, and he soon appeared alongside John Travolta in ''Face/Off''. After starring in the third and fourth seasons of ''Cybill'', Masterson decided he wanted to move on from ''Cybill'' and audition for a show originally titled ''Teenage Wasteland'', which later was changed to ''That '70s Show''. The original casting director for ''That '70s Show'', Debby Romano, resisted Masterson's audition because he was slightly older than the rest of the cast, but finally caved and allowed him to audition. She stated that "He came in and he was just so funny." and that he redefined where the role was going, and made the role of Steven Hyde the "tough, funny guy". He was cast as the main character Steven Hyde.
Masterson appeared in all eight seasons of ''That '70s Show'' as main character Steven Hyde. His appearance on ''That '70s Show'' launched a breakthrough in Masterson's career, allowing him to pursue other endeavours between tapings. After the show concluded Masterson went on to star in several movies and made guest appearances on television shows including ''Punk'd'' and ''MADtv''. Along with Kutcher and Valderrama, he co-hosted the Fox TV special ''Woodstock 1999''. He had a part in the 2008 comedy ''Yes Man''. Masterson stars with his real-life fiancee, Bijou Phillips, in the 2009 drama ''The Bridge to Nowhere''. In 2011, Masterson guest starred as James Roland in USA Network's "White Collar" in the episode "Where There's A Will."
Masterson will have a lead role in Spike's new television series, ''Playing With Guns''. Masterson will also portray the high-profile American social activist Jerry Rubin in the upcoming 2010 movie, '''', written and directed by Pinchas Perry. ''The Chicago 8'' is a movie based on the actual Chicago Eight in the late 1960s and early 1970s, and explores the events around the trial.  It was filmed in September and October 2009 and is likely to release in 2010. The film is based closely on the trial transcripts and most of the action takes place in the courtroom.
Masterson began DJing in 1999 as a hobby, but it soon became a side business other than acting and owning several businesses. Masterson frequently DJs at Los Angeles night clubs under the name DJ Mom Jeans, formerly DJ Donkey Punch. He came up with the name DJ Mom Jeans from ''That '70s Show'', because Mila Kunis and Laura Prepon had to wear mom jeans regularly and he would make fun of them. Masterson is a self-described "rock and hip hop fanatic", and is also a fan of indie, electro, and funk music, all of which he primarily DJ's with. He is a fan of 1970s rock music, and his favourite band is Pearl Jam. Some of his other favourites include Broken Social Scene, The Strokes, Tokyo Police Club, and Midlake. He played a 2-hour set at the 2008 Lollapalooza festival in Chicago, played for the 2009 Lollapalooza, and for the 2010 Lollapalooza as well. Additionally, with local nightlife impresario Brent Bolthouse, he co-hosted a Monday night radio show titled ''Feel My Heat'', on Indie 103.1 in Los Angeles for 6 years. The show was canceled in October 2008.
In 2009, Masterson planned to release an album of his music, but that album has not yet been released.
Masterson also owns or co-owns eleven restaurants. One is a Korean barbecue restaurant, ''Shin'', located at 1600 Wilcox Avenue, Los Angeles, CA. He is a co-owner both ''Dolce'' (located at 8284 Melrose Ave, Los Angeles, CA), and ''Geisha House'' (located at 6633 Hollywood Boulevard, Los Angeles, CA), restaurants he founded with ''That '70s Show'' co-stars Ashton Kutcher and Wilmer Valderrama, who are also his close friends. He also owns a boutique called '''' (located at 4661 Hollywood Boulevard, Los Angeles, CA) with longtime friend Ilaria Urbinati. ''Confederacy'' features quality selection of designer clothing for both men and women, accessories, beauty products, artwork and photography, in-store events, and a coffee shop. Masterson owns a lounge and bar in Park City, Utah called '''', located at 625 Main Street. He often visits Park City to vacation and DJ at Downstairs.
Masterson still models occasionally, and he has been on the covers of many magazines, including Paper Magazine and YRB Magazine.
He is also a well-known poker enthusiast, stating "The most I've lost is a couple of grand and the most I've won is a lot more than that." He appeared as part of a poker team, the Unabombers, at a Poker Royale: James Woods vs. the Unabombers tournament on GSN. He has also hosted celebrity poker events, such as the Phat Farm Stuff Casino Weekend Poker Tournament, in which he won the tournament. Masterson, his brother Chris, and his ''That '70s Show'' costar Laura Prepon are all investors in Card Player Magazine.
Masterson is a Scientologist. He has been dating Bijou Phillips since 2005, and they became engaged in 2009.
Masterson has also been involved with the New York Rescue Workers Detoxification Project, in which he is a chairman. He also played in a charity softball game in New York's Central Park to help raise money for children in need of neurosurgery, designed guitars for a MusiCares fundraiser, and has performed in plays on stage for charities such as The Hollywood Police Activities League (a national youth development program for at-risk youth) as well. He has also played on the World Poker Tour Celebrity Invitational for the charity Chrysalis, with all proceeds going to said charity. He has also played the World Series of Poker's ''Ante up for Africa'' event.