The United States established diplomatic relations with Lithuania on July 28, 1922. The Soviet invasion forced the closure of the Legation to Lithuania on September 5, 1940, but Lithuanian representation in the United States continued uninterrupted. The United States never recognized the forcible incorporation of Lithuania into the USSR and views the present Government of Lithuania as a legal continuation of the interwar republic. In 2007, the United States and Lithuania celebrated 85 years of continuous diplomatic relations. Lithuania has enjoyed most-favored-nation treatment with the United States since December 1991. Since 1992, the United States has committed more than $100 million in Lithuania to economic and political transformation and to humanitarian needs.  The United States and Lithuania signed an agreement on bilateral trade and intellectual property protection in 1994 and a bilateral investment treaty in 1997.  In 1998, the United States signed a "Charter of Partnership" with Lithuania and the other Baltic countries establishing bilateral working groups focusing on improving regional security, defense, and economic issues.
Principal U.S. Officials include:
The U.S. Embassy in Lithuania is located in Vilnius.
Principal Lithuania Officials include:
Lithuania     United States relations are bilateral relations between Lithuania and the United States.
The United States established diplomatic relations with Lithuania on July 28, 1922. The Soviet invasion forced the closure of the Legation to Lithuania on September 5, 1940, but Lithuanian representation in the United States continued uninterrupted. The United States never recognized the forcible incorporation of Lithuania into the USSR and views the present Government of Lithuania as a legal continuation of the interwar republic. In 2007, the United States and Lithuania celebrated 85 years of continuous diplomatic relations. Lithuania has enjoyed most-favored-nation treatment with the United States since December 1991. Since 1992, the United States has committed more than $100 million in Lithuania to economic and political transformation and to humanitarian needs. The United States and Lithuania signed an agreement on bilateral trade and intellectual property protection in 1994 and a bilateral investment treaty in 1997. In 1998, the United States signed a "Charter of Partnership" with Lithuania and the other Baltic countries establishing bilateral working groups focusing on improving regional security, defense, and economic issues.
Principal U.S. Officials include:
Ambassador--
Deputy Chief of Mission--Damian Leader
Political and Economic Section Chief--Rebecca Dunham
Press and Cultural Attache--Ilya Levin
Defense Attache--LTC Joseph King (USA)
Defense Cooperation Officer--LTC Richard Gibbons (USA)
Management Officer--Andrea Baker
Consular Officer--James Fellows
The U.S. Embassy in Lithuania is located in Vilnius.
Principal Lithuania Officials include:
Ambassador - Zygimantas Pavilionis
Executive Assistant to the Ambassador - Egle Janeliunaite
Deputy Chief of Mission - Simonas Satunas
Mr. Rolandas Kacinskas, Minister Plenipotentiary
Mr. Leonas Garbacauskas, Second Secretar
Ms. Deimante Bartkiene, Third Secretary
Mr. Laimis Rubinskas, Third Secretary
Ms. Krystyna Kazakeviciene,  Chief Officer, Chief Financial Officer
Mr. Donatas Butkys, Chief Officer
Mr. Mantas Kubilinskas, Administrative Officer
Ms. Inga Lukaviciute, Head of Chancellery
Col. Antanas Jurgaitis, Defence Attache
Ltc. Mindaugas Abaliksta, Assistant Defence Attache