Mitchell was raised in Hermitage, Berkshire and educated at Oakham School. Upon leaving Oakham she went up to Magdalen College, Oxford to read English. She is particularly inspired by Eastern European theatre and by choreographers such as Pina Bausch and Siobhan Davies. 
She began her career behind the scenes at the King's Head Theatre in London before taking on work as an assistant director at theatre companies including Paines Plough and the Royal Shakespeare Company. Early in her career she directed a number of early productions under the umbrella of her company Classics On A Shoestring. 
In 1997 Mitchell became responsible for programming at the Other Place     the RSC's now defunct black box space. While at the RSC her productions included ''The Phoenician Women'' which won her the Evening Standard Award for Best Director in 1996.
Mitchell staged a new production of Luigi Nono's ''Al gran sole carico d'amore'' for the Salzburg Festival in 2009, and a new production of ''Parthenogenesis'' at the Royal Opera House in June 2009. Her frequent collaborators include writer Martin Crimp and designer Vicki Mortimer.
 In 2007, the artistic director of the NT accused the British press of affording Mitchell's productions "misogynistic reviews, where everything they say is predicated on her sex".
Her productions have been described as "distinguished by the intensity of the emotions, the realism of the acting, and the creation of a very distinctive world"http://www.timeout.com/london/theatre/features/3819/Katie_Mitchell-interview.html and accused of "a willful disregard for classic texts", but Mitchell suggests that "there's a signature in every director's work" and that it is not her intent to work to a "strong personal signature".
Mitchell's process involves long and intensive rehearsal periods and use of the Stanislavsky method. She regularly involves psychiatry in looking at characters, and in 2004 directed a series of workshops on Stanislavsky and neuroscience at the NT studio. Since her 2006 play ''Waves'', she has also experimented with video projections in a number of productions.
A former associate director at the Royal Court Theatre, Mitchell was appointed Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) in the 2009 New Year Honours. She has a daughter Edie, born c. 2006.
In January 2011 she was a guest on ''Private Passions'', the biographical music discussion programme on BBC Radio 3.