This is a '''family tree of Chinese emperors''' from 1279 to 1912, the third of three periods of 700 years, from the conquest of China by the Mongols to the end of the empire in 1912.
Chinese emperors family tree (ancient)     Chinese emperors family tree (early)     Chinese emperors family tree (middle)     ''Chinese emperors family tree (late)''
The following is the '''Yuan dynasty family tree'''.
Genghis Khan founded the Mongol Empire in 1206. The empire became split beginning with the succession war of his grandsons Kublai Khan and Ariq Boke. Kublai Khan, after defeating his younger brother Ariq Boke, founded the Yuan Dynasty in China in 1271. The dynasty was overthrown by the Ming Dynasty during the reign of Toghun Temur in 1368, but it survived in Mongolia, known as the Northern Yuan Dynasty; years of reign over the Northern Yuan Dynasty are given in brackets.
The following is a simplified '''family tree''' for the '''Ming Dynasty''', which ruled China between 1368 and 1644.
Those who became emperor are listed in bold, with their years of reign. In China, Ming emperors are best known by their temple names, which are given second below, after the personal name. (Jianwen was not awarded a temple name: his posthumous name, Huidi (      ), is used instead.) The names given in bold are era names, the form by which Ming emperors are most commonly known in English, but which technically refer to the timespan of an emperor's reign rather than to the emperor himself. (Xingzong and Ruizong are temple names: they never actually ruled, but Xingzong was posthumously granted an emperor's title and Ruizong was raised posthumously to the status of emperor by his son Jiajing in the Great Rites Controversy.) The imperial family's original family name was Zhu (   ), but the Emperor Hongwu opted for the dynastic name Ming (   ), meaning "brilliant". After the fall of the dynasty in 1644 and Chongzhen's suicide, a series of Ming princes based in the south of China claimed the imperial title, their court being known as the Southern Ming Dynasty. These claimants are given with their era names, and the timespans of their purported reigns in brackets. Their purported periods of rule are given in brackets. In 1662, Koxinga regained control of Taiwan from the Dutch colonial regime, and established a state for those who wished restore the Ming Dynasty to power. This state lasted until 1683, when it submitted to the Qing Dynasty. 
The following is a simplified '''family tree''' for the '''Qing Dynasty''', which ruled China between 1644 and the declaration of the Republic of China on January 1, 1912.
Those who became emperor of China are listed in bold, with their years of reign. Nurhaci and Huang Taiji were emperors of the dynasty, which at the time dominated the Manchuria region, but were not emperors of China as a whole; their years of reign over the dynasty are therefore given in brackets. The names given for emperors are era names, the form by which Qing emperors were most commonly known (with the exception of Puyi, who ruled as the Emperor Xuantong, but was generally known by his given name after his deposition). Puyi abdicated as head of state on February 12, 1912, but was permitted to retain his imperial titles until 1924. The imperial family's original Manchu clan name was Aisin Gioro ("the golden clan"). The dynasty was originally titled the Later Jin Dynasty (      ), in reference to its Jurchen origins, by Nurhaci in 1616, but in 1636 Huang Taiji opted to replace this title with the Chinese dynastic title Qing (   ), meaning "pure".