Lederer was born on October 30, 1963 in Concord, New Hampshire. His father is Richard Lederer, a writer and linguist who taught at St. Paul's School in New Hampshire. Lederer was a young chess talent and after high school he moved to New York City, where he attended Columbia University.  New York City is known for its chess clubs, notably the Marshall Chess Club and Manhattan Chess Club where he played, and at one of these clubs he discovered poker and eventually began playing at the Mayfair Club with other now well-known poker players such as Erik Seidel and Dan Harrington. 
In 1994, he moved to Las Vegas, Nevada where he sought out high stakes poker games.
Lederer is known as "the Poker Professor" because of his demeanor, analytical style and long history of wins.  He has made an instructional poker video called ''Secrets of No Limit Hold'em'' and he runs the ''Howard Lederer Poker Fantasy Camp''.  He also co-hosts ''Poker Superstars'' and ''Learn from the Pros'' for the Fox Broadcasting Company.  His sister, Katy Lederer, wrote a book about the Lederer family, ''Poker Face: A Girlhood Among Gamblers''.  
Lederer is one of the founders, co-owners and CEOs of "Tiltware Inc", the owners and creators of Full Tilt Poker, along with Ray Bitar. Since the passage of the Unlawful Internet Gambling Enforcement Act of 2006, Tiltware renamed itself to "Pocket Kings" and relocated to Ireland.
He has won two World Series of Poker bracelets and two World Poker Tour titles. In 2008, he won A$1.25 million by winning the $100,000 No Limit Holdem Challenge, billed as the world's most expensive tournament buy-in, at the Aussie Millions.
As of 2010, his total live tournament winnings exceed $5,900,000. His 43 cashes at the WSOP account for $1,541,474 of those winnings.
Although he is a Semi-vegetarian, Lederer once won a $10,000 proposition bet from fellow poker player David Grey by eating a cheeseburger. Obese for much of his life, Lederer eventually had gastric bypass surgery to lose weight. One of his nicknames (given to him by his sister Annie Duke) was "Bubba", which was shortened to "Bub" after Lederer lost the weight.  Lederer also credits running and playing basketball as two activities he uses to keep in shape.
Lederer and his wife, Suzie, are active philanthropists in the poker community.  In 2009, they hosted their first annual April Fool   s fundraiser tournament at the Hard Rock Hotel and Casino.   The event raised money for the Las Vegas Springs Preserve.   Then, in July, the Lederers hosted another charity poker tournament alongside their seventh-annual World Series of Barbecue (a popular Las Vegas social event).  The event raised money for the Boys and Girls Club of Las Vegas and the first place prize included a seat on NBC   s television program ''Poker After Dark''. 
He currently resides in Las Vegas with his wife Suzie, son Mattias, and three dogs.