On August 23, 2008, via text message, the Obama campaign reported that the then-presumptive Democratic nominee chose Joe Biden as his vice-presidential running mate.
Various news sources had listed persons thought to be on Senator Obama's short list for Vice President.
In the final days leading up to the Democratic National Convention, four individuals were left on Obama's final list for Vice President.
On August 22, the eve of Obama's scheduled unveiling of his running mate, NBC News reported that Sen. Evan Bayh and Gov. Tim Kaine were informed that they were not chosen. Last minute controversy emerged as it was learned that Sen. Hillary Clinton was never vetted for the position, when it was earlier thought that Sen. Barack Obama would consider her as he previously stated in various private and public reports. This led to several questions as to whether Clinton supporters would feel betrayed and would defuse the intensity in "dream ticket" scenarios.
That night, ABC News reported that the U.S. Secret Service had assumed protection of Biden, which was seen as a sign that he had been chosen as Obama's running mate. Just hours later, the Associated Press broke the news that Democratic Party officials had confided that Obama had in fact selected Biden as the vice-presidential nominee.
Image:Evan Bayh official portrait.jpg|Senator '''Evan Bayh''' of Indiana
Image:General Wesley Clark official photograph.jpg|Retired General '''Wesley Clark''' of Arkansas
Image:Christopher Dodd official portrait 2-cropped.jpg|Senator '''Christopher Dodd''' of Connecticut
Image:Chet Edwards, official 109th Congress photo.jpg|Representative '''Chet Edwards''' of Texas
Image:John Edwards, official Senate photo portrait.jpg|Former Senator '''John Edwards''' of North Carolina
Image:Chuck Hagel official photo.jpg|Senator '''Chuck Hagel''' of Nebraska
Image:James L. Jones.jpg|Retired General '''James L. Jones''' of Missouri
Image:Sam Nunn.jpg|Former Senator '''Sam Nunn''' of Georgia
Image:Jack Reed, official photo portrait, 2008.jpg|Senator '''Jack Reed''' of Rhode Island
Image:Governor Edward G. Rendell.jpg|Governor '''Ed Rendell''' of Pennsylvania
Image:Bill Richardson at an event in Kensington, New Hampshire, March 18, 2006.jpg|Governor '''Bill Richardson''' of New Mexico
Image:Brian Schweitzer official photo.jpg|Governor '''Brian Schweitzer''' of Montana
Image:Sebeliusofficialphoto.jpg|Governor '''Kathleen Sebelius''' of Kansas