Chinese emperors family tree (ancient)     Chinese emperors family tree (early)     ''Chinese emperors family tree (middle)''     Chinese emperors family tree (late)
The following is a simplified '''family tree''' for the '''Sui Dynasty''' (      ), which ruled China between AD 581 and 618. The Dynasty  was named for the family title: the Yang (   ) family were the Dukes of Sui.
Those who became emperor are listed in bold, with their years of reign large. The names given for emperors are posthumous names, the form by which Sui emperors were most commonly known.
The names given in bold for emperors are temple names, the form by which Tang emperors were most commonly known (with the exception of Shangdi/Shaodi (       /       ), whose posthumous titles mean simply "died young" and "the young emperor", and Aidi (      ), also known as Zhaoxuan (      ), neither of whom were awarded temple names). It should be noted that the names of Xuanzong I (      ) and Xuanzong II (      ) are different in the original Chinese, but are rendered the same in Pinyin English transliteration (once the accents have been removed).
The fifty years between the fall of the Tang Dynasty and the establishment of the Song Dynasty were a time of upheaval known as the Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms Period. During this period, five short-lived imperial dynasties ruled the heart of China, while a series of small independent kingdoms were established in the south.
The '''Later Liang Dynasty''' ruled between 907 and 923.
The '''Later Tang Dynasty''' ruled between 923 and 937. The '''Later Jin Dynasty''' ruled between 936 and 947.
The '''Later Han Dynasty''' ruled between 947 and 951. Liu Min, brother of Emperor Gaozu the founder of the Later Han Dynasty, established the '''Northern Han''' kingdom, which ruled the area north of the Chinese heartland until it was overrun by Emperor Taizong of Song in 979. 
The '''Later Zhou Dynasty''' ruled between 951 and 960.
The '''Later Shu''' kingdom gained independence from the Later Tang Dynasty in 934, remaining an independent state until conquered by the Song Dynasty in 965.
The '''Wu''' kingdom existed as an independent state 907   937. In 937 Li Bian (also known as Xu Zhigao), at one point an adopted son of Yang Xingmi and later the adopted son of the paramount general Xu Wen, usurped power and established the '''Southern Tang''' kingdom, which remained an independent state until conquered by the Song Dynasty in 975.
The following is a simplified '''family tree''' for the '''Song Dynasty''', which ruled China between 960 and 1279. The names given are temple names, the form by which Song Emperors are most commonly known (with the exception of the last emperor, Bing, who is simply known by his given name. The Song Dynasty is often divided into the Northern Song (960   1127), which ended when the Song lost control of Northern China to the Jin Dynasty, and the Southern Song (1127   1279).
The following is a simplified '''family tree''' for the '''Liao Dynasty''', which ruled much of northern China between 907 and 1125. The names given are temple names, the form by which Liao Emperors are most commonly known (with the exception of the last emperor, Tianzuodi, who was not awarded a temple name).
The following is a simplified '''family tree''' for the '''Jin Dynasty'''. Arising from a family of Jurchen chieftains (whose years of rule are given in brackets), the Dynasty was declared by Wanyan Aguda in 1115; in 1125 his successor Wanyan Wuqimai conquered the Liao Dynasty. The Jin ruled much of northern China until their conquest by the Mongol Empire 1234. They were the ancestors of the Qing Dynasty, which was initially named the later Jin Dynasty in recognition of this heritage. The names given are temple names, the form by which Jin Emperors are most commonly known (with the exceptions of  Hailingwang, Weishaowang and Modi; these are posthumous names, as temple names were not awarded).