The university serves the San Antonio metropolitan area and the South Texas region through three campuses: Main Campus, Downtown Campus in Downtown San Antonio, and Hemisfair Park Campus (Institute of Texan Cultures). The Main Campus is on 600&nbsp;acres (2.4&nbsp;km2), at the intersection of Interstate 10 and Loop 1604 near the northern edge of San Antonio, Texas, in Bexar County.
The University of Texas at San Antonio offers more than 130 undergraduate and graduate programs.
The University of Texas at San Antonio was founded June 5, 1969 by Governor Preston Smith.  In 1970, the University of Texas Board of Regents appointed the university's first president, Arleigh B. Templeton, who served from 1970 to 1972, and received a land donation of  in northwest San Antonio for the site of UTSA. Architects Ford, Powell and Carson Inc. were assigned to design a master plan for the university. Although the university was established in 1970, students temporarily attended class at the Koger Center, which also housed administrative offices until 1975, when construction on the northwest San Antonio campus was completed. UTSA began with five colleges: Business, Fine and Applied Arts, Humanities and Social Sciences, Multidisciplinary Studies and Science and Mathematics.
UTSA currently has The Graduate School and nine colleges including:
All programs are fully accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools, and the UTSA College of Business is accredited by the Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business.
In addition to the educational advantages UTSA offers, the school generates more than $1.2&nbsp;billion in annual business revenue in San Antonio and directly employs more than 5,000 people.
In a 2007 study released by  Academic Analytics, UTSA was ranked fifth for faculty scholarly productivity among other large research universities in the state of Texas.
Proposition 4 was passed by Texas voters in November 2009. This piece of legislation named 7 emerging research universities in Texas that could compete for additional state funds in an effort to increase the number of tier 1 institutions in Texas. Factors such as research expenditure, graduate degrees awarded, and scholarly productivity all play a part in which schools receive the most funding.
The school reached a new record of $48.6&nbsp;million for research expenditures in fiscal year 2010. This represents a five-year increase of 50.5 percent.
UTSA is San Antonio's only NCAA Division I institution with 16 intercollegiate sports including basketball, cross country, golf, indoor track & field, men's baseball, outdoor track and field, tennis, fencing, women's soccer, women   s softball, and women's volleyball. UTSA's rival in most sports is Texas State.
The sport that attracts the most student attention is men's basketball. The UTSA team plays at the Convocation Center and is a member of the Southland Conference.
In September 2007, students passed a referendum to increase funding for the athletic department by doubling the athletics fee over a five-year period. The additional funding allows renovations of existing athletics facilities, increased institutional support of existing intercollegiate sports programs, and an expansion of the athletics program with the addition of a Division I FBS football team, playing at the Alamodome, by 2011. The plan was approved by the University of Texas System board of regents in December 2008.
Lyrics by Alan Craven, former dean and professor of COLFA.
Music by Clarence ("Joe") Stuessy, retired professor and former chair of Department of Music.
The official colors of The University of Texas System are orange and white and, according to Board of Regents Rules and Regulations, "an institution may adopt one additional color to be used in connection with athletic and other activities of the institution."http://www.utsystem.edu/bor/rules/RRRas1.pdf Rules and Regulations of the Board of Regents Upon recommendation from the UTSA Student Representative Assembly, the Board of Regents approved the addition of navy to the orange and white for UTSA's school colors.
The roadrunner, a bird representative of the Texas Hill Country and the Southwest, was voted the UTSA mascot in 1977.http://www.lib.utexas.edu/taro/utsa/00177/utsa-00177.html Inventory of the University Communications Records, 1973-2008 "Rowdy the Roadrunner" attends many university functions and games.
On March 1, 2008, UTSA Athletics unveiled it new logos during the Homecoming Game against Texas A&M University   Corpus Christi. The athletic markings were changed due to noticeable similarities to the University of Kansas Jayhawk.
 The first Fiesta UTSA was attended by over 1,000 students and included music, a jalapeno eating contest, a watermelon spitting contest, a dunk tank, and other activities. Fiesta UTSA features dozens of booths set up under the Sombrilla in a carnival atmosphere. The booths are run by Registered Student Organizations and offer food, drinks and games. The Campus Activities Board sponsors bands and other musicians throughout the day. Fiesta UTSA became the kickoff event for Fiesta San Antonio each spring, having been added to the official Fiesta San Antonio schedule in 1980.http://www.lib.utexas.edu/taro/utsa/00177/utsa-00177.html "It's Official." ''UTSA Bulletin'' vol. 8, no. 2 (February 1980). University Publications Collection: University Serials and Journals Collection, UA 1.02.01, Archives and Special Collections, UTSA Library The Fiesta royalty are present at the ribbon-cutting ceremony that marks the official beginning of Fiesta.
Best Fest, an annual celebration held in October, began in 1978 (as "Bestfest") as "a special salute to five of the state's outstanding festivals," including New Braunfels's Wurstfest, Corpus Christi's Buccaneer Days, San Antonio's Fiesta, the Texas State Fair in Dallas, and George Washington's Birthday Celebration in Laredo.http://www.lib.utexas.edu/taro/utsa/00150/utsa-00150.html Press release of October 11, 1978, University Communications Records, UA 16.01, Archives and Special Collections, UTSA Library It was presented by the student organization Variety 79. In 1979, the event was said to be "a salute to five of the city's outstanding festivals: Fiesta Navidena, King William Fair, La Feria del Rio, the San Antonio Stock Show and Rodeo, and the Texas Folklife Festival."http://www.lib.utexas.edu/taro/utsa/00150/utsa-00150.html Press release of October 10, 1979, University Communications Records, UA 16.01, Archives and Special Collections, UTSA Library In the late 1970s, Best Fest included performances by the UTSA Brass Ensemble and UTSA Jazz Ensemble, several contests such as the jalapeno eating contest, egg toss, "Walking the Plank Contest," "Pee Wee Bicycle Races," and others. The modern Best Fest incorporates a Halloween theme with costume and booth-decorating contests.
Image:UTSA sign, San Antonio, TX IMG_1230.JPG|UTSA entrance sign
Image:UTSA Campus University Center And Convocation Center.jpg|West Paseo between University Center III and University Center I (with Convocation Center in background)
Image:UTSA Campus University Center II.jpg|University Center II, Second Floor
Image:Entrance to John Peace Library, UTSA, San Antonio, TX IMG_1222.JPG|Entrance to John Peace Library atop Sombrilla Plaza
Image:UTSA Campus John Peace Library.jpg|John Peace Library, First Floor
Image:UTSA Campus Main Building.jpg|Main Building
UTSA offers four selections for on-campus housing:
A new $40 million dormitory to house 618 students is scheduled to open in August 2013.  It is situated between the Chaparral and Laural dorms.  
More than 8,000 students live off-campus within walking distance of campus. These student housing complexes include:
Alpin Park, Aspen Heights, Avalon Place, Broadstone Ranch, Campus Side, Chase Hill, The Grove, High View Place, Highlands, Hill Country Place, Las Colinas, Madera, Maverick Creek, The Outpost, Villas at Babcock, and The Reserve.
UTSA also features an 11&nbsp;acre (45,000&nbsp;m2) campus located in downtown San Antonio. Called the UTSA Downtown Campus, it houses the College of Public Policy and the College of Architecture. The UTSA HemisFair Park Campus stands as the third branch of UTSA, holding the Institute of Texan Cultures museum. 
A new bus-rapid transit line, VIA Primo, is scheduled to open in 2012.  This will allow students to quickly commute between the UTSA Main Campus and the UTSA Downtown Campus.  A streetcar is also planned that will connect the UTSA Downtown Campus to the HemisFair Park Campus.
From 2006 to 2009 the school completed over $250&nbsp;million in construction projects.
UTSA has also purchased  of land near the Main Campus in 2007. This land was named Park West in 2009 and became part of the school's Main Campus. The school has plans for more than $150&nbsp;million in new athletic facilities at Park West.
The $83 million Applied Engineering and Technology building opened in 2009. 
The school underwent an extensive remodel in 2009 of older buildings including the JPL, HSS, and MS buildings. North Paseo Building, a $15 million office building, will house ROTC operations when it opens July 2011.  A new ceramics studio broke ground in 2009 and two adjacent science buildings underwent $24 million in renovations.
East Parking Garage, a $30 million 5-level parking garage, is planned to open July 2012.  It will also include a coffee shop, apparel shop, and office space.
Dining services at UTSA also expanded in 2008-2011. New additions include two Starbucks, Panda Express, Taco Cabana, Burger King, and Chili's Too. Other new services on-campus include a hair salon, technology store, UPS store, and DVD rental kiosks.
Image:McKinney Humanities Bldg. UTSA IMG_1226.JPG|McKinney Humanities Building is located near the John Peace Library and across from the Business Building.
Image:Business Building, UTSA in San Antonio IMG_1225.JPG|Business Building
Image:UTSA Convention Center IMG_1215.JPG|UTSA Convocation Center is located between the Recreation Center and the Biotechnology Science Building.
Image:Recreation Center at UTSA, San Antonio, TX IMG_1205.JPG|UTSA Recreation Center (side view)
Image:UTSA Campus Rec Center.jpg|UTSA Rec Center Outdoor Pools
Image:UTSA Campus BSE Building Interior.jpg|BSE Building Atrium
Image:UTSA Campus BSE Building.jpg|Biotechnology Sciences and Engineering Building, designed by FKP Architects
Image:Close-up of UTSA Biotechnical Sciences Center IMG_1207.JPG|Close-up of Biotechnology Sciences Building
Image:Revised Sombrilla Plaza UTSA, San Antonio IMG_1221.JPG|Sombrilla Plaza, designed by O'Neil Ford 
At the heart of student life are 180 student organizations that represent a diverse array of interests:
Among the most active groups are the sponsored organizations that receive funding from the University Student Services fee:
UTSA also hosts a nationally recognized weekly newspaper, ''The Paisano''.
It has remained fully independent of the administration since its inception in 1981. The newspaper is published weekly every Tuesday.
UTSA's second student-run news organization was founded in September 2006. The Independent  is an online newspaper experimenting with newer forms of media, such as podcasting. In Spring 2008, The Independent launched a monthly print issue. New online editions are published every Monday, print issues are published monthly. As of January 20, 2010, it appears The Independent is now defunct as the last issue was on April 29, 2009.
The College Of Engineering Student Council is the student voice of The University of Texas at San Antonio College of Engineering. They are designed to serve and promote interaction among students and the engineering community. Their mission is to cultivate an active student body to encourage pride and tradition and to serve as the collective voice for all UTSA Engineering students. Their Vision is to serve as the cornerstone organization within engineering RSO's as acknowledged by their integration within the college of engineering and UTSA.
They offer opportunities in STEM outreach, host guest speakers, and compete in independent engineering competitions. Any student at UTSA's College of Engineering is considered a member and has a voice, but voting privileges is limited to 2 representatives from any engineering organization.
With the addition of more on-campus housing in recent years, campus life has evolved to become much more active. Before basketball games, tail-gate parties and body painting in the school's colors are common. There are many traditions as well, including Best Fest and Fiesta UTSA, both are events for students organizations to raise funds while providing entertainment and food to the student body.
A small percentage of incoming freshmen are in the CAP program, an agreement which allows students who are not initially accepted into UT - Austin to choose to come to UTSA. If they maintain a certain GPA and restrict themselves to taking specific classes, they will be granted admission to UT. The program is also in effect at other UT system schools, including UT   Arlington, and continues to draw more and more students every year. The CAP program has become more controversial as more freshmen are enrolled. UTSA officials have stated that only about 30% of those in the CAP program end up at UT - Austin the following school year. Despite this, however, many students are opting to stay at UTSA, as the university has been recognized for its growing research and business programs.
San Antonio is known for its tourist spots. In addition to research facilities, tourism along with congenial weather/temperatures play important roles in attracting many students.