Note:  If you are seeing this page as a result of an attempt to re-nominate an article for deletion, you must manually edit the AfD nomination links in order to create a new discussion page using the name format of  .  When you create the new discussion page, please provide a link to this old discussion in your nomination. -->
The result was  '''delete''', redirected to Tax protester (United States).    ( ) 01:56, 12 March 2008 (UTC)
This is a hoax, or more specifically, tax protester nonsense, incorrectly (and with breathtaking stupidity) mis-stating the law to contend that someone may be ''either'' a citizen of the U.S. ''or'' a citizen of an individual state therein, but not both. In other words, the article argues that people who are citizens of Texas or Indiana or Wyoming are therefore ''not'' U.S. Citizens. If the erroneous contentions are removed, then this article would be nothing more than a duplicate of material in United States nationality law, so it should be deleted outright as a hoax     07:48, 6 March 2008 (UTC)
I have taken your addition off.  You obviously did not read this article.  If you did you would have seen that this article is based on citizenship.  There are three citizenships in this country: citizenship of the United States, citizenship of the several states, and citizenship of a state.  Taxes has nothing to do with this article. 
Your action was, therefore, unjustified.  
I will report you to Wikipedia if you do this again.  I suggest you read this article.  It has references to Supreme Court cases, documents of our forefathers and other sources, including acts of Congress. --  ( ) 08:44, 6 March 2008 (UTC)
To all,
I am concluding that what is said by the Supreme Court of the United States on the topic of a citizen of the several states would matter to you.
On this point there is the following from the Supreme Court of the United States:
In addition, the following was removed by BD2412, from the top of my article:
This is another Supreme Court case decided after the ''Slaughterhouse Cases."
There is also the following from the ''Slaughterhouse Cases'':
And, from another Supreme Court case decided after the ''Slaughterhouse Cases''. there is:
Citizen of the several States is therefore a legal term.  
In addition, this article has nothing to do with taxes.  It deals with citizenship.  Sources are referred to including but not limited to: Supreme Court cases, documents of our forefatheres, and acts of Congress.  --  ( ) 04:34, 7 March 2008 (UTC)
To all, 
I went through BD2412 reference to Wikipedia's  , and found nothing in it, by way of "theory" of citizenship, to the issue of federal income taxes. The closest thing is that the Fourteenth Amendment was not properly ratified, which is '''NOT''' present in my article. --  ( ) 04:53, 7 March 2008 (UTC)
To all,
Above I quoted and cited cases from the Supreme Court relating to a citizen of the several States.  Here are some from the Supreme Court which relate to a citizen of a state.
The Supreme Court makes a distinction between a citizen of a state and a citizen of the United States.
In addition, there is the following:
Also:
And:
From the ''Slaughterhouse Cases'' there is the following:
Therefore, citizen of a state is a legal term. 
And, as stated at my first entry there are three citizenship in this country; citizenship of the United States, citizenship of the several States, and citizenship of a state.  To this I will add that privileges and immunities of a citizen of the United States are in the 14th Amendment, privileges and immunities of a citizen of the several States are located at Article IV, Section 2 and privileges and immunities of a citizen of a state are to be found in the constitution and laws of an individual State.  --  ( ) 05:47, 7 March 2008 (UTC)
To all, 
Now that I have given legal authority, I will now address other issues.  
My article does not in   violate local bias.  Legal authority is quoted and cited (and link to in most cases).  In addition, the views expressed are not my but those of the legal sources.  I have provided additional legal sources to further support those views in my article.  As I have stated before this article is on citizenship and '''NOT''' taxes.  Assuming the obvious is obviously not being violated since nothing is assumed in my article.  Pseudonyms has not been violated.  Other points really doesn't apply.  English language also really doesn't apply.  Under Basic writing I do not see a problem especially regarding being "unbalanced" since althought the article treats citizenship of the several states, citizenship of the United States and citizenship of a state are also included.  And Other areas really doesn't apply.  So I am left with the conclusion that   in not being violated, in whole, at all.  --  ( ) 06:45, 7 March 2008 (UTC)
To all, 
I will now address the issue of an hoax WP.HOAX.  "A hoax is an attempt to trick an audience into believing that something false is real."  Such is not the case here.  Legal authority has been provided which provide the basis for my article.  Note: court cases, acts of Congress, and other sources like the Congressional Globe are considered published documents.  An article was also referred to: Dan Goodman, "Slaughterhouse Cases, Two Citizens"; December 1, 2007; The New Media Journal.us at http://therant.us/guest/d_goodman/12012007.htm .  A published piece.  There is no trickery.  
Just because one does not know of something does not make it non-existent.  I at first, was unaware of what is now in this article.  However, I kept my mind open and pursued it further and was surprised at what I found.  In a way it is like finding out the Earth is round instead of being flat.  You took the journey to the edge of the Earth to see if it is really flat, knowing that it might not be and found out that it was indeed round and not flat.  --  ( ) 09:51, 7 March 2008 (UTC)
To all,
In WP.CB it reads "It is not a policy or guideline, and editors are not obliged to follow it."  However, I will make a comment.  The terms that used in my work are not complete bollocks.  Legal authority is provided in the article and has been provided in this Talk.  Turning the table around, if I was to say what is a citizen of the United States, Amendment 14 of the Constitution of the United States would be cited, and if pressed further reference to the ''Slaughterhouse Cases'', would have been made.  Both are legal documents, both are published, and both have the terms citizen of the United States or United States citizen in them.  --  ( ) 10:06, 7 March 2008 (UTC)
To all, 
WP.OR relates to unpublished original research or original thought.  My work is the expression of the legal sources included.  As stated in reference to WP.HOAX "Legal authority has been provided which provide the basis for my article.  Note: court cases, acts of Congress, and other sources like the Congressional Globe are considered published documents.  An article was also referred to: Dan Goodman, "Slaughterhouse Cases, Two Citizens"; December 1, 2007; The New Media Journal.us at http://therant.us/guest/d_goodman/12012007.htm .  A published piece." Wikipedia:No original research and Wikipedia:Verifiability are therefore satisfied.  This piece has been written in objective manner.  Wikipedia:Neutral point of view is therefore also satisfied.  --  ( ) 10:34, 7 March 2008 (UTC)
To Torchwood Who? (talk) 06:54, 7 March 2008 (UTC) 
I finished reading United States nationality law.  This article deals, in essence, with an act of Congress.  Granted, it relates to the Constitution of the United States, but it does not deal with the provisions of the Constitution of the United States as my article does.  I think the contributor would agree with me that his or his piece is substantially different from my, even though they both deal with citizenship.  
You would be putting an apple with an orange.  Even though they are a fruit, they are not the same.  Similiar yes, the same no.  --  ( ) 09:15, 7 March 2008 (UTC)
To Torchwood Who? (talk) 07:13, 7 March 2008 (UTC),
You have to read Footnote 1 and not the Slaughterhouse Case reference.  BD2412 remove the first line which was:
Footnotes:
Reference:
I am still reading United States nationality law. --  ( ) 07:51, 7 March 2008 (UTC)
The following Supreme Court case should answer your concern:
Note at Article IV, Section 2, Clause 1 of the Constitution of the United States it states:
Words in law are chosen carefully.  Citizens OF the several states is not the same as citizens IN the several states.  Citizen of the several states refers to a citizen of the several states and not a citizen of a state.  This is shown in ''Cole v. Cunningham'':
To Torchwood Who? (talk) 07:47, 7 March 2008 (UTC) 
Here is a case:
This clearly states there are two types of citizenship, not three. Ignoring the case law as citations, which I feel we can because no one is disputing the results of those cases or the looking at the cases from an academic standpoint in this article... we are in essence debating the language... I will move on to Jacob Howard, Congressional Globe... 
This illustrates that the author does not understand there to be three classes of citizenship, and if so he doesn't know what the differences are. This source is from 1866 in in context refers to interstate commerce right. In the citation for Alexander Hamilton's Federalist Papers the direct quote referencing Citizens of the Several States is thus, 
I can see no reference suggesting that the use of the phrase is distinct from citizens of the united states or citizen of a state in plural. The Joseph Story citation opens with the statement 
I am again at a loss for how this is interpreted as a unique and distinct classification of citizenship. In the final citation in question the document refers to the differences between political and civil rights of freed black and is in substance 
I again, there is no single statement put forward in this citation that defines three unique classes of citizenship. I therefore conclude that this article desperately needs better citations to bolster the argument that there is a third classification of citizenship and not merely a debate over semantics.--  ( ) 08:16, 7 March 2008 (UTC)
To Torchwoodwho|talk 08:16, 7 March 2008 (UTC)
You have made an ettor.  You have concluded that a citizen of the states is the same as a citizen of a state from the case U.S. v. Anthony.  This is incorrect as shown in my artice at "Citizenship of the several States after the Fourteenth Amendment"  There it is shown that the term is the same as a citizen of the several states in the ''Slaughterhouse Casse.''  To wit:
After the adoption of the Fourteenth Amendment, The Supreme Court of the United States decided in the ''Slaughterhouse Cases''  that because of the Fourteenth Amendment there were now two separate and distinct citizens under the Constitution of the United States (and not the Fourteenth Amendment):  a citizen of the United States and a citizen of the several States;
To wit:
And:
Also:
See also *Dan Goodman, ''"Slaughterhouse Cases, Two Citizens";'' December 1, 2007; The New Media Journal.us at http://therant.us/guest/d_goodman/12012007.htm  a published piece.
To all,  
In the ''Slaughterhouse Cases'', the Supreme Court dealt with two clauses of the Fourteenth Amendment; Section 1, Clause 1 and Section 1, Clause 2.  Citizenship of the United States and citizenship of a state were treated in Section 1, Clause 1 of the Fourteenth Amendment.  Citizenship of the United States and citizenship of the several States were covered in Section 1, Clause 2 of the Fourteenth Amendment:
Moreover, it was decided that citizenship of the United States and citizenship of a state were now separate and distinct.  Privileges and immunities of a citizen of a state were to be found in the constitution and laws of the individual state.  Privileges and immunities of a citizen of the United States were to be located at the Fourteenth Amendment.
Also, the ''Slaughterhouse'' court concluded that there were now two separate and distinct citizens under the Constitution of the United States (and not the Fourteenth Amendment); a citizen of the United States and a citizen of the several States:
To wit:
And:
Also:
It is to be observed that the terms    citizens of the states    and    citizens of the several states    are used interchangeably by the Slaughterhouse court.  And they are employed in contradistinction to the term    citizens of the United States.     --  ( ) 08:59, 7 March 2008 (UTC)
Dear Gettingitdone: If I'm reading you correctly, you keep saying that "citizen of the United States" and "citizen of the several states" and "citizen of a state" are three separate things.
Here is what "Dan Goodman" says in the material you linked:
Sorry, but in none of the court cases you cited, and in none of the court cases Dan Goodman cited, did any court ever rule that a person cannot be BOTH a citizen of the United States AND a citizen of "the several States" at the same time. Similarly, in none of the court cases cited did any court ever rule that one cannot be BOTH a citizen of the United States and a citizen of "a state" at the same time. No case. Not once. Not ever.
Think of it this way: The mere fact that "being a father" is not the same as "being a brother" does not mean that I cannot be ''both at the same time''. Yes, they're two different things, with different attributes and responsibilities and rights -- but I can be both a father and a brother at the same time. The mere fact that being a "citizen of the United States" is not the same as being a "citizen of Texas" does not mean that I cannot be both at the same time.
It appears that Goodman is essentially arguing that because "being a citizen of Texas" AND "being a citizen of the United States" are ''two different things'' (which of course they are), a person ''therefore cannot be both at the same time''. The argument is completely illogical. And more to the point, none of the courts in the court cases Goodman cited ever made any such ruling.
And as far as the phrase "citizens of the several states," as somehow being a "third class" of citizenship, none of the court cases cited ever contained any ruling that there is a third class of citizenship called "citizens of the several states." The term "citizens of the several states" essentially means, "citizens of the separate, or various, states." This is not rocket science.
There are only two classes of citizenship ''in the sense in which we are speaking here'': state citizenship and national citizenship. Under the Constitution (which of course includes the Fourteenth Amendment), a "citizen of the United States" is automatically a "citizen of the state wherein he or she resides" at a given time. You cannot be a citizen of a state (e.g., Montana) and not also be a United States citizen ''at the same time''. Nothing that Dan Goodman writes, and nothing that you write, will ever change that fundamental legal concept.
I am having a hard time finding any information on the linked web site about "Dan Goodman." What are his qualifications or credentials? Does he have any legal training? Can you find anyone with any legal expertise who has ever made the arguments Dan Goodman is making? I think we are also having a ''reliable source'' issue here.
In no federal court case whatsover has any court ever ruled that someone can be a citizen of "a state" and yet not, at the same time, be a "citizen of the United States". So, where is all this leading you?   ( ) 16:35, 7 March 2008 (UTC)
Post-script: Looking back, it appears that what you and Dan Goodman may be arguing is that there were three classes of citizenship before the 14th Amendment and only two afterward. You are at least correct that there are only two classes of citizenship after the Amendment (if that's what you're arguing). But the basic problem I have identified is: Goodman seems to be confused in his reading of the court cases. Goodman is incorrectly inferring that somehow the courts have ruled that you cannot be both a citizen of the United States AND a citizen of a state at the ''same time''. Goodman is wrong. No court has ever ruled that way, and again the argument has no legal validity. It's nonsensical.   ( ) 16:56, 7 March 2008 (UTC)
To   ( ) 16:35, 7 March 2008 (UTC)
You wrote that "In no federal court case whatsover has any court ever ruled that someone can be a 'citizen of a state" and yet not, at the same time, be a 'citizen of the United States'.  
In an earlier post on this Talk page, --  ( ) 05:47, 7 March 2008 (UTC), I provided legal authority on this point you brought up.  I reproduce here:
The Supreme Court makes a distinction between a citizen of a state and a citizen of the United States.
Also:
And:
I am in total agreement with you that a citizen of the United States can also be a citizen of a state. --  ( ) 05:36, 8 March 2008 (UTC)
To     05:49, 8 March 2008 (UTC)
In my posting at,--  ( ) 05:36, 8 March 2008 (UTC). there was this Supreme Court case:
Here is another case (a state case):
From the same Supreme Case above, including citing, is the following:
I think this makes it clear that one can be a citizen of a state and not a citizen of the United States.  --  ( ) 06:28, 8 March 2008 (UTC)
To all,  
I will now address the issue of three citizens (citizenships).
Section 1, Clause 1 of the Amendment 14 reads:
Section 1, Clause 2 of the Amendment 14 provides:
I have boldfaced the following terms from this opinion:
The ''Slaughterhouse'' court makes the observation that the term citizen of a state is in Section 1, Clause 1 of the Fourteenth Amendment but not in Section 1, Clause 2 of the Fourteenth Amendment:
Therefore, Section 1, Clause 2 of the Fourteenth Amendment does not relate to a citizen of a state.  
However, the ''Slaughterhouse'' court uses the term privileges and immunities of citizens of the several states in reference to Section 1, Clause 2 of the Fourteenth Amendment: 
The ''Slaughterhouse'' court refers to the argument of the plaintiff in error, and remarks that the brief rests on the wrong citizenship (and provision of the Constitution).  In this case, before this opinion, there is the following, starting at the bottom of page 45, then to pages 55 thru 56 :  
However, ''Ward v. Maryland'' did not deal with the Fourteenth Amendment and privileges and immunities of citizens of the United States, but rather, with Article IV, Section 2, Clause 1 and citizens of the several States:
Privileges and immunities of citizens of the several states therefore relate to a citizen of the several states.  
Thus, from the Slaughterhouse Cases, there are three citizens (citizenships):
In addition, the ''Slaughterhouse'' court stated the following  