Obama Sr. was born in Rachuonyo District on the shores of Lake Victoria just outside Kendu Bay, Kenya Colony, at the time a colony of the British Empire. He was raised in the village of Nyang   oma Kogelo, Siaya District, Nyanza Province.  His family are members of the Luo ethnic group. His father was Hussein Onyango Obama (c. 1895-1979) and his mother was Habiba Akumu Nyanjango of Karabondi, Kenya, Onyango's second wife. However, Obama Sr. was raised by his stepmother, Sarah Ogwel of Kogelo, after Akumu left her family and separated from her husband in 1945.
Before working as a cook for missionaries in Nairobi, Obama Sr.'s father Onyango had traveled widely, enlisting in the British colonial forces and visiting Europe, India, and Zanzibar, where he converted from Roman Catholicism to Islam and took the name Hussein. Hussein Onyango was jailed by the British for six months in 1949 due to his involvement in the Kenyan independence movement. According to Sarah Onyango Obama, Onyango was subjected to brutal torture which caused permanent physical disabilities. Obama Sr. was born into this Muslim and Christian family, but he became an atheist as a young man, before meeting Ann Dunham.
While still living near Kendu Bay, Obama Sr. attended Gendia Primary School and transferred to Ng   iya Intermediate School once his family moved to Siaya District. From 1950 to 1953, he studied at Maseno National School, an exclusive Christian boarding school in Maseno that is run by the Anglican Church of Kenya. The head teacher, B.L. Bowers, described Obama Sr. in his records as "very keen, steady, trustworthy and friendly. Concentrates, reliable and out-going."  In 1954, after attending the Maseno National School, Obama Sr. was married for the first time at the age of eighteen, to Kezia Aoko  in a tribal ceremony. They had two children, Malik (aka Roy) and Auma, during the early years of their marriage. Later, while Obama Sr. was married to his third wife, Kezia had Abo and Bernard, thought to be with Obama Sr., but in ''Dreams from My Father'', it is stated that the Obama family question whether Abo and Bernard are his biological sons.Obama (1995, 2004), p.335.
 Initial financial supporters of the program included Harry Belafonte, Sidney Poitier, Jackie Robinson, and Elizabeth Mooney Kirk, a literacy advocate who provided most of the financial support for Obama Sr.'s early years in the United States, according to the Tom Mboya archives at Stanford University. Funds provided the following year by John F. Kennedy's family paid off old debts of the project and subsidized student stipends, thereby indirectly benefiting Obama Sr. and other members of the 1959 group of scholarship holders. During the 2008 presidential campaign, his son misspoke, saying that the Kennedys organized the initial 1959 student airlift, an error subsequently acknowledged by a campaign spokesman. When Obama Sr. left for America, he left behind his baby son, Roy, and his young wife, Kezia, who was pregnant with their daughter, Auma.
In September 1959, Obama Sr. enrolled at the University of Hawaii at Manoa in Honolulu as the university's first African foreign student. He initially lived across the street from the university at the Charles H. Atherton branch of the YMCA at 1810 University Avenue; public records from 1961 indicate he later had a residence two miles southeast of the university at 625 11th Avenue in the Kaimuki neighborhood. In September 1960, Obama Sr. met Ann Dunham in a basic Russian language course at the University of Hawaii. Dunham dropped out of the University of Hawaii after the fall 1960 semester after becoming pregnant, while Obama Sr. continued his education. (online) ("Raising Obama" cover story) (print) Obama Sr. married Dunham in Wailuku on the Hawaiian island of Maui on 2 February 1961.}} He eventually told Dunham about his previous marriage in Kenya, but said he was divorced   which she found out years later was a lie.
 Obama Sr. continued his education at the University of Hawaii and in 1961   1962 lived one mile east of the university in the St. Louis Heights neighborhood.
He graduated from the University of Hawaii after three years with a B.A. in economics and was elected to Phi Beta Kappa and left Hawaii in June 1962.
 In 1959, a monograph written by him had been published by the Kenyan Department of Education, entitled ''Otieno jarieko. Kitabu mar ariyo. 2: Yore mabeyo mag puro puothe.'' (English: ''Otieno, the wise man. Book 2: Wise ways of farming.'') That same year, Obama Sr. published a paper entitled "Problems Facing Our Socialism" in the ''East Africa Journal,'' harshly criticising the blueprint for national planning, "African Socialism and Its Applicability to Planning in Kenya", which had been produced by Tom Mboya's Ministry of Economic Planning and Development. The article was signed "Barak H. Obama." In December 1971, Obama, Sr., who was recuperating after an almost year-long hospitalization following an automobile accident, made a month-long trip to Hawaii, during which he visited with his ex-wife, Ann Dunham, and their son, Barack Obama II. The visit was the last time 10-year-old Obama II would see his father. On that trip Obama Sr. took his son to his first jazz concert, a performance by pianist Dave Brubeck.
As his son described it in his memoir, conflict with President Jomo Kenyatta destroyed Obama Sr.'s career. The decline began after Tom Mboya's assassination in 1969. Obama Sr. was fired from his job by Kenyatta, was blacklisted in Kenya, and began to drink. He had a serious car accident, spent almost a year in the hospital, and by the time he visited his son in Hawaii in late 1971, he already had a bad leg. Obama Sr.'s life fell into drinking and poverty, from which he never recovered. His friend, journalist Philip Ochieng, has described Obama Sr.'s difficult personality and drinking problems in the Kenya newspaper the ''Daily Nation''. Obama Sr. later lost both legs in another automobile collision and subsequently lost his job. He fathered another son named George. Six months after his son's birth, Obama Sr. died in a third car crash in Nairobi in 1982. He was interred in his native village of Nyang   oma Kogelo, Siaya District. His funeral was attended by ministers Robert Ouko, Oloo Aringo and other prominent political figures.