Is there any way to change the shape of the Contents list? What I mean is instead of having a very tall ToC, Id like to make it extend it horizontally instead.   --  ( ) 00:09, 4 March 2008 (UTC)
Can you use images from Google Images?   ( )
Can   be used to contest nonarticle (such as an image) deletions or do they have to go elsewhere?   ,   03:23, 4 March 2008 (UTC)
Not sure how to explain it. This is kind of what I want. . nothing fancy. just a container with vertical scrollbars. maybe using a div somehow? I know nothing about wiki code or html. :/    ( ) 03:50, 4 March 2008 (UTC)
The Help: Moving page mentions two manners by which to change the name of an article: renaming and moving. This page only describes show to move a page in order to change the name, but not how to simply rename it. I am interested in only renaming as the name of the article is clearly mistaken. Moving it seems unnecessary in such a case.   ( ) 05:14, 4 March 2008 (UTC)
Thanks, after I actually read the help page carefully I figured it out.   ( ) 18:22, 4 March 2008 (UTC)
There is something wrong with my account. Whenever I want to edit, it says "Sorry! We could not process your edit due to a loss of session data. Please try again. If it still doesn't work, try logging out and logging back in." '''AND''' at the same time, it logs me off so that I need to log in again. I am not able to make any edits when logged in ( ). I have tried this over a variety of articles and talk pages and it is always doing the same thing. --  ( ) 08:16, 4 March 2008 (UTC)
Does anyone know how to export a page such as 'Special:Contributions/UserID' or a history page of a certain page?
I found it wasn't work when I type 'Special:Contributions/Abhaac' into the text field of page 'Special:Export'. The returned xml file just contained the information of site and namespaces. Thanks.
Thank you,
Stephen McKeever     Preceding   comment added by   (       ) 10:28, 4 March 2008 (UTC) 
How do I add an image from the MOD uk website to the Northumberland Hussars page , I was lookiong at the unit cap badge?     Preceding   comment added by   (       ) 11:46, 4 March 2008 (UTC) 
I have read the articles on copyright laws and tags etc. and all the pictures i have uploaded belong to me, and there are no copyrights against my pictures, how can i change the status of my pictures from 'speedy deletion' as they do not conflict any copyright issues?     Preceding   comment added by   (       ) 12:36, 4 March 2008 (UTC) 
For other licenses, check this page:
Just replace the speedy deletion stuff with that tag and it should be fine.. oh, and maybe if those images are free.. you might want to consider uploading them to the Commons instead of Wikipedia, if thats not what uve been doing already ;)
Hope that helps.. --    12:45, 4 March 2008 (UTC)
Does this guideline apply to   or just to articles?      13:31, 4 March 2008 (UTC)
Hi,
I am trying to use the export page. As mentioned there the tool can export the text and editing history of a particular page or set of pages wrapped in some XML. I just entered the title of a page in the text box and un ticked the first option which says "include only the current version not the full history".
The result is an xml file ( a part is shown under)
Am wondering if someone could explain how the above codes contains the content and the full revision history.
Another intersting point is that. I did this for several different article an the xml out put for all is exactly the same.
All comments and helps are mora than welcome.
I am quite sure that I do something wrong but couldnt find it out.
Identify and describe the IFTHENELSE control structure     Preceding   comment added by   ( ) 17:17, 4 March 2008 (UTC) 
I wonder if it is possible to get the entire series of Zorro on DVD.  I have seven disc but would like to get all of them.  How can I get them if available
Rich. B     Preceding   comment added by   ( ) 17:56, 4 March 2008 (UTC) 
I am flummoxed and don't know what to do. My entry, a bio of Ilia Kulik (under Ilia Kulik) was removed because it's on www.kuliks-krew.com. I am the writer of the original bio. I have posted it both here and on Kuliks-Krew (I am the President of the group). So someone took it down for copyright violation. But if you try to contact that someone, it gives you a warning that the IP is at Harvard and used by lots of folks. How can someone take it down and not be responsible or contact-able. Please restore it. I have already had this go-round with photos and I've given up with those even those the photographer has give express permission for them to be up on Wikipedia but the copyright police keep taking it down no matter what I say. 
I would like the bio restored and the IP from Harvard blocked. Thanks.
Hi, I wanted to link to a remix of the Meth Song to show an example of its cult status. Instead it got removed. I didn't mean to break a rule or anything but it does show a good example. Any explanation? Was it because it was a link to the youtube video?
Hello Wiki people,
I am setting up a Wiki page and I am wonderin how I can click on a link and have user taken to the MIDDLE (specific section) of another Wiki page.
Thanks!
I had previously found an article on newsweek talking about yahoo! and it had a small mention of yahoo's beginnings; information that was not in wikipedia. I decided to add the information and correctly referenced my addition. However, the addition was reverted by someone who said that Newsweek was wrong. Do I stay quiet and let others steamroll my research? I respectfully asked the person to back up their findings, but they would not refer me to anything else. (The conversation can be seen on yahoo's discussion page. Any help would be appreciated. I would prefer if you left a message on my talk page but I will check periodically here too. Thanks!   ( ) 21:45, 4 March 2008 (UTC)
I made 2 changes before creating an account- I did this out of sequence. i would like to hide my IP address and attribute the changes to my name.    ( ) 21:55, 4 March 2008 (UTC)
I am so confused. Can we only ask questions here, or is there a message board that you can talk about books you have read, and things you have learned, and diffrent stuff like that?