Sheist was born in Inglewood, California and grew up in both Inglewood and neighboring city South Los Angeles. He started writing music around the age of 10 and formed a performing group with his best friends that won first and second place prizes at local talent shows produced by ASCAP. He worked with producers Johnny J, Howie Hersh and Ronnie King on his early recordings. He performed from 1994 to 1999 as Shady Montage, signed to Hollywood Records. Two singles he released under this moniker, ''Shake You Down'' and ''Leaving You Again'' (both hip hop interpolations of older r&b compositions) were well-received and aired on major market radio stations nationally. At one point during this period he became label mates and recorded with ''Biggie Smalls'' (the artist who caused the late Christopher Wallace to change his stage name to The Notorious B.I.G.) As a teen he appeared in several music videos including 2Pac's ''So Many Tears'' and South Circle's ''Attitudes.'' Sheist graduated from Alexander Hamilton High School in 1997.
 Sheist, Kurupt and Nate Dogg performed the title single, which peaked at #60 on the Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart but at #1 on the Hot Rap Singles. Shade Sheist and Nate Dogg collaborated together again on the track ''Cali Diseaz'' on the soundtrack to the 2001 film ''The Fast and the Furious''. Damizza recorded the track "Bad News" with Shade Sheist and N.U.N.E. for the soundtrack to the short-lived Fox television drama ''Dark Angel''.
In 2002, Sheist released his debut album ''Informal Introduction'' through a deal between MCA Records and his own Baby Ree label. ''Informal Introduction'' featured production by Timbaland, DJ Quik, Damizza and Kay Gee of Naughty By Nature. The singles included ''Money Owners'' (with Timbaland), ''Wake Up'' (with Nate Dogg and Warren G), and ''John Doe'' (with DJ Quik, AMG, Hi-C & Swift). The ''Where I Wanna Be'' music video featured cameos from N.U.N.E., TQ, Irv Gotti, Ja Rule and The D.O.C. The ''Money Owners'' music video featured a special appearance from Dr. Dre, who worked in the studio room next door to Sheist during the recording of the "Informal Introduction" album. Shade Sheist stated that Dr. Dre was a big help during the creation of his debut album.
The ''Los Angeles Times'' asserted that Power 106 played Shade Sheist singles more than any other urban radio station in the U.S. and reported that Peter Hart of Fairness and Accuracy in Reporting brought up conflict of interest issues given that Emmis Communications funded both the radio station and Sheist's label Baby Ree. Power 106 decided to disclose its ties to Sheist after the ''Times'' brought up the issue. Emmis president Rick Cummings stated that his station played Sheist's music based on listener tastes.
Sheist returned in 2004 with the single ''What Would You Do'' featuring Nate Dogg and Mariah Carey. The track appeared on Sheist's second album ''Before The Waitin Before The Hatin'' which originally released in 2005 and re-released in late 2006 with new tracks included. In 2008, Sheist, N.U.N.E. and other associate rappers from the PYO Entertainment International label toured the world.
In 2010, Shade Sheist released a new album with N.U.N.E., ''Movin Units'' which was his first original studio release in 4 years. The album featured the single ''Movin Like a Boss'' which spawned several international remixes. On May 31, 2011 Shade Sheist released a new single worldwide titled "Queen," featuring LaToiya Williams. The single served as the introduction to his final solo album. 