The '''2008 United States presidential election in Washington''' took place on November 4, 2008 throughout all 50 states and D.C., which was part of the 2008 United States presidential election. Voters chose 11 representatives, or electors to the Electoral College, who voted for President and Vice President.
Washington was won by Democratic nominee Barack Obama by a 17.1% margin of victory. Prior to the election, all 17 news organizations considered this a state Obama would win, or otherwise considered as a safe blue state. No Republican presidential nominee has won the State of Washington in 20 years. Continuing on that trend, Washington stayed in the Democratic column as Obama carried the state with over 57% of the vote.
There were 17 news organizations who made state by state predictions of the election. Here are there last predictions before election day:
Since February 28, Obama won every pre-election poll. Since September 22, he won each poll with a double digit margin of victory. The final 3 polls averaged Obama leading 54% to 40%.
John McCain raised a total of $2,697,999 in the state. Barack Obama raised $16,518,208.
Obama and his interest groups spent $312,869. McCain and his interest groups spent just $2,264. The Democratic ticket visited the state once, while the Republican ticket didn't visit at all.
A solidly blue state, Washington has voted for the Democratic presidential nominee in every presidential election since 1988. Neither candidate seriously contested the state as it was viewed as a safe blue state. Like Oregon, the state is divided politically by the urban/rural divide and geographically by the Cascade Mountains. Most of the state's population resides in Western Washington along the Pacific Coast and in highly urbanized areas like Seattle; this part of the state votes overwhelmingly Democratic. The other side of the mountains in Eastern Washington is much more rural and conservative and therefore heavily Republican.
On Election Day, Obama won the state by 17.08%. He swept the more urban counties along the Western Seaboard which compose the Democratic base. More than two-thirds of the state's population lives in this area; this makes it very difficult for a Republican to win the state because of this region's liberal tilt. Obama would have been assured a victory in any event due to his performance in King County which contains Seattle and its close suburbs and is where almost one-third of Washington voters reside. King County cast 69.97 percent of its vote for Obama whose margin of victory here and in its neighboring counties ensured a landslide.
On the other hand, McCain did extremely well in Eastern Washington, which is far more conservative and culturally closer to Idaho than Seattle. Neither Al Gore or John Kerry was able to take a single county in Eastern Washington; in 2008, Obama only won one small county, Whitman County, home to Washington State University in Pullman. Nevertheless, as with Oregon, McCain's margins in the eastern part of the state were far outweighed by Obama's landslides in the more populated coastal regions and cities in the western part of the state. Obama did, however, improve substantially in Eastern Washington, especially in Spokane County.
During the same election, incumbent Democratic Governor Christine Gregoire was reelected to a second term with 53.72% of the vote over Republican Dino Rossi who took in 46.28%. At the state level, Democrats picked up one seat in the Washington House of Representatives while Republicans picked up a seat in the Washington Senate.
Barack Obama carried seven of the state   s nine congressional districts, including one district held by a Republican.
Technically the voters of Washington cast their ballots for electors: representatives to the Electoral College. Washington is allocated 11 electors because it has 9 congressional districts and 2 senators. All candidates who appear on the ballot or qualify to receive write-in votes must submit a list of 11 electors, who pledge to vote for their candidate and his or her running mate. Whoever wins the majority of votes in the state is awarded all 11 electoral votes. Their chosen electors then vote for President and Vice President. Although electors are pledged to their candidate and running mate, they are not obligated to vote for them. An elector who votes for someone other than his or her candidate is known as a faithless elector.
The electors of each state and the District of Columbia met on December 15, 2008 to cast their votes for President and Vice President. The Electoral College itself never meets as one body. Instead the electors from each state and the District of Columbia met in their respective capitols.