Lizza attended the Berkshire School in Sheffield, Massachusetts and graduated from the University of California, Berkeley.
A resident of Washington, D.C., Lizza is married to Christina Irene Gillespie, a family physician and assistant clinical professor of medicine at both Georgetown University and George Washington University.
Lizza was previously a Senior Editor at ''The New Republic'', where from 1998 to 2007 he covered Bill Clinton's impeachment, the Florida recount, the Bush White House, the 2004 presidential election, and many other national political stories. In 2006 and 2007 he was a correspondent for ''GQ'', where he wrote profiles of Rahm Emanuel, Sen. James Webb, and a cover story about Barack Obama, who was the first politician on the cover of ''GQ'' in 15 years. From 2004 to 2006 Lizza was a contributing editor for ''New York'' magazine, where he wrote about national politics, including a profile of Sen. Chuck Schumer, a piece exploring New York's place as the "abortion capital of America," a profile of New York's top conservative organizer, and a piece about president Bush's relationship with New York City. From 2002 to 2007, Lizza also regularly contributed to ''The New York Times''. In 1997, Lizza worked on the Emmy Award-winning PBS ''Frontline'' documentary "Hot Guns."
Lizza covered the 2008 U.S. presidential election for ''The New Yorker'', and notably wrote an extended profile of Barack Obama's career in Illinois politics. In 2009, the same article was nominated for a National Magazine Award. During the campaign, a cartoon in the ''New Yorker'' allegedly caused the Obama campaign to exclude Lizza from Obama's campaign plane. The Obama campaign cited a lack of space.
Brian Williams of ''NBC Nightly News'' referred to Lizza as "required reading" for those interested in the American political scene. In June, 2009, ''The Washingtonian'' magazine included Lizza on its list of Washington's "50 Top Journalists" and described him as a writer who "change the way readers see the world."
Conservative talk show host Hugh Hewitt said Lizza is "widely regarded as one of the premiere political reporters of the United States working at this time." 
Lizza is slated to write a book published by Penguin Press on Obama's first year in the American presidency.
Lizza's writing has been included in the 2003, 2004, 2006, 2007, and 2008 editions of ''The Best American Political Writing''. Lizza is a regular guest on public affairs shows on television and radio. He has appeared on ''Meet the Press'', ''Hardball with Chris Matthews'', ''Good Morning America'', ''The NewsHour with Jim Lehrer'', ''Countdown with Keith Olbermann'', ''The O'Reilly Factor'', CSPAN's ''Washington Journal'', ''Tavis Smiley'', NPR's ''Fresh Air'', Pacifica Radio's ''Democracy Now!'', among others.