Years later, the scientist '''Dr. Viktor Adler''' and his companions Richard and Elizabeth Evans discovered the seeds that remained of Master Org while on an expedition to prove the existence of the Animarium. Driven by his jealousy toward Richard, who had the hand of Elizabeth and had taken the spotlight from him when they announced that they would be searching for the Animarium, Dr. Adler took the seeds secretly, and out of personal revenge, swallowed them and gained the powers of an Org, killing his companions, but never finding Cole.
So it was that Dr. Viktor Adler became the second Master Org. He was aided by the Duke Orgs Jindrax and Toxica, who later found out his secret. He temporarily turned them into slaves, but they escaped. After repeated defeats at the hands of the Wild Force Power Rangers, Master Org fought them himself. In the process, he lost his Org powers, and was then killed by General Org Mandilok.
However, from Dr. Adler's dead husk was born the true Master Org, with real Org horn on his forehead. He sent Duke Org Onikage to arrange for his return. When he came, he destroyed Mandilok and kidnapped Shayla. He then invoked a ceremony to create an Org Heart, summoning Retinax, Nayzor, and Mandilok to guard him. He swallowed the Heart, and his human body crumbled.
Unfortunately, Master Org used the Org Heart to create a full-Org body, which resembled a composite of the three General Orgs, Nayzor, Retinax, and Mandilok and had taken the Nexus Blade as his own weapon. He attacked the Animarium, destroyed Animus (and with that, Kite was no more) and was seemingly destroyed by the Kongazord, but the Org Heart quickly restored him. He then proceeded to destroy the Kongazord, as well as every last wild zord and brought the Animarium down to Earth. He attacked Turtle Cove, but was destroyed when the Wild Zords were all revived and countless others combined powers with them. Master Org was hit with an Ultra Roar, and disappeared into nothingness. The Org Heart itself was then destroyed by the Red Lion Ranger and the Lunar Wolf Ranger with the Jungle Sword. With the destruction of Master Org, Dr. Viktor Adler could finally rest in peace.
Master Org holds the record for the most Zords destroyed by a single villain, 23. Ironically, he also holds the record for the villain defeated by the most Zords, the revived 18 Zords (possibly 23, if Animus was also revived) plus 100 more that arrived on the scene.
Master Org is played by Ilia Volok. His costume is inspired by the Gorma Emperor Shadam, the lead villain of Gosei Sentai Dairanger, who never appeared when the Dairanger footage was used in Mighty Morphin' Power Rangers (his place was taken by the American original Lord Zedd).
The Org Generals are higher-ranking Duke Orgs that are Master Org's most powerful servants:
Retinax, themed after an eye (his name is even a pun on retina and axe, his signature weapon), was brought back with the other face-themed General Orgs Nayzor and Mandilok to defend the pillars used in the Org Heart ceremony. He was defeated, but returned fused together with the other Generals as Master Org's new body.
In battle, Retinax uses an axe with an eye embedded in it, this axe is also used in the formation of the Nexus Blade. This General Org can also shoot electricity from his main eye and can extend his arms to wrap around enemies.
Retinax is voiced by Michael Sorich, and of the three Org Generals was the one who had the least role in the series (only appearing in two episodes).
Nayzor later obtains the animal crystals stolen by Zen-Aku and uses them to create Quadra Org. However, the Org is beaten by the Lunar Wild Force Ranger Merrick Baliton, who also takes out Nayzor. Nayzor's crown is then used by Toxica to become the General Org Necronomica. Master Org later revives Nayzor as '''Super Nayzor''', who pounds on the Rangers until his defeat at the hands of the Isis Megazord.
Nayzor is revived in his normal form during the ceremony of the Org Heart, and is ordered to guard one of the pillars involved in the ceremony. He is defeated, but appears later as a part of Master Org's new Org form.
In his normal form, Nayzor uses a paper fan in battle, this fan can be used to deflect projectiles back at enemies and was also used in the formation of the Nexus Blade. He could also fire electricity from the purple colored gem on his chest. In his Super Form, Nayzor used a staff with a pair of claws on them, these were identical to the claws on his knuckles (similar to Wolverine's retractable claws from X-Men.) and feet. In Super Form, Nayzor could also manipulate electricity with his hands and from his eyes. A "Next time on ''Power Rangers: Wild Force''" sequence also showed that Nayzor could separate his molecules before he is attacked and can reform, although this was not seen in any actual episode.
Nayzor is voiced by Ken Merckx.
Mandilok used a giant fork and knife as weapons. These were used in the formation of the Nexus Blade. Mandilok could also breathe fire from the mouth with the male voice on his stomach and could also manipulate electricity with his hands.
Mandilok's upper, female face is voiced by Barbara Goodson. The lower, male face is voiced by Ezra Weisz.
The Duke Orgs listed below serve Master Org and/or the Org Generals:
Jindrax is known for his skill with knives (and occasionally swords), and uses them constantly in battle - he was particularly a battle rival to Taylor (Yellow Ranger). In a few episodes, he causes monsters to grow using Toxica's staff and reciting the spell, "Evil spirits of toil and strife, give this fallen Org new life". He also sometimes uses the word, "Inconceivable".
He was later transformed and brainwashed, along with Toxica, into '''Super Jindrax''' by Master Org after they discovered that he was a human. He was later released, and set out with Toxica to free the general Mandilok. However, the two were mistreated under Mandilok, and Toxica was actually destroyed in battle with the Rangers.
He has a brother named Juggelo, who was imprisoned along with the other Orgs 3000 years ago. Together, the two form "Team Carnival" (a reference to their clown like appearances). In one episode, Jindrax eats Toxica's magic beans to grow large and fight alongside Juggelo. After Juggelo is destroyed, the effect of the beans wears off and Jindrax shrinks to his normal size. This makes him the only Org ever to grow large and return to normal (indeed, Toxica warned him that this was normally not possible). After Juggelo's death, Toxica joins Team Carnival in his stead.
Jindrax later brought Toxica back from the netherworld she had been sent to by charging her severed horn with energy from the Rangers' weapons. The two aided the Rangers in the final battle with Master Org, and then left to travel the world with Toxica and "find himself". 
Jindrax was voiced by Richard Cansino for four episodes, and later his US suit actor Danny Wayne Stallcup (credited in this series as Danny Wayne), who played Jindrax in his human-guise prior to the series beginning.
She is a Duke Org and the Mistress of Magic.  
She can resurrect fallen Orgs and cause them to grow by reciting the spell "Evil spirits of toil and strife, give this fallen Org new life" and firing some magic beans from her staff, which grow into vines that entangle the fallen Org.  
She and Jindrax hid themselves for centuries after Master Org's defeat, and were the first to rejoin him in the Nexus when he re-emerged. Toxica grew suspicious of Master Org, when she saw him adjust his horn, something no real Org should be able to do.
After General Nayzor was destroyed, Toxica temporarily used his crown to become the General Org '''Necronomica'''. She and Jindrax later received newer forms from Master Org when they exposed him, and were brainwashed, becoming the submissive slaves Super Jindrax and '''Super Toxica'''. However, they were later freed, and unleashed the General Org Mandilok to aid them against Master Org. 
Duke Org Onikage tricked her into cutting off her horn, telling her that it would grow back (a lie). After this, she was near-death and was soon destroyed by Mandilok when he used her as a human shield against the rangers' Jungle Blaster. 
Jindrax then re-energized Toxica's severed horn by tricking the Rangers into firing the Jungle Blaster at it (backstabbing the Locomotive Org in the process), and used it to resurrect her from the Netherworld she was trapped in. She aided the Rangers by rescuing Princess Shayla, and then left with Jindrax to travel the world and "find herself".
Toxica was played by Sin Wong, who also voiced Necronomica.
Centuries later, Zen-Aku was released by Nayzor to destroy the Wild Force Rangers of the present day. As Zen-Aku, he battled them on several occasions, proving to be more than a match in battle- even stealing some of their zords for himself-, until the Power Rangers learned the truth about his past and helped free Merrick from the curse. As it turned out, Merrick's transformation was caused by the full moon, similar to the transformation of a werewolf and Zen-Aku's power was weaker during the waning of the moon and during lunar eclipses. During a battle, Princess Shayla realized that the power of the curse was connected to the Predazord and told the Rangers to destroy the Predazord to break the curse. With help from the Rhino and Armadillo Wild Zords, the Wild Force Megazord was able to destroy the Predazord, thus breaking the curse due to the power of the curse being connected to the Predazord.
Zen-Aku would later return when the original curse trapping him within the mask was cancelled as well. Apparently when the Rangers destroyed the Predazord and released Merick from the Mask it also released Zen-Aku and broke both curses. Zen-Aku attempted to kill Merrick and absorb him to regain the power he'd had when they were bonded together. Zen-Aku was more powerful than ever, something that Princess Shayla revealed was due to him having his full power now; while when he was Merrick the Mask's power was split between the Mask, Merick and the Dark Zords, but it was now fully concentrated within him. Zen-Aku was seemingly destroyed by the Rangers who fought him with the Wild Force Megazord and Predazord but were unable to defeat him even with Final Strike. He was defeated when Merrick remembered a pool trick his friend Willie taught him and used that to knock off Zen-Aku's horn with the Armadilo Zord, badly weakening Zen-Aku. He then struck him with Revolver Phantom, causing him to crumble to dust, seemingly destroying Zen-Aku.
In the finale, it is revealed that Zen-Aku somehow survived and seeks redemption, just like Merrick. They are last seen in or near a forest, about to begin their journey together.
He was voiced by Dan Woren for some episodes, and later voiced by Lex Lang.
Artilla is voiced by Michael Sorich.
Helicos is voiced by Dave Mallow.
Juggelo is voiced by Patrick Thomas.
Onikage is voiced by Dan Woren.
In the year 3000, only three Orgs remained of the once great army that battled Animaria. Imprisoned in statues, they were stumbled upon by  . When he learned that his cause, taking over the world, was the same as their own, he released them. They copied his DNA, combining the invulnerability of Mutants with their ancient Org powers. In exchange, they gave Ransik the power to pull weapons from his body. After Ransik's incarceration, the '''Mut-Orgs''' (who spoke their own language, which was actually English played in reverse) escaped into the past to seek out Master Org. After thoroughly trouncing the Wild Force Power Rangers several times, they find him. However, the Mut-Orgs are then met in battle by the combined Time Force/Wild Force team, as well as by Ransik. When they attempt to summon an energy blast, Ransik leaps in, taking the blast at point blank and causing it to wash back over the Mut-Orgs. As a result, their Mutant halves are destroyed, and their Org halves soon follow at the combined attacks of the Time Force Rangers and the Wild Force Rangers.
Takach and Kired are voiced by David Lodge, and Rofang is voiced by Kim Strauss.
Years after ''Countdown to Destruction'', in the episode ''Forever Red'', the last generals of the Machine Empire gathered on the moon. Determined to obtain revenge for the destruction of their beloved monarch King Mondo, they set out to resurrect Serpentera. Led by Generals Venjix, Tezzla, Gerrok, Steelon, and Automon, the Empire unearthed the giant Zord and placed a neo-plutonium core inside to power it. However, just as they were about to board Serpentera, a team of 10 Red Rangers arrived on the moon. The Generals battled the Rangers, and Tezzla, Gerrok, Steelon, and Automon were destroyed. Venjix escaped to Serpentera, which he flew towards Earth. However, the Red Wild Force Ranger used his Wild Force Rider to reflect Serpentera's blast back into it. The Zord was destroyed, along with Venjix and the Machine Empire.
The five actors who voiced the remnants of the Machine Empire were Archie Kao (General Venjix), Catherine Sutherland (Tezzla), Walter Jones (Gerrok), Scott Page-Pagter (Steelon; uncredited), and David Walsh (Automon; uncredited).
The Putrids are a weak and underdeveloped version of Org that serves as the Org Empire's footsoldiers. They are usually summoned by a pink slime from a conch shell-like container that Toxica carries around with her. The Putrids are basically young Orgs, as their horns are just barely developed showing how strong they actually are. They wield kanabos in battle.
Normal Orgs first appear as spirits that take the form of whatever they acquire. To make an Org grow, Toxica would wave her staff around and quote "Evil spirits of toil and strife. Give this fallen Org new life." Toxica's staff would then launch seeds toward the Org ooze reforming the Org into giant-size. a Orgs life-force is connected to there horns, and unlike humans, a Org doesn't have blood (Which was one of the tell-tale signs that Zen-aku wasn't a true org.)
As a result of an Org Spirit acquiring a plug, Plugma Org is one of two Orgs that attacked Turtle Cove and did a combining attack with Turbine Org. He is one of the first of the Orgs that Cole ever witnessed. Was destroyed by the Jungle Sword
As a result of an Org Spirit acquiring a turbine, Turbine Org is one of two Orgs that attacked Turtle Cove and did a combining attack with Plugma Org. He is one of the first of the Orgs that Cole ever witnessed. Turbine Org became huge and attacked the dam. The five Wild Zords used a combine roar attack to finish him. In "Sing Song," Turbine Org's spirit was among the defeated Org Spirits used to create the Tombstone Org.
As a result of an Org Spirit acquiring some barbed wire on a fence, Barbed Wire Org attacked Turtle Cove. Cole tried to reason with it only to sense that Orgs do not have hearts. Was destroyed by the Wild Force Megazord.
As a result of an Org Spirit acquiring a camera, Camera Org had the ability to steal the body of anyone rendering the person invisible.Cole outsmarts the monster and uses his Lion Blaster against it. It was destroyed by the Wild Force Megazord. In "Sing Song," Camera Org's spirit was among the defeated Org Spirits used to create the Tombstone Org.
As a result of an Org Spirit acquiring a church bell, Bell Org wielded a hammer to bang on himself to do sound attacks and use bell traps to trap anyone. In "The Master's Herald" Pt. 1, Bell Org was brought back as a spiritual illusion by Onikage. In "The Master's Herald" Pt. 2, Bell Org appeared in the Org's Spirit World.
As a result of an Org Spirit acquiring a tire, Tire Org has the ability to turn into a tire. He was responsible for kidnapping Princess Shayla when Alyssa made a discovery in the mountains. When it came to a battle between the Wild Force Megazord and Tire Org, Alyssa managed to awaken the Elephant Zord. With the Elephant Zord becoming a sword & shield for the Wild Force Megazord, Tire Org was destroyed. In "The Master's Herald" Pt. 1, Tire Org was brought back as a spiritual illusion by Onikage. In "The Master's Herald" Pt. 2, Tire Org appeared in the Org's Spirit World.
As a result of an Org Spirit passing between two ships, Ship Org had hard armor and wielded an anchor in battle, He also does not know the difference between friend and foe as he attacked both the Rangers and the Putrids. Ship Org comes out of a lake and has Max's bottle lodged in his shoulder which he had foreseen in an earlier vision after the first battle with him. Ship Org was destroyed by the Wild Force Megazord Spear Mode. In "The Master's Herald" Pt. 2, Ship Org appeared in the Org's Spirit World.
As a result of an Org Spirit acquiring a cell phone, Cell Phone Org had the ability to use a jamming field that was enough to disable the Growl Phones. The Rangers had a hard time fighting Cell Phone Org. When the Rangers take out his antennae, the jamming field is disrupted. Upon being hit by a slash attack by the Rangers, Toxica makes him grow and the Wild Force Megazord fights Cell Phone Org. When the twins Taylor had encountered appear during the fight between the Wild Force Megazord and Cell Phone Org, they use the flowers Taylor obtained for them and assume their true forms as the Black Bear Zord and the Polar Bear Zord. Upon the Bear Zords combining with the Wild Force Megazord to form the Double Knuckle Mode, Cell Phone Org was destroyed. However, the effects of the Double Knuckle Mode weakened the Red Lion Zord.
As a result of an Org Spirit acquiring a bulldozer, Bulldozer Org was a strong Org that was lost in a forest until it found Jindrax and Toxica. The Wild Force Rangers (while looking for the Soul Bird to heal the Red Lion following the fight with Cell Phone Org) encounter it in giant form. Cole is contacted by the Red Lion stating that it will try to fight. When the Wild Force Megazord was not enough to damage Bulldozer Org, the Red Lion contacts Cole to try to use the Double Knuckle Mode. Upon an attack from the Bulldozer Org, the Wild Force Megazord splits into individual Wild Zords as the Red Lion collapse. The Wild Zords defend the Red Lion from the Bulldozer Org while Cole searches for the Soul Bird. After a brief encounter with Master Org (who scared the Soul Bird away), Cole manages to make contact with the Gorilla Zord and summons it to help fight Bulldozer Org. With the formation of the Kongazord, Bulldozer Org was destroyed.
As a result of an Org Spirit acquiring a refrigerator, Freezer Org blasts the Rangers with icy breath. He overheats himself by deep freezing the Kongazord and self-destructs. This freezes out the Growl Phones as well. While battling the Kongazord, he destroyed himself and froze the Kongazord as well. In "Sing Song," Freezer Org was among the defeated Org Spirits used to create Tombstone Org.
As a result of an Org Spirit acquiring a vacuum cleaner, Vacuum Cleaner Org has the ability to suck things toward him. was destroyed by the Wild Force Megazord Sword and Shield Mode.
As a result of an Org Spirit acquiring a bus, Bus Org takes form of a runaway bus and Alyssa stops it by jumping into it. It was destroyed by the Wild Force Megazord. In "Sing Song," Bus Org was among the defeated Org Spirits used to create Tombstone Org.
When Taylor first fought this Org in the form of Scooter Org, she could not defeat it on her own and Princess Shayla had to seal it with a spell. One year later, Zen-Aku frees it in its form of Motorcycle Org. The Rangers destroyed him with the Jungle Blaster before Zen-Aku called forth the Predazord.
As a result of an Org Spirit acquiring a lawnmower, Lawnmower Org had the ability to turn into a riding mower and took much pride in its lawn. It assisted Jindrax and Toxica in fighting the Rangers at a soccer field where it fought Danny. Zen-Aku crashed the battle and destroyed Lawnmower Org, stating that destroying the Rangers is his job.
A chimeric Org created by Master Org from the powers of the Elephant Zord, Giraffe Zord, Black Bear Zord, and Polar Bear Zord. It has an elephant head on its chest, a giraffe head on its forehead, a black bear head on its left shoulder, and a polar bear head on its right shoulder. It can launch constricting trunks from the elephant head, breathe fire from the black bear head, and perform ice attacks from the polar bear head. It has the Rangers at his mercy until Merrick beats it. It was destroyed by Wild Force Megazord Striker.
As a result of an Org Spirit acquiring a karaoke system, Karaoke Org has a devastating singing attack and can launch CDs. He was destroyed by the Predazord with the Armadillo's help. In "Sing Song," Karaoke Org was among the defeated Org Spirits used to create Tombstone Org.
As a result of an Org Spirit acquiring a traffic signal, Signal Org can attack with the lights emitted from his signal lights. Signal Org makes Cole forget who he was. It was destroyed by the Wild Force Megazord Spear Mode.
As a result of an Org Spirit acquiring a bowling ball, Bowling Org had a devastating bowling attack. The Bowling Org overwhelms the Rangers and makes Max go back to his old mentor, a former pro bowler. Max learns the spin and uses it against the Bowling Org. It was ultimately destroyed by Wild Force Megazord Predator Mode.
As a result of an Org Spirit acquiring a wedding dress, Wedding Dress Org was abducting brides and turning them into wedding mannequins. He injures Danny's crush Kendall. He is destroyed by the Wild Force Megazord Sword and SHield mode.
As a result of an Org Spirit acquiring a samurai doll, Samurai Org specializes in Kung Fu. Samurai Org was defeated by Alyssa using skills learned from her father. He was destroyed by the Kongazord. In "Sing Song," Samurai Org was among the defeated Org Spirits used to create Tombstone Org.
Master Org infused Dr. Victor Adler's tombstone with the spirits of Turbine Org, Camera Org, Freezer Org, Bus Org, Karaoke Org, and Samurai Org to create the Tombstone Org. The Wild Force Megazord had a hard time defeating it even in Predator Mode and Spear of Pardolis Mode. Tombstone Org's attacks were enough to damage the Zords. The Deer Zord appeared and used an antler trap to immobilize the Tombstone Org. It did not hold him for long as it continued to attack. While Merrick and Princess Shayla went to obtain the Deer Zord, the other used the Kongazord's Striker Mode to fight the Tombstone Org. When the Kongazord managed to damage the Tombstone Org enough for it to leak Org Spirit energy, Merrick and Princess Shayla arrived with the Deer Crystal. After the Deer Zord healed the other Wild Zords, it combined with the Wild Force Megazord to form the Wild Force Megazord's Clutcher Mode and its bubble attack was enough to destroy Tombstone Org. In "The Master's Herald" Pt. 2, Tombstone Org appeared in the Org's Spirit World.
As a result of an Org Spirit acquiring a flute, Flute Org interrupts Shayla and Merrick's performance for the Deer Zord and is powered up from Toxica and Jindrax's energy. At first it only made children dance under control, but received a power upgrade that makes the Rangers dance under its control. It is destroyed by the Isis Megazord with Animus' help. In "The Master's Herald" Pt. 1, Flute Org was brought back as a spiritual illusion by Onikage. In "The Master's Herald" Pt. 2, Flute Org appeared in the Org's Spirit World.
It was not revealed what an Org Spirit acquired to become the Lion Tamer Org. The Lion Tamer Org had the ability to control animals. Jindrax and Toxica force-fed him the growth seeds to control the Wild Zords and did so with the main Wild Zords. When the Rangers formed the Kongazord's Striker Mode and fought the Wild Force Megazord, Lion Tamer Org had the Red Lion Zord call the Elephant and Giraffe Zords and used them to form a Spear and Shield mode. When the Rangers resolved to use the Deer Zord and formed the Kongazord's Striker/Clutcher Mode. When it tries to use its healing attack, Lion Tamer Org had the Shark Zord prevent that. Lion Tamer Org then had the Black Bar combine with the Wild Force Megazord to form the Wild Force Megazord's Spear and Knuckle Mode whose attack was enough to eject the Rangers from the Kongazord. Lion Tamer Org then takes control of the Kongazord. As the Wild Force Megazord assumes its Sword & Shield mode, Kite manages to get through to the Lion and Gorilla Zords which was enough to break Lion Tamer Org's spell. Upon contact from the Lion Zord, Cole summoned the Falcon Zord and the Isis Megazord then destroyed the Lion Tamer Org. In "The Master's Herald" Pt. 1, Lion Tamer Org was brought back as a spiritual illusion by Onikage.
As a result of an Org Spirit acquiring a video monitor and some junk, Monitor Org rises from the garbage pile and sucks people in from their monitors and takes all the people from a stadium. It is destroyed by the Wild Force Megazord. It played a part in Kite taking the Wild Zords away.
As a result of an Org Spirit acquiring a toy robot, Toy Org can shoot fire from its hands and use its toy-themed weapons. It attacked a nearby factory followingd Animus taking away the Wild Zords. The Rangers fought hard against it enough to convince Kite to return the Wild Zords. The Predazord's Blue Moon Mode and Animus were enough to destroy the Toy Org.
As a result of an Org Spirit acquiring a clock, Clock Org was a defeated Org who Onikage brought back as a spiritual illusion. In "The Master's Herald" Pt. 2, Clock Org appeared in the Org's Spirit World.
As a result of an Org Spirit acquiring some train parts, Locomotive Org was a powerful Org that can perform a powerful fireball attack from its engines. When the Rangers fought it, Jindrax (in his plan to revive Toxica) restrained Locomotive Org in order to get the Rangers to fire the Jungle Blaster at Toxica's broken horn. After that was done, Jindrax made Locomotive Org grow who quoted to Jindrax that he will make 
Jindrax pay for what he did. Jindrax left as the Rangers called the Zords. When fighting the Wild Force Megazord's Sword & Shield Mode and the Predazord, Locomotive's attacks were enough to damage the Eagle, Lion, Shark, and Tiger Zords. Then the Rangers try to use the Kongazord on it even when they use the Kongazord's Striker Spear Mode, but Locomotive Org manages to use his fireball attacks on the Predazord and Kongazord which was enough to damage the Gorilla Zord, Black Bear Zord, Polar Bear Zord, and Rhino Zords as well as Locomotive Org stepping on the Alligator Zord's mouth. Danny is contacted by the Bison Zord who is still standing. With the Bison Zord, Wolf Zord, and Hammerhead Shark Zord combining with the Falcon Zord to form the Isis Megazord's Predator Mode, Locomotive Org was destroyed by the Wings of Animarium attack.