First, an important note for everyone to remember:
A few Wikipedians have gotten together to make some suggestions about how we might organize data in articles about states, counties, cities and towns.  These are ''only'' suggestions, things to give you focus and to get you going, and you ''shouldn't'' feel obligated in the least to follow them. But if you don't know what to write or where to begin, following the below guidelines may be helpful. Mainly, we just want you to write articles!
This   aims primarily to provide information on all of the U.S. states' counties, independent cities (Virginia), boroughs (Alaska), census areas (Alaska), and parishes (Louisiana).  It also provides information on the analogous administration districts (if any) in the current U.S. Federal Territories (District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, etc.).
Please place the following template on article ''talk'' pages related to U.S. counties, parishes or boroughs:
There is an article called County (United States) that discusses U.S. Counties in general, as opposed to any particular county, and provides a list of U.S. counties.  It also lists the analogous administration districts of the current U.S. Federal Territories, and explains the differences between the various types of "counties".  Pages on the administrative districts of U.S. Federal Territories are to have the same format as U.S. counties, subject to appropriate variances.
Each state has a list of counties.  There is a primary table, FIPS state code as well as a primary page List of Counties of the United States that both point to the list of every county.  Each page also includes the footer which interconnects all of them to each other,  .  It looks like this:
Further information on the state county lists can found at  .
A template article can be found at the bottom of this page.  This section explains aspects of writing good county articles that the template doesn't address.
Each U.S. county is called by the common name of the state, e.g. Jackson County, Michigan. Where needed, a link to the county is placed on a more general entry page, e.g. Jackson contains links to Jackson County, Michigan, Jackson, Mississippi, Jackson, Michigan, and many more.
The article should consist of a few short paragraphs that give an outline of the history, politics, etc.. of the county. If any section becomes too long, 
It should be split off into a separate article with more detail, leaving a brief summary behind.  The beginning of the section should look like this example:
Every county should be in at least one category, of the form "StateOrTerritoryName counties" (or "Alaska boroughs", "Alaska census areas", "Louisiana parishes").
The red and black U.S. county maps are generated from scanned public domain originals, which have then been modified by   and   to indicate the counties and licensed under the GFDL.   has uploaded these images using a bot.   included links to these maps in all of the county articles.
Each of these county maps is credited thus: "Public domain   courtesy of , modified to show counties. Released under GFDL."
The page   has pointers to all of the image filenames, whether they are uploaded yet or not.
The gold maps for California counties and grey maps for Nevada counties were done by  .
Don't forget to replace the "_" with the name of the article being converted. For the table, replace the X's with the proper information.
Introductory paragraph.
Or alternatively use:
See   for more information about how to use this section.