In each show, five celebrities played a no limit Texas hold 'em tournament for charity. The winners of each qualifying game won a silver commemorative poker chip and advanced to the championship game. The winner of the championship game won the grand prize for his or her charity as well as a gold commemorative poker chip. Each tournament featured 25 celebrities and consisted of six episodes, five qualifying games and one championship game.
In an interview with ''TV Guide'', host Dave Foley said that a ninth tournament is not being produced, as Bravo did not order any new episodes.
The first seven tournaments were taped at the Palms Casino in Las Vegas in front of a live studio audience. With the eighth tournament, Harrah's Entertainment became the "official casino of Celebrity Poker Showdown."  
When a player was eliminated, he or she moved to the "Loser's Lounge" to watch the rest of the game. With the move to New Orleans for the eighth tournament, the Lounge was renamed for sponsor Southern Comfort as the "SoCo Lime Lounge".
The first series was hosted by actor/comedian Kevin Pollak, most episodes of his short-lived run were an hour in length, and the Championship telecast was two hours in length. Pollak's run lasted only one tournament. In 2004, the show officially expanded to two hours in length and actor/comedian Dave Foley took over hosting. Most episodes of his run were two hours in length, and only one episode (the Championship telecast of the fifth tournament) was an hour in length. Professional poker player Phil Gordon provided the color commentary for the first seven tournaments. Phil Hellmuth took over the commentary spot in the eighth tournament.
All the games were officiated by Tournament Director Robert Thompson. Thompson was noted amongst viewers of the show for the catchphrase, "Shuffle up and deal!"
Several celebrities have appeared in multiple tournaments, and five have won games in separate tournaments. David Cross won in the first and third tournaments; Dule Hill won in the second and seventh; Kevin Nealon won in the fourth and seventh; Jason Alexander won in the fifth and eighth; and Michael Ian Black won in the second and eighth tourneys. No celebrity won more than one championship game.
The series was produced by Andrew Hill Newman and Joshua Malina.
The first six tournaments were played for a total of '''$250,000''' in prize money as follows:
Starting with the Seventh Tournament, the "prize pool" was increased to '''$1,000,000''' and divided as follows:
Some of the celebrities on this series have parlayed their game play into visits onto the World Poker Tour and the World Series of Poker. In 2005, Brad Garrett, Shannon Elizabeth, Nicholas Gonzalez, and James Woods all participated in the WSOP's $10,000 Texas Hold-Em Main Event. In 2007, Shannon Elizabeth advanced to the semifinals of the NBC National Heads-Up Poker Championship. 
In 2005, prior to appearing on the show, Jennifer Tilly won a WSOP Gold Bracelet for coming in first in the Ladies' No-Limit Texas Hold 'Em event, and won the third annual WPT Ladies Invitational Tournament.
For the December 10, 2005 episode of ''Saturday Night Live'', Foley and Gordon lent their voices (playing themselves) to a Robert Smigel animated TV Funhouse parody called "Celebrity Mugshot Poker," where, as the title suggests, various celebrities (like Nick Nolte and James Brown) are represented by animated versions of their infamous mugshots.
For the November 3, 2005 episode of the ''Friends'' TV series spin-off, ''Joey'', Foley and Gordon played themselves in a fictitious tournament in which the character of Joey (played by Matt LeBlanc) participates based on bad advice and incorrect rules from his neighbor, Alex, who is trying to sabotage his efforts. This includes a so-called ''Texas Earthquake'' that occurs when one card of each suit is present in the face-up community cards, during which Joey believes that players jump onto the table and attempt to steal chips from their opponents.