Obama (1995, 2004), pp. 9   10.  Obama's mother dropped out of the University of Hawaii after the fall 1960 semester and Obama's parents were married on the Hawaiian island of Maui on February 2, 1961. (online) ("Raising Obama" cover story) (print) Obama was born in Honolulu on August 4, 1961 at the old Kapiolani Maternity and Gynecological Hospital at 1611 Bingham Street   a predecessor of the Kapi'olani Medical Center for Women & Children at 1319 Punahou Street. Kapiolani Maternity and Gynecological Hospital, 1611 Bingham St., 110 beds. She did not know Obama's mother, Ann Dunham, while they were in labor together on Aug. 4, 1961, at the old Kapiolani Maternity and Gynecological Hospital.  His birth was announced in ''The Honolulu Advertiser'' and the ''Honolulu Star-Bulletin'', with his parents' address listed as 6085 Kalaniana'ole Highway   his maternal grandparents' home.
  Obama's father graduated from the University of Hawaii with a B.A. in economics and left Hawaii in June 1962, and traveled to Cambridge, Massachusetts where he began graduate study in economics at Harvard University in September 1962. 
Obama's mother and her son returned to Honolulu, and in January 1963 resumed her undergraduate education with the spring semester at the University of Hawaii.  Obama's maternal grandparents lived in Apartment 110 at 1427 Alexander Street in Honolulu in 1963, and then moved into a house at 2234 University Avenue in Honolulu in 1964; Obama's mother lived at 2277 Kamehameha Avenue in 1963.   In January 1964, Obama's mother filed for divorce, which was not contested.  Barack Obama, Sr. later graduated from Harvard University with an A.M. in economics and returned to Kenya in 1965.
At the East-West Center, Obama's mother met Lolo Soetoro, an Indonesian surveyor, who had come to Honolulu on an East-West Center grant in September 1962 to study at the University of Hawaii, from which received a M.A. in geography in June 1964. In 1965, Soetoro married Obama's mother in Hawaii.  Obama's stepfather returned to Indonesia in 1966, and Obama and his mother moved into her parents' house at 2234 University Avenue in Honolulu, with Obama's mother continuing her studies at the University of Hawaii   earning a B.A. in anthropology in August 1967, while her son attended kindergarten in 1966   1967 at Noelani Elementary School.
  From January 1968 to December 1969, Obama's mother taught English and was an assistant director of the U.S. government-subsidized Indonesia-America Friendship Institute,  while Obama attended the Indonesian-language Santo Fransiskus Asisi (St. Francis of Assisi) Catholic School around the corner from their house for 1st, 2nd, and part of 3rd grade.
 Google Translate's   and the family moved two miles north to 22 Taman Amir Hamzah Street in the Matraman Dalam neighborhood in the Pegangsaan administrative village of the Menteng subdistrict in Central Jakarta.Obama (1995, 2004), p. 46.  From January 1970 to August 1972, Obama's mother taught English and was a department head and a director of the Institute of Management Education and Development,  while Obama attended the Indonesian-language government-run Besuki School, one and half miles east in the exclusive Menteng administrative village, for part of 3rd grade and for 4th grade, and was a Cub Scout.  In mid-1970, between 3rd and 4th grades at the Besuki School, Obama spent the summer in Hawaii with his maternal grandparents, Stanley and Madelyn Dunham, and interviewed for admission to the Punahou School in Honolulu,Obama, Barack (1995, 2004). pp. 54, 58. while on August 15, 1970, Obama's mother and stepfather had a daughter, Maya Kassandra Soetoro.
A year later, in August 1972, Obama's mother and his sister Maya rejoined Obama in Hawaii, with his mother beginning graduate study in anthropology at the University of Hawaii at Manoa.  In 1973, Obama lived with his mother and sister in an apartment at 1839 Poki Street in Honolulu.
 and after three years in Hawaii, returned with Obama's sister Maya to Jakarta in 1975 to complete her contract with the Institute of Management Education and Development and to do anthropological field work.   Obama chose to stay with his grandparents in Apt. 1008 in the Punahou Circle Apartments at 1617 S. Beretania Street in Honolulu to continue attending Punahou School for high school.Mendell (2007), p. 43.
 Of his early childhood, Obama writes: "That my father looked nothing like the people around me   that he was black as pitch, my mother white as milk   barely registered in my mind." The book describes his struggles as a young adult to reconcile social perceptions of his multiracial heritage. He wrote that he used alcohol, marijuana, and cocaine during his teenage years to "push questions of who I was out of my mind". Obama has said that it was a seriously misguided mistake. At the Saddleback Civil Presidential Forum Barack Obama identified his high-school drug use as his greatest moral failure. Obama has stated he has not used any illegal drugs since he was a teenager.
Some of his fellow students at Punahou School later told the ''Honolulu Star-Bulletin'' that Obama was mature for his age as a high school student and that he sometimes attended parties and other events in order to associate with African American college students and military service people.  Reflecting later on his formative years in Honolulu, Obama wrote: "The opportunity that Hawaii offered   to experience a variety of cultures in a climate of mutual respect   became an integral part of my world view, and a basis for the values that I hold most dear."
Following high school, Obama moved to Los Angeles in 1979, where he studied at Occidental College for two years.
Obama (1995, 2004), pp. 92   112.
Mendell (2007), pp. 55   62.
Remnick (2010), pp. 98   112. On February 18, 1981, he made his first public speech, calling for Occidental's divestment from South Africa. In the summer of 1981, Obama traveled to Jakarta, Indonesia to visit his mother and sister Maya, and visited the families of Occidental College friends in Hyderabad, India and Karachi, Pakistan for three weeks.
He then transferred to Columbia College in New York City, where he majored in political science with a specialization in international relations. Obama lived off campus in a modest rented apartment at 142 West 109th St. Bragging Rights: President Obama Studied Here, Bragging Rights: President Obama Studied Here, New York Times, June 13, 2010, Elizabeth Harris.  He graduated with a B.A. from Columbia in 1983, then worked at Business International Corporation and New York Public Interest Research Group. Obama (1995), pp. 133   140; Mendell (2007), pp. 62   63.
After four years living in New York City, Obama moved to Chicago to work as a community organizer. He worked for three years from June 1985 to May 1988 as director of the Developing Communities Project (DCP), a church-based community organization originally comprising eight Catholic parishes in Greater Roseland (Roseland, West Pullman, and Riverdale) on Chicago's far South Side. During his three years as the DCP's director, its staff grew from 1 to 13 and its annual budget grew from $70,000 to $400,000, with accomplishments including helping set up a job training program, a college preparatory tutoring program, and a tenants' rights organization in Altgeld Gardens.  Obama also worked as a consultant and instructor for the Gamaliel Foundation, a community organizing institute. reprinted in: In the summer of 1988, he traveled for the first time to Europe for three weeks then to Kenya for five weeks where he met many of his paternal relatives for the first time.Obama (1995, 2004), pp. 299   437.
Obama entered Harvard Law School in late 1988. In an interview with ''Ebony'' in 1990, he stated that he saw a degree in law as a vehicle to facilitate better community organization and activism: "The idea was not only to learn how to hope and dream about different possibilities, but to know how the tax structure affects what kind of housing gets built where."  At the end of his first year he was selected as an editor of the ''Harvard Law Review'' based on his grades and a writing competition.     Mendell (2007), pp. 80   92. In February 1990, his second year at Harvard, he was elected president of the law review, a full-time volunteer position functioning as editor-in-chief and supervising the law review's staff of 80 editors.      Obama's election as the first black president of the law review was widely reported and followed by several long, detailed profiles. He got himself elected by convincing a crucial swing bloc of conservatives that he would protect their interests if they supported him. Building up that trust was done with the same kind of long listening sessions he had used in the poor neighborhoods of South Side, Chicago. Richard Epstein, who later taught at the University of Chicago Law School when Obama later taught there, said Obama was elected editor "because people on the other side believed he would give them a fair shake."
While in law school he worked as an associate at the law firms of Sidley & Austin in 1989, where he met his wife, Michelle, and where Newton N. Minow was a managing partner. Minow later would introduce Obama to some of Chicago's top business leaders. In the summer of 1990 he worked at Hopkins & Sutter. Also during his law school years, Obama spent eight days in Los Angeles taking a national training course on Alinsky methods of organizing. He graduated with a J.D. ''magna cum laude'' from Harvard in 1991 and returned to Chicago.
The publicity from his election as the first black president of the ''Harvard Law Review'' led to a contract and advance to write a book about race relations. Obama (1995), pp. xiii   xvii. In an effort to recruit him to their faculty, the University of Chicago Law School provided Obama with a fellowship and an office to work on his book. He originally planned to finish the book in one year, but it took much longer as the book evolved into a personal memoir. In order to work without interruptions, Obama and his wife, Michelle, traveled to Bali where he wrote for several months. The manuscript was finally published as ''Dreams from My Father'' in mid-1995.
He married Michelle LaVaughn Robinson in 1992 and settled down with her in Hyde Park, a liberal, integrated, middle-class Chicago neighborhood with a history of electing reform-minded politicians independent of the Daley political machine. The couple's first daughter, Malia Ann, was born in 1998; their second, Natasha (known as Sasha), in 2001.
One effect of the marriage was to bring Obama closer to other politically influential Chicagoans. One of Michelle's best friends was Jesse Jackson's daughter, Santita, later the godmother of the Obamas' first child. Michelle herself had worked as an aide to Mayor Richard M. Daley. Marty Nesbitt, a young, successful black businessman (who played basketball with Michelle's brother, Craig Robinson), became Obama's best friend and introduced him to other African-American business people. Before the marriage, according to Craig, Obama talked about his political ambitions, even saying that he might run for president someday.
Obama directed Illinois Project Vote from April to October 1992, a voter registration drive, officially nonpartisan, that helped Carol Moseley Braun become the first black woman ever elected to the Senate. He headed up a staff of 10 and 700 volunteers that achieved its goal of 400,000 registered African Americans in the state, leading ''Crain's Chicago Business'' to name Obama to its 1993 list of "40 under Forty" powers to be.Slevin, Peter, , article, ''The Washington Post'', November 13, 2007, page A3, retrieved July 18, 2008 Although fundraising was not required for the position when Obama was recruited for the job, he started an active campaign to raise money for the project. According to Sandy Newman, who founded Project Vote, Obama "raised more money than any of our state directors had ever done. He did a great job of enlisting a broad spectrum of organizations and people, including many who did not get along well with one another."
The fundraising brought Obama into contact with the wealthy, liberal elite of Chicago, some of whom became supporters in his future political career. Through one of them he met David Axelrod, who later headed Obama's campaign for president. The fundraising committee was chaired by John Schmidt, a white former chief of staff to Mayor Richard M. Daley, and John W. Rogers Jr., a young black money manager and founder of Ariel Capital Management. Obama also met much of the city's black political leadership, although he didn't always get along with the older politicians, with friction sometimes developing over Obama's reluctance to spend money and his insistence on results. "He really did it, and he let other people take all the credit", Schmidt later said. "The people standing up at the press conferences were Jesse Jackson and Bobby Rush and I don't know who else. Barack was off to the side and only the people who were close to it knew he had done all the work."
Obama taught constitutional law at the University of Chicago Law School for twelve years, as a Lecturer for four years (1992   1996), and as a Senior Lecturer for eight years (1996   2004). During this time he taught courses in due process and equal protection, voting rights, and racism and law.  He published no legal scholarship, and turned down tenured positions, but served eight years in the Illinois Senate during his twelve years at the university.
Obama was a founding member of the board of directors of Public Allies in 1992, resigning before his wife, Michelle, became the founding executive director of Public Allies Chicago in early 1993. He served on the board of directors of the Woods Fund of Chicago, which in 1985 had been the first foundation to fund Obama's DCP, from 1993   2002, and served on the board of directors of The Joyce Foundation from 1994   2002. Membership on the Joyce and Wood foundation boards, which gave out tens of millions of dollars to various local organizations while Obama was a member, helped Obama get to know and be known by influential liberal groups and cultivate a network of community activists that later supported his political career. Obama served on the board of directors of the Chicago Annenberg Challenge from 1995   2002, as founding president and chairman of the board of directors from 1995   1999. He also served on the board of directors of the Chicago Lawyers' Committee for Civil Rights Under Law, the Center for Neighborhood Technology, and the Lugenia Burns Hope Center. In 1995, Obama also announced his candidacy for a seat in the Illinois state Senate and attended Louis Farrakhan's Million Man March in Washington, DC.