Cloutier was born in Albany, California, and attended the University of California, Berkeley on an athletic scholarship for American football and baseball and played in the Rose Bowl in 1959. However, he later dropped out because of family financial hardship.
Cloutier was drafted into the United States Army. After the Army, he played football in the Canadian Football League for Toronto and Montreal, but an injury cut his career short.
Cloutier then started a food company, but it was not successful, so following the end of his first marriage, he moved to Texas to work on oil rigs. On his off days he began to play poker, and quit his job after realizing that he was winning more money playing poker than working. He started playing poker when he was a caddy at a golf course and played poker after the rounds. 
In addition to poker, Cloutier is well known for his high stakes craps sessions. 
Cloutier specializes in playing tournament poker, especially no-limit and pot limit hold'em. He is the only person in the history of the World Series of Poker (WSOP) to have won events in three types of Omaha played at the World Series     Pot Limit High, Limit High, and Limit 8-or-Better High-low split.  He has won a total of six WSOP bracelets in his career, in addition to many other titles in various kinds of poker games. 
He has placed four times in the top five in the main event of the World Series of Poker, including two 2nd place finishes, in 1985, losing to Bill Smith, and 2000, losing to Chris Ferguson.  Cloutier also finished in 5th place in 1988, won by Johnny Chan, and in 3rd place in 1998, won by Scotty Nguyen.
In 2009, he was one of numerous players turned away from the main event, as registration was capped on that particular day. Cloutier is currently second to Phil Hellmuth (41) for the most all-time WSOP final table finishes record, with 39.  His 55 WSOP cashes rank him 5th overall.
Cloutier also plays in World Poker Tour (WPT) events, where his highest finish is 3rd in the 2003 Legends of Poker event, won by Mel Judah. He has also been featured in the Ultimate Poker Challenge, the National Heads-Up Poker Championship, Poker Superstars Invitational Tournament and  .
As of 2009, his total live tournament winnings exceed $9,700,000. $4,324,186 of his tournament winnings have come at the WSOP.
Cloutier is the co-author (with Tom McEvoy) of four books:
In May 2006, Cloutier released ''How To Win The Championship: Hold'em Strategies For The Final Table'', a book covering tournament strategy with an emphasis on the final few tables.
Cloutier formerly wrote for ''Card Player'' magazine.