Before becoming a well-known tournament player, Preston was a rounder, touring the United States looking for gambling action along with Doyle Brunson and Sailor Roberts. 
Following his WSOP victory he appeared on several talk shows, including  ''The Tonight Show'', and had a bit part in the 1974 Robert Altman movie ''California Split''.  He appeared on ''I've Got a Secret'', where his secret involved losing $190,000 in one night of poker. 
In January/February 1980 Amarillo Slim hosted the ''Second Annual Poker Classic'' which was the second most prestigious poker tournament in its time. This series eventually came to be called the ''Super Bowl of Poker'' and continued until 1991. Gabe Kaplan became the first winner of this tournament series and Stu Ungar won the title three times.
In 1973, Preston and Bill G. Cox wrote ''Play Poker to Win'' which was published by Grosset and Dunlap.  A revised edition was published by HarperCollins in 2005 entitled ''Amarillo Slim's Play Poker to Win''.
In May 2003, Preston published his autobiography ''Amarillo Slim in a World Full of Fat People'', where he wrote of playing poker with Larry Flynt, Lyndon Johnson, and Richard Nixon and others. In addition to his poker exploits, Preston writes of his exploits in proposition betting.
In April 2007, Preston created a website and released an E-Book called ''All In: An E-guide To No Limit Texas Hold'em''. The book was written by Amarillo Slim Preston and Brent Riley.
Preston is divorced, has three children, and currently resides in Amarillo, Texas. Preston was the best friend of casino owner Benny Binion and when Binion died in 1989, he left his horse to Preston.
In August 2003, Preston was indicted in Randall County, Texas on charges of indecency with a 12-year-old child. The charges were reduced to misdemeanor assault in a plea bargain and on February 10, 2004, Preston pled "no contest" to the reduced charges, "to protect his family". Preston received a $4,000 fine, two years probation and was ordered to undergo counseling.
Early on the morning of October 4, 2006, Preston was the victim of an attempted armed robbery. The armed robber fired three bullets into Preston's car as he sped away. Preston was not injured.
On January 28, 2007, Preston was robbed at gunpoint while in his  home.
On January 22, 2009, Preston was beaten and robbed near the intersection of Interstate 40 and Soncy Road while attempting to collect a gambling debt.
 According to a 2009 article at Poker Listings the "planned Hollywood movie about Slim's life" has been "dropped".