 The ensuing fifty years encompassed considerable progress photovoltaic technology and many different technologies emerged. As of 2010, maximum efficiencies of 25.0% in c-Si solar cells and 26.1% in GaAs solar cells have been achieved.
In comparison, multi-junction (MJ) solar cells have achieved 42.3% efficiency in laboratory settings as of October 2010 (with concentration at 406 suns). MJ cells presents significant development potential because theoretical efficiency for an infinite number of pn junctions is 86.8% under high concentration of sunlight.
Commercial photovoltaic panels are composed of several modules. Modules can be connected either in series or in parallel  and include numerous cells. Single-junction photovoltaic cells are composed of a pn junction most commonly fabricated from doped silicon and metallic contacts. Photons that hit the top of the solar cell, are either reflected or transmitted. Transmitted photons have the potential to give their energy ''h  '' to an electron if ''h  ''     Eg, generating an electron-hole pair. As shown in Figure A (top), electrons move from the valence band to the conduction band and holes vice versa. In the depletion region, the drift electric field ''Edrift'' accelerates both electrons and holes towards their respective n-doped and p-doped regions. The resulting current ''Ig'' is called the generation photocurrent. In the quasi-neutral region, the scattering electric field Escatt accelerates holes (electrons) towards the p-doped (n-doped) region, which gives a scattering photocurrent ''Ipscatt'' (''Inscatt''). Consequently, due to the accumulation of charges, a potential ''V'' and a photocurrent ''Iph'' appear. The expression for this photocurrent is obtained by adding generation and scattering photocurrents: ''Iph = Ig + Inscatt + Ipscatt''.
The ''J-V'' characteristics (J is current density, i.e. current per unit area) of a solar cell under illumination are simply obtained by shifting the ''J-V'' characteristics of a diode in the dark downward by ''Iph'', as shown in Figure B. Since solar cells are designed to supply power and not absorb it, the power ''P = V  Iph'' must be negative. Hence, the operating point ''(Vm, Jm)'' is located in the region where ''V''>0 and ''I<sub>ph</sub>''<0, and chosen to maximize the absolute value of the power |''P''|.<ref name=a9></ref>
In a single band gap solar cell, efficiency is limited due to the inability to efficiently convert the broad range of photon energies present in the solar spectrum. Photons below the band gap of the cell material either pass through the cell or are converted to waste heat within the material. Photon energy above the band gap energy is also lost via thermalization, since only the energy necessary to generate the electron-hole pair is utilized, with the remaining energy converted into heat.
Multi-junction cells are photovoltaic cells that work in a fashion similar to those for single-junction cells, with the caveat that some of the light will be converted to other frequencies and re-emitted within the structure.
The most-explored path to higher efficiency solar cells has been to use multiple p-n junctions, each one tuned to a particular frequency of the spectrum. Since light will only react strongly with structures roughly the same size as their wavelength, as long as these layers are extremely thin they are almost transparent to lower frequencies. This allows the layers to be stacked, with the layers capturing higher frequencies on top, and the lower frequency light traveling through them to the lower layers. The layers can potentially be made of different materials.
The fundamental difference between multi-junction solar cells and single-junction solar cells is the number of pn junctions (sub-cells) connected in series. Figure C(a) illustrates the basic structure of a typical commercially-available triple-junction example. In order to better cover the AM1.5 solar spectrum (a typical terrestrial reference spectrum for photovoltaic performance evaluation), suitable materials must be chosen for each pn junction.
The choice of materials for each sub-cell is determined by the requirements for lattice-matching, current-matching, and high performance optoelectronic properties.
For optimal growth and resulting crystal quality, the crystal lattice constant ''a'' of each material must be closely matched, resulting in lattice-matched devices. This constraint has been relaxed somewhat in recently-developed metamorphic solar cells which contain a small degree of lattice mismatch. However, a greater degree of mismatch or other growth imperfections can lead to crystal defects causing a degradation in electronic properties.
Since each sub-cell is connected electrical in series, the same current flows through each junction. The materials are ordered with decreasing bandgaps, Eg, allowing sub-bandgap light (''hc/   g'') to transmit to the lower sub-cells. Therefore, suitable bandgaps must be chosen such that the design spectrum will balance the current generation in each of the sub-cells, achieving current matching. Figure C(b) plots spectral irradiance ''E''(  ), which is the source power density at a given wavelength   . It is plotted together with the maximum conversion efficiency for every junction as a function of the wavelength, which is directly related to the number of photons available for conversion into photocurrent.
Finally, the layers must be electrically optimal for high performance. This necessitates usage of materials with strong absorption coefficients   (  ), high minority carrier lifetimes   minority, and high mobilities   . 
The favorable values in the table below justify the choice of materials typically used for multi-junction solar cells: InGaP for the top sub-cell (Eg = 1.8 - 1.9 eV), InGaAs for the middle sub-cell (Eg = 1.4 eV), and Germanium for the bottom sub-cell (Eg = 0.67 eV). The use of Ge is mainly due to its lattice constant, robustness, low cost, abundance, and ease of production. 
Because the different layers are closely lattice-matched, the fabrication of the device typically employs metal-organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD). This technique is preferable to the molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) because it ensures high crystal quality and large scale production.
The metallic contacts in aluminium are low-resistivity electrodes that make contact with the semiconductor layer in GaAs. They are positioned on the two sides of the structure but mainly on the backwards face so that shadowing on the lightning surface is reduced.
Hence, electrons can easily tunnel through the depletion region. The J-V characteristic of the tunnel junction is very important because it explains why tunnel junctions can be used to have a low electrical resistance connection between two pn junctions. Figure D shows three different regions: the tunneling region, the negative differential resistance region and the thermal diffusion region. The region where electrons can tunnel through the barrier is called the tunneling region. There, the voltage must be low enough so that energy of some electrons who are tunneling is equal to energy states available on the other side of the barrier. Consequently, current density through the tunnel junction is high (with maximum value of J_P, the peak current density) and the slope near the origin is therefore steep. Then, the resistance is extremely low and consequently, the voltage too.. This is why tunnel junctions are ideal for connecting two pn junctions without having a voltage drop. When voltage is higher, electrons cannot cross the barrier because energy states are no longer available for electrons. Therefore, the current density decreases and the differential resistance is negative. The last region, called thermal diffusion region, corresponds to the J-V characteristic of the usual diode:
In order to avoid the reduction of the MJ solar cell performances, tunnel junctions must be transparent to wavelengths absorbed by the next photovoltaic cell, the middle cell, i.e. EgTunnel > E<sub>gMiddleCell</sub>.
A window layer is used in order to reduce the surface recombination velocity ''S''. Similarly, a back-surface field (BSF) layer reduces the scattering of carriers towards the tunnel junction. The structure of these two layers is the same: it is a heterojunction which catches electrons (holes). Indeed, despite the electric field ''Ed'', these cannot jump above the barrier formed by the heterojunction because they don't have enough energy, as illustrated in figure E. Hence, electrons (holes) cannot recombine with holes (electrons) and cannot diffuse through the barrier. By the way, window and BSF layers must be transparent to wavelengths absorbed by the next pn junction i.e. EgWindow > E<sub>gEmitter</sub> and E<sub>gBSF</sub> > E<sub>gEmitter</sub>. Furthermore, the lattice constant must be close to the one of InGaP and the layer must be highly doped (''n''     10<sup>18</sup> cm<sup>   3</sup>).<ref name=a3></ref>
For maximum efficiency, each subcell should be operated at its optimal J-V parameters, which are not necessarily equal for each subcell. If they are different, the total current through the solar cell is the lowest of the three. By approximation, it results in the same relationship for the short-circuit current of the MJ solar cell: ''JSC = min (JSC1, JSC2, JSC3)'' where ''JSCi''(  ) is the short-circuit current density at a given wavelength    for the subcell ''i''.
Because of the impossibility to obtain ''JSC1, JSC2, JSC3'' directly from the total J-V characteristic, the quantum efficiency ''QE''(  ) is utilized. It measures the ratio between the amount of electron-hole pairs created and the incident photons at a given wavelength   . Let   i(  ) be the photon flux of corresponding incident light in subcell ''i''and''QE''i(  ) be the quantum efficiency of the subcell ''i''. By definition, this equates to:
The value of QE_i(\lambda) is obtained by linking it with the absorption coefficient\alpha(\lambda), i.e. the number of photons absorbed per unit of length by a material. If it is assumed that each photon absorbed by a subcell creates an electron/hole pair (which is a good approximation), this leads to :
Similarly, because
The values of V_{OCi} are then given by the J-V diode equation:
The majority of multi-junction cells that have been produced to date use three layers, tuned to blue (on top), yellow and red (on the bottom). These cells require the use of semiconductors that can be tuned to specific frequencies, which has led to most of them being made of gallium arsenide (GaAs) compounds, often germanium for red, GaAs for yellow, and GaInP2 for blue. 
Dual junction cells can be made on Gallium arsenide wafers.  Alloys of Indium gallium phosphide in the range In.5Ga.5P through In.53Ga.47P serve as the high band gap alloy.  This alloy range provides for the ability to have band gaps in the range of 1.92eV to 1.87eV.  The lower GaAs junction has a band gap of 1.42eV.
Triple junction cells consisting of Indium gallium phosphide, Gallium arsenide or Indium gallium arsenide and Germanium can be fabricated on germanium wafers.  Early cells used straight gallium arsenide in the middle junction.  Later cells have utilized In0.015Ga0.985As, due to the better lattice match to Ge, resulting in a lower defect density.
Due to the huge band gap difference between GaAs (1.42eV), and Ge (0.66eV), the current match is very poor, with the Ge junction operated significantly current limited.
Current efficiencies for InGaP/GaAs/Ge cells are in the mid 30% range. Lab cells using additional junctions between the GaAs and Ge junction have demonstrated efficiencies above 40%.
Indium phosphide may be used as a substrate to fabricate cells with band gaps between 1.35eV and 0.74eV.  Indium Phosphide has a band gap of 1.35eV.  Indium gallium arsenide(In0.53Ga0.47As) is lattice matched to Indium Phosphide with a band gap of 0.74eV.  A quaternary alloy of Indium gallium arsenide phosphide can be lattice matched for any band gap in between the two.
Indium phosphide-based cells have the potential to work in tandem with gallium arsenide cells. The two cells can be optically connected in series (with the InP cell below the GaAs cell), or in parallel through the use of spectra splitting using a Dichroic filter.
All MJ photovoltaic cells use III-V semiconductor materials. GaAsSb-based heterojunction tunnel diodes, instead of conventional InGaP highly doped tunnel diodes described above, have a lower tunneling distance. Indeed, in the heterostructure formed by GaAsSb and InGaAs, the valence band of GaAsSb is higher than the valence band of the adjoining p-doped layer. Consequently, the tunneling distance ''dtunnel'' is reduced and so the tunneling current, which exponentially depends of ''dtunnel'', is increased. Hence, the voltage is lower than that of the InGaP tunnel junction.
GaAsSb heterojunction tunnel diodes offer other advantages. The same current can be achieved by using a lower doping. Secondly, because the lattice constant is larger for GaAsSb than Ge, one can use a wider range of materials for the bottom cell because more materials are lattice-matched to GaAsSb than to Ge.
Chemical components can be added to some layers. Adding about one percent of Indium in each layer better matches lattice constants of the different layers. Without it, there is about 0.08 percent of mismatching between layers, which inhibits performance. Adding aluminium to the top cell increases its band gap to 1.96 eV, covering a larger part of the solar spectrum and obtain a higher open-circuit voltage ''VOC''.
The theoretical efficiency of MJ solar cells is 86.8% for an infinite number of pn junctions, implying that more junctions increase efficiency. The maximum theoretical efficiency is 37, 50, 56, 72% for 1, 2, 3, 36 pn junctions, respectively, with the number of junctions increasing exponentially to achieve equal effiency increments. The exponential relationship implies that as the cell approaches the limit of efficiency, the increase cost and complexity grow rapidly. Decreasing the thickness of the top cell increases the transmission coefficient ''T''.
Finally, an InGaP hetero-layer between the p-Ge layer and the InGaAs layer can be added in order to create automatically the n-Ge layer by scattering during MOCVD growth and increase significantly the quantum efficiency ''QE''(  ) of the bottom cell. InGaP is advantageous because of its high scattering coefficient and low solubility in Ge.
Solar spectrum at the Earth surface changes constantly depending on the weather and sun position. This results in the variation of   (  ), ''QE''(  ),   (  ) and thus the short-circuit currents ''JSCi''. As a result, the current densities ''Ji'' are not necessarily matched and the total current becomes lower. These variations can be quantified using the average photon energy (APE) which is the ratio between the spectral irradiance G(  ) (the power density of the light source in a specific wavelength   ) and the total photon flux density. It can be shown that a high (low) value for APE means low (high) wavelengths spectral conditions and higher (lower) efficiencies. Thus APE is a good indicator for quantifying the effects of the solar spectrum variations on performances and has the added advantage of being independent of the device structure and the absorption profile of the device.
Light concentrators increase efficiencies and reduce the cost/efficiency ratio. The two types of light concentrators are refractive lenses like Fresnel lenses and reflective dishes. Thanks to these devices, light arriving on a large surface can be concentrated on a smaller cell. The intensity concentration ratio (or    suns   ) is the average intensity of the focused light divided by 0.1 W/m  . If its value is ''X'' then the MJ current becomes ''X'' higher under concentrated illumination.
 These cells capture about 2/3 of their theoretical maximum performance, so assuming the same is true for a non-concentrated version of the same design, one might expect a three-layer cell of 30% efficiency. This is not enough of an advantage over traditional silicon designs to make up for their extra production costs. For this reason, almost all multi-junction cell research for terrestrial use is dedicated to concentrator systems, normally using mirrors or fresnel lenses.
Using a concentrator also has the added benefit that the number of cells needed to cover a given amount of ground area is greatly reduced. A conventional system covering 1 m   would require 625 16&nbsp;cm   cells, but for a concentrator system only a single cell is needed, along with a concentrator. The argument for concentrated Multi-junction cells has been that the high cost of the cells themselves would be more than offset by the reduction in total number of cells. However, the downside of the concentrator approach is that efficiency drops off very quickly under lower lighting conditions. In order to maximize its advantage over traditional cells and thus be cost competitive, the concentrator system has to track the sun using as it moves to keep the light focused on the cell and maintain maximum efficiency as long as possible. This requires an expensive solar tracker system, and offsets the potential advantages offered by multi-junction cells.
Multi-junction cells are expensive to produce, using techniques similar to semiconductor device fabrication fabrication, usually metalorganic vapour phase epitaxy but on "chip" sizes on the order of centimeters. In cases where outright performance is the only consideration, these cells have become common, they are widely used in satellite applications for instance, where the power-to-weight ratio overwhelms practically every other cost.
There are four main categories of photovoltaic cells: c-Si solar cells, thin film solar cells, MJ solar cells and new technologies (including organic solar cells).
MJ solar cells and other photovoltaic devices have significant differences (see the table above). Physically, the main property of a MJ solar cell is having more than one pn junction in order to catch a larger photon energy spectrum while the main property of the thin film solar cell is to use thin films instead of thick layers in order to decrease the cost efficiency ratio. As of 2010, MJ solar panels are more expensive than others. These differences imply different applications: MJ solar cells are preferred in space and c-Si solar cells for terrestrian applications.
The efficiencies of solar cells and Si solar technology are relatively stable, while the efficiency of solar modules and multi-junction technology are progressing.
Measurements on MJ solar cells are usually made in laboratory, using light concentrators (this is often not the case for the other cells) and under standard test conditions (STCs). STCs prescribe, for terrestrial applications, the AM1.5 spectrum as the reference. This air mass (AM) corresponds to a fixed position of the sun in the sky of 48   and a fixed power of 833 W/m  . Therefore, spectral variations of incident light and environmental parameters are not taken into account under STC.
Consequently, performance of MJ solar cells in terrestrial environment is inferior to that achieved in laboratory. Moreover, MJ solar cells are designed such that currents are matched under STC, but not necessarily under field conditions. One can use ''QE''(  ) to compare performances of different technologies, but ''QE''(  ) contains no information on the matching of currents of subcells. An important comparison point is rather the output power per unit area generated with the same incident light.
As of 2010, the cost of MJ solar cells was too high to allow use outside of specialized applications. The high cost is mainly due to the complex structure and the high price of materials. Nevertheless, with light concentrators under illumination of at least 400 suns, MJ solar panels become practical.
MJ cells are currently being utilized in the Mars rover missions.  
In terrestrial concentrating applications, the scatter of blue light by the atmosphere reduces the photon flux above 1.87eV, better balancing the junction currents.Radiation particles that are no longer filtered can cause damage the cell. There are two kinds of damage: ionisation and atomic displacement. Still, MJ cells offer higher radiation resistance, higher efficiency and a lower temperature coefficient.