Determine if user Springee is violating Wikipedia:Neutrality, Wikipedia:No Original Research standards by 'blanking' a legitimate relevant point from a published cited source based on user:Springee's personal conflicting opinion.
Autostream, Springee
Autostream added a point under 'disadvantages' section from a cited Motor Trend article verbatim.  Springee blanked this point immediately saying," This information is factually incorrect." The resulting edit conflict has gone back and forth 6 times.
Springee's response:
I am removing an article that contains know factual errors, contains speculation with out explanation, and contains opinion. 
Autostream's response is:
This Corvette leaf spring article deals with springs on a car. And springs have a huge impact on handling and ride. Two aspects which are inherently subjective; they cannot be quantified with figures. 
Motor Trend magazine is a hugely credible source on vehicle ride and handling dynamics. The only source to counter them in this Wikipedia article is an unprofessional, personal opinion. 
According to the help pages here, Wikipedia should present all legitimate and professional aspects of a subject, including alternate points of view, to allow the reader to make his/her own judgements.
I would like the cited point to remain. I would also like user:Springee to be blocked from blanking as he appears to 'own' the article --  ( ) 08:12, 27 March 2008 (UTC)
I'm just going to pose some general questions, to help establish where we agree and disagree.  Please try to be concise, but still clear &mdash; for instance, try to address the point completely but ''only'' the point in question.  Answering just "yes" or "no" is not really helpful, but neither is answering in the form of a 1000 word essay. --  ( ) 04:58, 1 April 2008 (UTC)
2. This contention as I see it, with Springee, is with only one issue: The sources credibility. And the source is talking only about the deficiency of the Corvette leaf spring and not the anti-roll bar or other suspension parts or geometry.
3. * Only the above mentioned typo that is irrelavent to this discussion.
4 * The Motor Trend article is not about a road test of a SPECIFIC car in question and I think this is crucial. Such negative statements about ride/handling are noticable subdued during road tests articles because the manufacturers of the loaned vehicles sign their paychecks (through ads). Thus road test magazines usually only criticise in a small sidebar or in editorial pieces such as this one. This perhaps explains why there is little to no other sources to cite.
Further, he surrounded it by counter claims with no citing whatsoever apart from a non professional 'scanned' page from a book hosted on a Corvette website. This also seems to be counter to the Wiki: Article Ownership standard. I argue this should be posted as per my number 1. above.--  ( ) 05:48, 2 April 2008 (UTC)
The rigid axle behavior claim is incorrect if we use the common definition of "independent suspension" and would apply to almost all cars with independent suspension if we assume "independent" means 100% no connection (ie no left to right side connecting springs).  
950 Words... sorry.
As my initial posting were prior to Autostream's I have added the following section as a response to Autostream's post.
1a.  Short and pithy are not qualities of good technical sources.  They are qualities of opinion pieces.  
1b.  The disadvantages are in dispute.  The ride quality and handling of the car may or may not be bad (I have my own opinion on this subject but I will leave it out).  The issue is are the concerns raised by Motor Trend actually CAUSED by the unique properties of the leaf spring or not.  Mind you the only thing that make the leaf spring truly unique vs a coil spring is the anti-roll effect.  
This link contains a web forum discussion with an aftermarket tuner who replaces the leaf springs
Note the following comments from the tuner:
Basically for an aftermarket tuner, it is easier to use commonly accessible coil springs rather than custom leaves.  He also notes a dislike of the factory dampers.
1c.  Again, it should be adequately demonstrated that the alleged poor ride quality is because of the type of spring, as opposed to say spring rate (universal to coils or leaves, damping, unsprung weight, the run flat tires (generally know for poor ride quality) etc).
2a.  Why off handedly dismiss a fundamental descriptive error of the suspension system yet blame the same part?  Autostream has never answered this point.
2b.  "behaving like" implies properties similar to.  However, the article doesn't explain this and based on existing Wikis this would be inconsistent with the suspension design used on the Corvette.  
2c.  The physical counter claim is supported by illustrations from wiki entries, both mine and others.  The source by Lamm has not been shown to be biased nor factually incorrect.  You are correct my sources don't counter the claims about FEEL however, they do show that the claim that the feel is the result of the specific use of a leaf spring is in question.  They also suggest other areas of suspension design could be the cause.    
2d.  Among web forums the "Car of the Year" award is very questionable.  Additionally, the writer of the Autoextremist.com wrote a lengthy piece talking about the marketing and sales tie ins that Motor Trend demands of a recipient. 
3.  If you disagree with my other points please explain why.
4.  If Motor Trend is indeed paid by the manufacture as you claim they can no longer be considered unbiased in any of their views and loose all credibility as an independent source.
Springee, I feel you misunderstand what Wikipedia is and is not. Wikipedia is NOT a blog or journal for you to post your own research.  If you have extensive knowledge of a subject, publish your results in other venues such as peer-reviewed journals, or online sites, and Wikipedia will report about your work once it becomes part of accepted knowledge. 
If you are going to edit, Wikipedia policy DEMANDS that conflicting perspectives exist and  be presented equally. None of the views should be judged as "the truth", even the most popular one. 
All sources have bias. Which is why we include ALL sourced POV's and let readers form their own opinions.--  ( ) 23:27, 2 April 2008 (UTC)
To add yet more evidence that things are not as the MT editor sees them, here is a posting from an Composite spring manufacture who makes aftermarket leaf springs for the Corvette 
This post was in reply to a long posting which became the original Corvette leaf spring wiki entry
Quoted from the posting:
This was posted by a person in the industry who is familiar with the engineering of the springs.  I would call that an expert opinion.  He did not claim the spring would fundamentally harm ride and handling.
Okay, so I'm getting a lot of different things here.  I think we're going to have to focus in a lot more on the ''editorial'' issue here, rather than the actual factual issues.  I'd just like to remind us of an important point &mdash; please, let's keep the issue focused on ''content'', and not other editors.  So, with that said, I'm going to address question individually.  Please, don't respond to each other directly &mdash; pretend you're giving evidence, or something.
1. We can't be sure that the material is NOT made in part from carbon because we know for a fact that the Corvette leaf spring is indeed a 'composite' of fibers from GM's own press releases on the Cadillac XLR: "Like the Corvette, it uses transversely mounted composite leaf springs front and rear." (If you google this quote, you will find at least ten publications with this exact quote, signifying a press release.) So it may be a typo, ot it may indeed be a fact. But either way, the material is NOT in question here. Only the way the part functions.
2. The problem with the Lamm book here is:
A. It's outdated. It was written in 1983 about the 1984 Corvette.  It's 14 years later and the current Corvette has been through two extensive redesigns. The Motor Trend article involves only the 2005+ Corvettes.
B. It only covers advantages of the 1984 Corvette leaf spring and doesnt make any reference to any downsides or cons, so it seems a bit biased. 
C. It talks about objective theory of operation while the Motor Trend article is about actual subjective feel in the real world.
D. Nowhere does the Lamm book contradict the Motor Trend article. I see them as separate issues.
The Lamm book also states that the spring is fiberglass vs carbon fiber.  Please note that I have used the Lamm book as a reference with regards to how the system functions.  I have not used it as a reference for how things like anti-roll bars function nor as a reference for properties which may lead to poor vehicle handling.
I think it should also be added that the view of the particular MT author should not be considered universal.  Many articles can be found which praise the handling of the Corvette.  Also important to note is GM has put a number of different shocks and versions of the leaf spring on the Corvette.  Criticism of say an 2006 Z06 may not apply to a 2008 lower line Corvette with the magnetorheological shocks.  For the MT criticism to be true it must be categorically true and apply to all versions of the C5 and C6 Corvettes (ie all with the same leaf spring setup).  If it does not, it would be logical to assume the flaw is not fundamental to the system but inherent in a particular combination of spring, shocks, and tires on the particular test car.
I understand that you requested we not reply to the comments of others.  However, my comments were viewable by Autostream thus enabling tailoring responses with my text in mind.  As such I have included these replies.  
How about if you include the cited MT opinion, but also include information about similar issues with the Volvo, to balance the description.  For instance, something like:
Thought? --  ( ) 16:13, 4 April 2008 (UTC)
I understand the desire to include the information in a section regarding oposing views.  I would not include it in the "Disadvantages" section as the claim clearly has not been shown to be true and a body of evidence exists to indicate that it isn't true.  Simply, the claim is too flippant and factually incorrect to include as a point of reference.  If we were talking about something subjective such as "the Corvette handles badly" or even somewhat objective such as "the rear jumps laterally when cornering over broken pavement" I would agree that we should include references that both praise and admonish the handling of the car.  
This case is different.  First, I believe we have established that the MT claim that the suspension behaves like a rigid axle is categorically wrong.  I have shown several patents include ones from Ford which do not agree with this description of events.  Thus for the simple fact that the information is wrong it should not be included.  
Also, in this case we are talking about proof of a causal relationship.  Even if we ignore that MT was wrong about the spring material AND how it functions, for the MT claim to be true it must be categorically true.  All cars with this arrangement (including all versions of the Corvette) must display the same trait.  Additionally it must be shown that no other aspect of the suspension design was the cause of the issue.  After Autostream attacked every point I made in the Wiki with a request for citations, I added a number of them.  I have two difference sources which refer to other aspects of the suspension design which could cause the exact issue mentioned by MT; to stiff an anti-roll bar and high unsprung weight.  Neither are inherent properties of the leaf spring suspension.  
The aftermarket tuner claim is in no way conclusive.  Some tuners do not remove them.  Other remove them because, if they want different spring rates, it   s easier to do that with commonly available, low cost coils vs expensive, custom made leaves.  I included a link to a conversation with an aftermarket turner who said, he replaces them because it makes his job easier.  He does not consider the factory suspension to be better or worse just because it uses leaves instead of coils.  
If someone were to add the Volvo link, honestly I would be just as critical of it.  While it at least from an engineering based journal, it is very brief and does not provide proof that Volvo found the leaf spring cars to ride as well as those with coils.  Both sources are very weak though I believe the MT source to be the weaker of the two.  
Ultimately the link simply confuses the issue.  It does not add to the basic    here is how it works    premise of the wiki.  It definitely should not be listed as a    disadvantage    until proven to be such.
I don't disagree with the subjective part.  The problem is the attribution has been shown to be very questionable and the justification for the attribution, ie the claimed physical cause has been shown to be 100% wrong.  As I said, although I believe it takes away from the entry, I would be willing to include it so long as it were separate from the clearly stated disadvantages and so long as a proper explanation of why it would be wrong is included.  I have added this to the article already.  As you said before, we do not want to simply argue to moderation.--  ( ) 17:56, 4 April 2008 (UTC)
Haemo, In the spirit of fairness and neutrality, I agree with your proposal 100% as a fair compromise. This is assuming that this point goes under "Disadvantages" AND as the first point since its controversy makes it the most important.
If this heading is not agreeable to the other party, I would also accept other headings as follows: "Deficiencies" or "Shortcomings" since the MT article titled '...corvette/improvements.html' implies pervasively that the modern Corvette leaf spring is indeed a disadvantage to the Corvette, in Motor Trends opinion - the obvious point being that a "rigid axle" 'feel' is NOT a desirable trait in any sports car (which also makes irrelavent any reference to the Volvo family sedans). Also any different heading should go no further down the article than right-under "Disadvantages".
This is really the only point now since the other party added the reference to the article,due to a 'Third Opinion', but did it in a way as to dilute and discredit its significant importance to the article.--  ( ) 00:26, 5 April 2008 (UTC)
The Volvo issue is irrelavent here.  A professional road tester would have to publish his opinion that it's leaf springs do NOT 'behave' like a rigid axle for it to even be considered in the same paragraph as the MT quote. And even then, one is a sports car and the other is a family sedan; completely different tuning, not a single suspension part number is shared; apples and oranges.
My personal opinion of the Corvette is shared on blogs, internet forums, and my own literature.  When it comes to Wikipedia, we must adhere to its rules: Verified published quotes go in. Original Research (personal opinion) stay out.
As for the rest, this is not the place to argue. We tried to reach a consensus in the discussion part last month, but could not. The MT point is a verified source and that is all that matters in Wikipedia.  This is not your personal blog.  The inclusion of this published source and its milieu, are now in the hands of a mediator.--  ( ) 03:06, 5 April 2008 (UTC)
Okay, so far we've agreed that this material should be included in the article in some respect, and probably qualified with some of the other material that has been brought to light during this discussion.  Before we continue, I'd just like to ask everyone to continue being   and keep the tone here   &mdash; this is moving forward, and it only gets harder if we can't discuss things calmly.  Also, please remember to   to keep things readable.
With that said, I've got a   &mdash; a lot of this discussion focuses around the "advantages/disadvantages" organization of the article, as it currently stands.  However, this is a completely artificial distinction &mdash; this article has a lot of problems, and this is one of them.  Ideally, an article should discuss these things ''together'', not in separate lists.  Perhaps you guys could draft a section like "Performance and handling consideration", where these advantages and disadvantages could be more intelligently discussed and given some context for the general reader.  Can one, or both of you guy propose a revision of a section like that, and implement the tentative common ground in a way you think will be mutually acceptable?  (Reply below, if you would like) --  ( ) 04:23, 5 April 2008 (UTC)
All, 
After a complete review of the Wikipedia guidelines on sources the MT article is a Questionable Source and should be removed from the article.
For the MT article to be used as a reference supporting a point or in quotation to support a point it must be, per Wiki rules, a Reliable Source.  If it is a reliable source inclusion is valid even if other reliable sources contradict the points being made.  So IF the MT article is considered a reliable source it can be used as evidence that the Corvette has handling problems specifically BECAUSE it uses a leaf spring and NOT because of other design/tuning characteristics which have been shown via cited sources in the article to also cause the handling issues described by MT.  
However, if the MT article is considered a Questionable Source it    should only be used in articles about themselves .     That means it can not be used to support claims in articles which are not about MT articles.  I think we can clearly say this Wiki is not about MT articles.  The wiki guidelines state that questionable sources are    those with a poor reputation for fact-checking.     
So is it a Questionable Source?  The article contains two factual errors.  Autostream has acknowledged them in the article   s discussion section as:
We both agree that the MT article incorrectly identified the spring material, ie fact checking error.
The description of mechanical function of the spring, a    rigid connection    has also been shown to be incorrect.  The Lamm article does not support that claim, the patents on transverse leaf springs show non-rigid connections.  The photos in this link  show the front spring has a rubber pad that pushes down on a flat area of the front, lower A-arm thus not a rigid connection.  The rear uses a tension link with rubber bushings at either end.  Again, this is not a rigid connection to the A-arms.  It is clear that the geometric motion of the suspension defined by the A-arms and not by the springs (which would actually create an over constrained kinematic structure).  
Based on the two factual errors above the article MUST be considered a Questionable Source and per Wiki rules can not be used in support of other claims.  This means it can not be used to support a claim that Corvettes have handling and ride issues BECAUSE they use a leaf spring.  
Given the Wiki source guidelines and the specifics of the MT article it should be removed as a reference.  If the poor ride and handling point is to remain a new reference must be cited.--  ( ) 19:19, 5 April 2008 (UTC)
This article has shown poor fact checking.  Are there errors in dispute?  That doesn't mean all Motor Trend article citations should be considered questionable, just this one in context of this topic.  The Wall Street Journal is a reputable newspaper.  They have on occasion published bad reports.  While those bad reports should not cause us to cast all WS Journal articles into doubt, would we want to reference a section of an article that has been shown to be incorrect?  Does that not make the particular article questionable?--  ( ) 22:29, 5 April 2008 (UTC)
I have no problem with the article being rewritten without the 'advantages' & 'disadvantages' section as per your suggestion. But I do have a problem with user:Alexi, as he has had this to say about our conflict, "Motor Trend is a generalist magazine; it's not appropriate to use a vague quote from them to support a specific technical explanation of crosstalk." He also references 'crosstalk', a term and/or behavior that Springee previously said was erroneous (and Springee also blanked the section, 'crosstalk', that I created last month).
Perhaps somebody who knows nothing about Corvettes or suspensions could be rewrite it with a neutral POV?
Also, I disagree the article definitely has an error as I have explained in the 2nd set of questions--  ( ) 23:16, 6 April 2008 (UTC)
As I said, I think Alexi would be a great resource.  When it comes to moderation it's clear that I will not convince Autostream that the MT article is flawed.  He isn't willing to acknowledge even basic facts such as the spring material (I have a link from the manufacture saying it isn't carbon-fiber) nor realizing that rubber suspension bushings can flex.  However I would like to know if I have created enough doubt in you, a third party to this mess, so that you would agree the particular article at least contains errors.  Again, if a Wall Street Journal article is proven wrong is that particular article still "Reliable" just because it came from a reliable paper?
I also have yet another alternative.   has suggested changing the page from Corvette specific to a general page about transverse leaf springs used in automotive applications.  The page would likely primarily focus on recent applications similar to those of the Corvette.  This would reduce the Corvette focus of the page.  It would also allow discussion of the designs in a more general sense.  I believe Autostream also questioned the article's need to be stand alone and I originally added it to the Corvette wiki.  ( ) 12:49, 7 April 2008 (UTC)
I am not making this personal. I have only focused on the cited quote regarding Wiki's rules. I have make a request to  on the original discussion page as follows:
If this is the case, I ask that you draft the two revisions if you would like, and if Springee agrees.  This issue is currently reaching conclusion under Mediation   and the moderator has concluded thus far that when discussing we've agreed the 'Performance and Handling consideration" on the modern Corvette, this cited quote must should be added: "Ride and Handling: according to an opinion in Motor Trend magazine, the Corvette C6's transverse leafs "make the rearend behave a bit like a rigid axle. Aftermarket tuners have scrapped them in C5s and C6s for coil-springs". - Above quotes are the mediator HAERMO's actual context verbatim.
This represents the Mediators proposed solution to our mediation. Of which I will agree to his compromise in all respects."--  ( ) 02:06, 8 April 2008 (UTC)
Autostream wrote
What Haermo actually wrote on the moderation discussion page:
How about if you include the cited MT opinion, but also include information about similar issues with the Volvo, to balance the description.  For instance, something like:
Haermo offered the suggestion.  Haermo did not state this would be the moderated outcome.  
I didnt mis-state anything. I started this moderation to get the legitimate Motor Trend quote inserted. I quoted verbatim. If you want to compare the Corvette leaf spring to the Volvo leaf spring, I dont think it helps the article, but I have no objection to that. This is the fifth time you've personally attacked me. I am waiting for Daniel's thought on the rewrite. --  ( ) 02:56, 9 April 2008 (UTC)
You said the    the moderator has concluded thus far that    this cited quote must be added:     No such statements were made.  ( ) 03:09, 9 April 2008 (UTC)
I changed the 3 words as to state it correctly.--  ( ) 08:36, 9 April 2008 (UTC)
In reading through the article again it does seem to me that Autostream has a bad habit of cherry picking his quotes and presenting them in misleading context.  I would note the number of times he has said I agreed to something or his misattribution of a quote by Haemo.  Here is another example.  
Autostream wants to include the following quote from the article:
Their term, "behave a bit like" is actually quite vague as a description.  The simple fact that it occurs only under    some conditions    would make it to vague as to draw a general point from the statement.    Are we talking about conditions of the road, of the suspension package on the car (which shocks, springs tires etc), of the weather?  Do they mean all Corvettes or just those with certain suspension packages.  The quoted text doesn't say "performance" or "handling" anywhere.  I might assume they meant handling but Autostream has shown that all details, no mater how trivial MUST be cited.  As the MT paragraph does not mention Handling or Performance we have to assume some non-neutral point of view if we include it in a handling-performance section.
Yes, these are small details (in addition to the fundamental problems with the MT statements).  However, Autostream has demanded I provide proof for even the smallest detail of suspension operation, such as the operation of rubber bushings, thus he must be willing to provide the same.  ( ) 23:07, 9 April 2008 (UTC)
All, 
Given the amount of back and forth discussion I   ve added this section.  The intent is simply for each side to give a brief,    as we see it    statement.  This can be referenced to avoid confusion/ miswording of the other party   s position.  This isn   t meant to be a discussion area.  This should be updated as needed.
I am waiting for the Mediator's suggestion of having an unbiased user do a rewrite.   has agreed to a revision based on this mediated discussion. --  ( ) 00:10, 11 April 2008 (UTC)
From what I've read, it appears that all parties and the Mediator and the Third Opinion all agree that the quote meets guidelines for insertion.  Its a matter of inserting it in a way where its appropriate and unbiased. So I await 's revision, and we can take it from there.--  ( ) 04:00, 11 April 2008 (UTC)
Autostream,
I saw and replied to your posting on the Motor Trend forums.  I   m glad to see you are actually looking into the validity of what I have been saying.  It   s also good to see that most of the forum members their seem to agree with me.    ( ) 18:06, 13 April 2008 (UTC)
I repudiate all of Springees comments regarding myself and/or my intentions. 
I'm actually looking into the validity of what I have been saying to help put this issue to rest.
The consensus on your question among the forum members is
Your history of posting on negative and inflammatory remarks on Corvette related subjects makes your intention clear.  
Your thread  and the thread the forum members linked to .  Have not supported either that MT is a credible source for the claim they made, nor that the information is right.  If you disagree, please indicate why and provide the quotes to back it.  Otherwise, we have factual errors AND opinions of auto enthusiasts showing that the claim can only be considered as a Questionable Source.  With that in mind I would propose that we not include questionable sources in the article or create a separate section regarding misconceptions and include the information in that section.  That would also be an appropriate place to address the notion that the suspension is "semi-independent".    ( ) 19:41, 14 April 2008 (UTC)
I disagree and reject everything Springee has said. But this is not the venue to discuss these matters. This category does not belong in this mediation page. It should be moved to the Corvette Leaf Spring talk page.--  ( ) 00:26, 15 April 2008 (UTC)
Autostream,
You have yet to follow up on the opinions you sought on the web forum.  The consensus of the people on the forum seems to undermine the notion that MT is a credible source:
I think it is harder and harder to justify keeping the article as anything but a questionable source.  Unless you are interested in having a section covering misconceptions.  If you would still like to add a section critical to the car   s handling the Corvette vehicle entry would be the appropriate place and that editor's opinion would be appropriate as a Reliable Source for an auto reviewer's opinion.   ( ) 04:12, 16 April 2008 (UTC)
I would like to propose closing this mediation.  We have agreed that the article can be changed to cover transverse leaf springs in general rather than just on the Corvette.  I think we can close this topic now.  ( ) 15:08, 19 April 2008 (UTC)
Autostream   s thread on the MT forum has paid off.  The MT editor, Frank Markus, who wrote the article has clarified some points.  
From the above link to the MT forums:
The editor has retracted his statement about spring material.  
The second statement from the author describes a seesaw type effect.  Now we clearly know the author was NOT describing springs rigidly fixed at their ends as Autostream had tried to claim.  The author saw the spring as a centrally mounted seesaw.  This point was discussed and agreeably dismissed early in the life of the wiki entry.  In short, this effect does not happen with the wide Corvette spring mounts.  The C2-C4 rear springs did suffer from what the author describes to some limited degree.  The C5-C6 absolutely do not.
Here is a link to a simple finite element model of a leaf spring and its two pivot mounts.  It is clear that when one side is raised, the center of spring goes down and the opposite side of the spring goes up.
Image:Deformed_spring_model_iso_and_plane.JPG
This clearly shows the author was mistaken in this case.  Can we now close this discussion?   ( ) 13:35, 30 April 2008 (UTC)
Wrong. Frank Markus did NOT write the Motor Trend article of interest. --  ( ) 23:29, 30 April 2008 (UTC)
My bad Autostream, perhaps he wasn't the writer.  However, the MT admin gave his response.  I would assume you agree that his response would represent that of MT.  It certainly would seem he was at least the person who contributed the particular morsel of information in the article to which you have clung.  Any comments on the technical validity of what I have shown above?    ( ) 00:34, 1 May 2008 (UTC)
Again, can we now close this discussion.  Motor Trend has stated what they meant.  It is clear that what they meant is wrong both in the description of the material and in the function of the spring.  This means at best they can only be a questionable source because their facts have been shown to be wrong.  I would like to remove the mediation tags from the article discussion.    ( ) 14:26, 8 May 2008 (UTC)