William W. Warren was born at La Pointe, Michigan Territory, on Madeline Island, the son of Lyman Marcus Warren, an American fur trader and a descendant of Richard Warren,Williams, J. Fletcher. "Memoir of William W. Warren" in ''History of the Ojibway People'' and Mary Cadotte, the daughter of the major fur trader Michel Cadotte, of Ojibwe-French descent, and his Anishinaabe wife ''Ikwesewe'', of the White Crane clan. (His father's brother Truman married a sister of Mary's, so the families were doubly linked.)
After attending Protestant mission schools at La Pointe and on Mackinac Island, in 1836, young Warren traveled with his grandfather Lyman Warren to Clarkson, New York. There he lived with his grandfather and attended Clarkson Academy. He then attended the Oneida Institute near Whitesboro, New York, a Presbyterian college that combined liberal and what was called industrial or crafts education. The director was Beriah Green, an abolitionist. In 1840 Warren returned to his family in La Pointe.
Warren liked to sit with his mother's people and hear the Ojibwe stories. At age 17, he started working as an interpreter, making notes on the stories and history of the people when he could. In the fall of 1847 he moved to Crow Wing, to work for the trader Henry Mower Rice. Warren continued collecting stories and began to write a history of the Ojibwe.
Soon Warren was put to work by Rice answering questionnaires on the Ojibwe sent by the geographer and early ethnologist Henry Rowe Schoolcraft and got to meet him. This gave Warren an additional sense of how important his work was. In time away from his work as an interpreter with Rice, Warren continued to collect the stories and history he heard, as well as to figure ways to identify dates in the Ojibwe stories.
In 1851 he was a legislator with the Minnesota Territory serving in the Minnesota Terrtorial House of Representatives. Rice became a politician also, serving as an United States Senator (1858   1863) and running as a candidate for governor in 1865.
William went on to marry Mathilda Aitken, August 10, 1843 at La Pointe, Wisconsin. She was born around 1822 at Sandy Lake, Minnesota and baptised September 13, 1835 at La Pointe. She was the daughter of William Alexander Aitken, the fur trader, and Gin-gion-cumig-oke, an Ojibwe. After the death of William Whipple Warren, Mathilda married Louis Fontaine and was allotted on the White Earth Reservation as "Mathilda Fontaine". She died October 19, 1902. Their children were: