Hajji Ahmed appended a lengthy commentary to a 16th century map of the world annotated in the Turkish language, known as ''The Ottoman Mappa Mundi of Hajji Ahmed'', amongst other titles, which opens with "Whoever wishes to know the true shape of the world, their minds shall be filled with light and their breast with joy." 
The map is heart shaped, and the extant copy was printed from wooden blocks in Venice, Italy, in 1559. It was kept until the late 18th century in the archives of the Venetian Council of Ten.
Known as the "Mappamondo Hajji Ahmed", the map outlines legends and place-names in Turkish, and it may be the first map in Turkish ever published for sale to an Ottoman audience. Whether the map is original, or was simply a translation into Turkish, it helps show how the people of the Ottoman Empire perceived themselves in relation to the wider world.
Within the accompanying text of the map, Hajji Ahmed explains that the map was created to share knowledge of the shape of the world, especially of the New World. Specifically, Ahmed points out that the classical philosophers, such as Plato and Socrates, did not know about the newly discovered continent, which he says shows that the world is round. He says that the New World demonstrates the "extent to which the Ottomans were participants in their own right in the process of physical expansion abroad and intellectual ferment at home that characterized the period of history commonly referred to as the Age of Exploration".
The map is considered unlikely to be original, and was probably translated into Turkish by Ahmed.
The map has specific European characteristics, in that it includes the use of Western terms, suggesting Ahmed translated an older map into Turkish. In fact, throughout the map   s accompanying text, Ahmed emphasizes translation, stating that he    translated it from the language and alphabet of the Europeans into that of the Muslims   . A further argument made against Ahmed's authorship is that the    heart-shaped form of the map had already been used by earlier European cartographers   . 
The map has been tentatively linked to several other geographers, including Giovanni Battista Ramusio. It has also been argued that it shares similarities with a map by the French cartographer Orontius, published in 1536.
Ahmed claimed the map was made for Ottoman princes, and some of the sons of Suleyman the Magnificent were interested in maps of the world and had looked to Venice for their production. This resulted in the development of Ottoman-Venetian relations, which offered "new interpretations of Venetian attitudes to the production of world maps for Ottoman clients".
The map's printing in Venice helps to highlight aspects of Ottoman-Venetian relations. In the minds of Venetian publishers, it would be    a promising venture to produce a world-map for sale in the Muslim world   , and so the production of world maps was financially rewarding for European publishers. Maps in the Turkish language were in demand by the Ottoman Empire, and maps were translated into Turkish to satisfy that market.
Nothing is known of Hajji Ahmed himself, other than his own account of his life recorded in the map text.
According to the story, Ahmed was educated in Fez, and when a European nobleman purchased him, he was able to continue to practice his Islamic religion.