The city-owned BKV runs an extensive network of surface mass transportation, with the emphasis on buses. The dark blue liveried bus fleet includes 1457 vehicles on 215 routes and the trolleybuses in red livery are operated on 14 lines. The night service is provided exclusively by buses. The articulated bus is a hallmark of Budapest; both diesel and ETB bendy vehicles have been running since the late 1950s and still form the majority of BKV's fleet.
In recent years, the bus service has been increasingly plagued by traffic jams as car use has increased and the narrow, congested streets of Budapest rarely allow for separate bus-lanes. Many motorists ignore bus-lane markings anyway, while few traffic lights fast-gate buses. The lamentable road conditions in Budapest incur continually high vehicle maintenance costs and inconvenience for bus passengers. Working conditions (esp. the age of the vehicles) and competitive wages are a serious issue as bus drivers are often lured to the trucking industry. Yet, the city council traditionally favours a bus service, owing to its flexibility and lower initial costs; some 150 brand new articulated buses were procured in 2004-2006.
BKV operates 27 city tram lines and 4 commuter railway lines into the suburban agglomeration. The once-extensive network of tram tracks and the brown striped yellow streetcars were a characteristic of Budapest, but the network was curtailed after the fall of Communism, owing to lack of funding. Line 4-6 is still the largest capacity tram-line in Europe. The streetcar and cogwheel railway services are now set to have a renaissance as there is no further road capacity for bus lanes in Budapest. Financing is being sought from the EU to help replace the more than 40-year-old rolling stock, starting with new 54-meter long Siemens Combino Supra giants intended for the 4-6 line.
The underground railway network is less extensive, including two full-sized metros (red M2, running roughly east-west and blue M3, north-south) utilizing Soviet technology, and the MFAV (or Foldalatti), a small-sized underground tramway, which is over 100 years old. A third full-sized metro (M4) should be completed by 2011, as well as a high speed rail link to Ferihegy BUD international airport, which is currently served by bus from the end of the M3 metro line. &ndash; ''See the main article Budapest Metro.'' In 2005 a "BEB" monthly pass was introduced for a 10% extra cost over the regular price, which permitted the use of the MAV national railway lines within the city area, effectively increasing the tracked service for BKV's passengers. Since 2009, all monthly (and 15-day) passes, now called a "Budapest Pass", are valid on the national railway and suburban bus lines within city boundaries.
As of 2009, approximately 54% of the passenger traffic in Budapest, a city of 1.7 million inhabitants, is still carried by BKV vehicles, with the remaining 46% using private vehicles. During 2003 a total of 1.4 billion people travelled by BKV. During the Socialist era, Budapest had 2 million residents and its public vs. private transport ratio (the so-called modal split) was 80% : 20% in favor of mass transit. This ratio was a result of artificial restriction: COMECON rules did not allow Hungary to produce private cars domestically and Dacia / Lada / Skoda / Trabant car imports were never enough. (After the Iron Curtain fell, a large number of second hand cars were imported from Austria and Western Europe, leading to rapid private motorisation of Budapest's streets.)
Since the fall of communism BKV has been constantly plagued by a lack of funding and its fleet is becoming obsolete; as of October 2009 the average BKV diesel bus is 16,5 years old and the oldest one of the 1400 strong fleet is 24 years old, with 3,5 million kilometers to its track record. BKV operates on a net-loss basis; state-mandated ticket prices cover less than 50% of running costs. 
The state circumvents EU regulations by failing to fully compensate the BKV company for operating costs and amortization, and so funds for new vehicles are scarce. BKV has survived by selling off some of its old garage and repair bases for mall and housing development.
In 2004-2006, 150 low-floor Volvo 7700A articulated buses were acquired via a long term leasing agreement from Volvo Polska, to provide a replacement service during months of extensive reconstruction work on the M2 underground line and the lengthy 4-6 tram line. This batch of 150 Volvos represents the first significant new addition to BKV's fleet in five years. A contract has been signed about buying a single large batch of new underground railway trains from Alstom, at considerable discount, for the M4 line (under construction) and the refurbished M2 line. The first trains for M2 have already arrived, but are not in service due to some adaptation problems.
In 2009-2010 investigations into corruption led the police examine all money logs and contracts of the 20-year period individually, to find issues unrelated to the already detected ones. Many high-level employees and independent or in-company participants were arrested and sentenced. This issue led the owner, the Local Government of the Capital City making BKV accept a new Company Inner Regulation System and its assembly enacting local government degrees guaranteeing complete transparency in the contracts, billings, and job descriptions for the owner, and all representatives of its assembly even individually. This regulation was extended to all enterprises owned in mayority by the city council.
The assembly, because of majority of resisting members in the first round ''(according to inner sources, the governing Socialist Party, which had then approx. 50% support in the Capital (without campaigning with the transparency degrees and dissolving the Assembly for it) informed the resisting members of the coalition who belonged to SZDSZ (support 0.1%) that both the transparency degrees in one package and a degree for dissolving the Assembly will be handed in in the following order and should it fail to get majority, the second motion (knowing the behaviour of the opposition) surely will, and after the elections the socialist will push the transparency package through, and govern the city alone. They asked for a second round before a round with the second motion and promised to vote in favour of it.)'' was the last to follow the government's philosophy of transparency.
The government's concept was online transparency of scanned documents and searchable money databases to the public and the press (arbitrarily checked for validity by independent, competing authorities), implemented in comprehensive laws and degrees applying to state-owned and directly local-government related employees and contracts since March 2009. ''(These laws also required taking methodologies used by modern multi-national companies, like money transfers of increasing value intervals have to be confirmed by people of increasing levels in the hierarchy of the relevant sector of the company.)'' These also applied to businesses owned in mayority by state- or local government, but the greater legal independence of the local government of the capital city made it necessary to construct its own transparency package.
BKV uses a paper-based system of tickets and passes; a 32-euro pass allows an adult to travel on any BKV vehicle for one month. There are plans to introduce smartcard passes and tickets within a few years, in an attempt to reduce fare evasion (by approximately 10% of passengers).
Only a minority of regular BKV vehicles are wheelchair accessible: Ik-412 diesel and ETB low-floor buses, Solaris ETB buses, Volvo and Van Hool articulated buses, Localo solo buses and a few stations on the metro system. There are, however, a few small-sized BKV buses, which can be reserved by phone to transport a person using a wheelchair. The M4 metro line will have public elevators installed in every station. Most of the current M2 and M3 metro stations only have escalators.
Currently available regular service line with handicapped compatible low-floor vehicles:
Metro
Tram
Many of the bus and trolleybus lines have some low-floor or low-entry cars:
All buses in Budapest run on diesel fuel.
Mercedes-Benz Citaro owned by Volanbusz
Volvo 7700A owned by Volanbusz
King Long XMQ6121G owned by Volanbusz's subcontractors, T&J Limited and Kontakt-Busz Limited.
Nograd Volan and VT Transman are BKV's subcontractors run some routes by their own vehicles, but those vehicles have blue-grey painting like BKV's, and they are completely integrated in BKV system. Volanbusz or its subsubcontractors runs suburban lines. But they are members of Budapest Transport Organization (BKSZ), so their lines can be used by regular tickets inside the city (300s, 600s, 700s, 800s and 2000s lines).
In the vehicle utastajekoztathato can be found.the successor is in service on lines:18,59,59A,61.
BKV paints its vehicles different colors by type.
The five metro lines are marked on the map in different colours:
The current livery of the M2 and M3 trains is blue (lighter shade than on buses), on M1 vehicles are painted yellow.
A surrealistic thriller titled ''Kontroll'' was filmed in the M2 and M3 metro tunnels during 2002-2003. The movie has won several awards. The ironic beginning of the movie features Botond Aba, former CEO of BKV, who declares that all events and locations shown in the film are purely fictional.