The '''Illinois Senate career of Barack Obama''' stretched from 1997 (when Barack Obama was sworn in to his first term in the Illinois Senate) to 2004 (when he was elected to the United States Senate). Starting in 1993 and throughout his state senate career, Obama also taught constitutional law part-time at the University of Chicago Law School, as a Lecturer from 1992 to 1996 and as a Senior Lecturer from 1996   2004, when he was elected to the U.S. Senate.
On June 27, 1995, Palmer announced she was running for Congress and would be giving up her state Senate seat instead of running for re-election in 1996.
The following week newspapers reported that Palmer-supporter Barack Obama of Hyde Park   who had been announced as chairman of the $49.2 million Chicago Annenberg Challenge on June 22 and whose memoir ''Dreams from My Father'' would be published on July 18   would announce he was running and would be a front-runner for Palmer's state Senate seat.
On September 11, 1995, Illinois Governor Jim Edgar set November 28 as the date for a special primary election to fill the vacancy created by the resignation of Mel Reynolds following his August 1995 conviction.
On November 7, 1995, Obama's mother Ann died of metastatic uterine cancer at the age of 52 in Honolulu.
Obama arrived in Hawaii the following day, remained for his mother's memorial service and returned to Chicago soon after.
On December 11, 1995   the first filing day for nominating petitions   Obama filed his nominating petitions with over 3,000 signatures; perennial unsuccessful candidate Ulmer Lynch, Jr. also filed nominating petitions to run for the 13th District state Senate seat.
Palmer then drove to Springfield to file her nominating petitions; also filing nominating petitions on the last filing day were first-time candidates Gha-is Askia and Marc Ewell.
On January 17, 1996, Palmer announced she was withdrawing her bid for re-election because she was a couple of hundred signatures short of the 757 needed to earn a place on the ballot after almost two-thirds of the 1,580 signatures on her nominating petitions were found to be invalid.
The Chicago Board of Election Commissioners had previously sustained an objection to the nominating petitions of Lynch because of insufficient valid signatures, and subsequently also sustained objections to the nominating petitions of Askia and Ewell because of insufficient valid signatures.
In the March 19, 1996 primary election, Obama, running unopposed on the ballot, won the Democratic nomination for state Senator for the 13th District.
On January 8, 1997, Obama was sworn in for a two-year term as state Senator for the 13th District, which was then a T-shaped district that spanned Chicago South Side neighborhoods from Hyde Park-Kenwood south through South Shore and from the lakefront west through Chicago Lawn.
In the March 17, 1998 primary election, Obama, running unopposed on the ballot, won the Democratic nomination for state Senator for the 13th District, and Yesse Yehudah, running unopposed on the ballot, won the Republican nomination.
On September 5, 2001, Democrats won a lottery that added a tie-breaking ninth member to the bipartisan state Legislative Redistricting Commission, which on September 25, by a 5   4 party-line vote, approved the Democratic "Currie II as amended by the Bilandic Amendment" map.
In the March 19, 2002 primary election, Obama, running unopposed on the ballot, won the Democratic nomination for state Senator for the new 13th District.
Early in his first term, the just-retired U.S. Senator Paul Simon called a longtime Obama mentor, judge and former congressman Abner Mikva. Simon suggested that Mikva recommend Obama to Emil Jones, Jr., the powerful Democratic leader of the state Senate. "'Say, our friend Barack Obama has a chance to push this campaign finance bill through,'" Simon said in a telephone conversation, as recounted by Mikva in a 2008 interview. "'Why don   t you call your friend Emil Jones and tell him how good he is.'" With Jones' support, Obama helped pass a sweeping law that banned most gifts from lobbyists and personal use of campaign funds by state legislators.Becker, Jo and Drew, Christopher, , ''The New York Times'', May 11, 2008, retrieved July 28, 2008
During his first years as a state senator, Obama was a co-sponsor of a bill which re-structured the Illinois welfare program into the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) program. He was also involved in various pieces of legislation which established a $100 million Earned Income Tax Credit for working families, increased child care subsidies for low-income families, and required advance notice before mass layoffs and plant closings.
 The support of some veteran Democratic fundraisers who saw Obama as a rising star, along with support of African-American entrepreneurs, helped him keep pace with Rush's fundraising in the district's most expensive race ever.
During the campaign, Rush charged that Obama was not sufficiently rooted in Chicago's black neighborhoods to represent constituents' concerns, and also benefitted from an outpouring of sympathy when his son was shot to death shortly before the election. Obama said Rush was a part of "a politics that is rooted in the past" and said he himself could build bridges with whites to get things done. But while Obama did well in his own Hyde Park base, he didn't get enough support from the surrounding black neighborhoods. Starting with just 10 percent name recognition, Obama went on to get only 31 percent of the votes, losing by a more than 2-to-1 margin despite winning among white voters. See also:   and   Despite losing the 2000 Congressional primary and not running for Illinois Senate as he had in 1996, 1998, and 2002, Obama did not lose his Illinois Senate seat because the Illinois Senate elections are on a 2-4-4 year cycle.Illinois Constitution Article IV, Section 2(a) http://www.ilga.gov/commission/lrb/con4.htm
After losing the primary for U.S. Congress to Bobby Rush, Obama worked to repair relations with black politicians and clergy members, telling them he bore no grudges against the victor. He also became more responsive to requests for state funding, getting money for churches and community groups in his district. State Senator Donne E. Trotter, then the top Democrat on the Senate Appropriations Committee, said in 2008 that he knew Obama was responding more to funding requests "because the community groups in his district stopped coming to me".
In September 2001, Democrats won a lottery to redraw legislative districts that had been drawn ten years earlier by Republicans and had helped ensure ten uninterrupted years of Republican control of the Illinois Senate.
He resigned from the Illinois Senate in November 2004 following his election to the U.S. Senate.