What angle does water make with a capillary tube?     Preceding   comment added by   ( ) 00:21, 2 April 2008 (UTC) 
What the problem with so-called "killer" strangelets here?    ( ) 01:14, 2 April 2008 (UTC)
I'm reminded of this question by the recent news about the Virgle Project: Supposing that Mars is terraformed and permanent human settlements are established, what would be the physiological effect of the planet's low gravity on the generations of humans living there, having been gestated and raised there? Would they become taller and more gracile, as I read in some science fiction book? Would they be unable to walk on Earth? --  ( ) 02:27, 2 April 2008 (UTC)
I saw a website that showed a video of some pants made from it with a person sliding on pavement and the "armalith" was very resistant to damage.  The website is    
My google search had very little information and wiki had nothing.  ( ) 03:19, 2 April 2008 (UTC)
What is the combustion equation for acetone in air?    ( ) 05:10, 2 April 2008 (UTC) 
I want to make a cheap solar heating system for homes using pipes only and a pump motor that circulates the water which  is all connected to a geyser. The pipes will be connected in parallel like a big web and sit on the roof. What kind of pipe would be suitable, what kind of plastic? Does it have to be weather proof and high pressure and able to take high temperatures? Is copper pipe better, maybe with a black plastic coating on the outside? What length of pipe would be effective? I want to help the poor who cant afford normal solar panel or tube heating systems and I also want to help combat global warming. Any advice or help would be greatly appreciated. Thanks so much.
I've read somwhere that in places like Isreal they use ponds with a freah water layer and a salt water layer beneath. The reash water layer acts as insulation while the salt water absorbs heat. Salt might work in place of a die. I know for sure that chromium oxide will.    ( ) 22:05, 2 April 2008 (UTC) 
My heart is completely broken and I cannot function because my other half does not want to be with me anymore.  We have been together for several years.  It feels like I am dying inside and food tastes like sawdust.  What, if any at all, are there any benefits for a human to endure this?  Is there some sort of biological benefit to this?--  ( ) 18:35, 2 April 2008 (UTC)