The '''State of Sequoyah''' was the proposed name for a state to be established in the eastern part of present-day Oklahoma. In 1905, faced by proposals to end their tribal governments, Native Americans of the Five Civilized Tribes in Indian Territory proposed such a state as a means to retain some control of their land. Their intention was to have a state under Native American constitution and rule. The proposed state was named in honor of Sequoyah, the member of the Cherokee Nation who had created a writing system for the Cherokee language.
From 1890 onward, the land that now forms the State of Oklahoma was made up of the Oklahoma Territory (to the west), and the Indian Territory (to the east). The Indian Territory, as its name suggests, had a large Native American population, but European-American settlers had also continued to arrive. The territory had been reduced by required land cessions after the Civil War and through other treaties with the United States. In the 1900 US Census, Native Americans composed 13.4 percent of the population in the state. Indians made up about 7.2 percent of the population of the combined territory.
The Native American movement to secure statehood for the Indian Territory began in 1902 with a convention in Eufaula. It consisted of representatives of the Five Civilized Tribes. The representatives met again in 1903 to organize a constitutional convention to be held in 1905.
The Sequoyah Constitutional Convention met in Muskogee, on August 21, 1905. General Pleasant Porter, Principal Chief of the Creek Nation, was selected as president of the convention. The elected delegates decided that the executive officers of the Five Civilized Tribes would also be appointed as vice-presidents: William C. Rogers, Principal Chief of the Cherokees; William H. Murray, appointed by Chickasaw Governor Douglas H. Johnston to represent the Chickasaws; Chief Green McCurtain of the Choctaws; Chief John Brown of the Seminoles; and Charles N. Haskell, selected to represent the Creeks (as General Porter had been elected President). Muscogee journalist Alexander Posey served as secretary.
The convention drafted a constitution, drew up a plan of organization for the government, put together a map showing the counties to be established, and elected delegates to go to the United States Congress to petition for statehood. The convention's proposals were then put to a referendum in the Indian Territory, where they were overwhelmingly endorsed.
The delegation received a cool reception in Washington. Eastern politicians, fearing the admission of two more Western states, with a relative increase in political power, put pressure on the U.S. President, Theodore Roosevelt. He ruled that the Indian and Oklahoma Territories would be granted statehood only as a combined state.
The hard work of the Sequoyah State Constitutional Convention was not entirely lost. When representatives from Indian Territory joined the Oklahoma State Constitutional Convention in Guthrie in 1906, they brought their constitutional experience with them. The Sequoyah Constitution served in large part as the basis for the constitution of the State of Oklahoma, which was admitted in 1907 after the merger of the two territories.
Harry Turtledove's alternate history novel ''How Few Remain'' features victory by the Confederate States of America. In this version, they control the Indian Territory, which is admitted to the Confederacy as the Confederate State of Sequoyah. The state is populated almost completely by various tribes, with a small population of whites and some black laborers. The state is generally pro-Confederate, and has a particularly hostile attitude towards the United States. In the ''Great War'' series of sequels, Sequoyah is conquered by the United States during the First World War. It then quickly fills with Northern settlers. The population changes so much that a referendum on rejoining the Confederacy fails shortly before the Second World War breaks out.