According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of 721&nbsp;square miles (1,868&nbsp;km  ).It is the fifth largest county in Vermont. It is larger than the nation of Guadeloupe and smaller than the country of Mauritius.
There are 37.7 persons per square mile. 698&nbsp;square miles (1,807&nbsp;km  ) is land and 23&nbsp;square miles (61&nbsp;km  ) (3.25%) is water.
The county lies between the eastern and western ranges of the Green Mountains.
It has the largest area of the three counties comprising the Northeast Kingdom.
The highest point in the county is Jay Peak in the town of Jay, at . The lowest is the surface of Lake Memphremagog at .
The county is mainly drained by four river systems: the Barton, the Black, the Clyde and the Missisquoi River. The first three run north. The last meanders west through Canada and the U.S. Two exceptions are Greensboro and the southern part of Glover which drain south into the Passumpsic River, a tiny stretch of which is also in Orleans County, and Craftsbury which drains west into the Lamoille.
The county is unique in eastern Vermont for mostly draining north as a part of the St. Lawrence River basin. All Vermont counties directly to the south (and east of the Green Mountains) drain into the Connecticut River, as does much of Essex county, to the east.
The Barton River drains Crystal Lake, runs north through Barton, Brownington, Coventry and drains through Newport into Lake Memphremagog. The Barton River watershed also includes the towns of Derby, Irasburg, Westmore, and the water bodies of Lake Willoughby, Crystal Lake, and Shadow and Parker ponds.
The Black River is about  in length. It rises in some ponds in Craftsbury, and passes through Albany, Irasburg, and Coventry. It reaches Lake Memphremagog at Salem. The watershed also includes Albany, Lake Eligo and the Hosmer Ponds.
The Clyde River has four hydroelectric dams before reaching Lake Memphremagog. The watershed includes Brighton (Essex County), Charleston, Morgan (Essex County), Derby, Seymour Pond, Echo Lakes, and Island, Clyde and Pensioner ponds.
Additionally, the Canadian rivers of Coaticook and Tomifobia watersheds include Derby, Holland, and Norton Pond, Holland Pond, and Great and Little Averill Ponds.
The county contains more ponds than any other in the state.
The county contains three state forests: Hazen's Notch, Jay, and Willoughby.
The average growing season is about 130 frost-free days in the Newport area. As this is the lowest point in the county, the growing season for other places in the county which are more elevated, should be less.
Tornadoes have struck the county four times from 1950   1995, all F1s. One caused an injury. This level is 2.7 times below than the national average.
As in all Vermont counties, there is a small executive function which is mostly consolidated at the state level. Remaining county government is judicial. There are no "county taxes."
In 2007, median property taxes in the county were $1,940, placing it 265 out of 1,817 counties in the nation with populations over 20,000.
The budget for 2006 was $428,612.51. Town taxes accounted for over 65% of this money. The budget was all fulfilled by the state. There are no "county taxes" in Vermont. Almost 32% of the money was spent on courthouse personnel. Over 22% of the money was spent on the Sheriff Department's expenses.
The Assistant, or "Side," Judges, Superior Court, approve the budget for county expenses.
The Superior, Family and Probate courts are all located at 247 Main Street, Newport Vermont.
Superior Court presiding judge (appointed by the state) - Christina Reiss
Family court presiding judge - Christina Reiss
The District Court is located at 217 Main Street, Newport, Vermont, as is the State Attorney.
The District court presiding judge is Walter Morris. The Court Manager is Tina de la Bruere. The State's Attorney (elected) is Keith Flynn.
The sheriff's office and jail facilities are located at 255 Main Street, Newport, Vermont, next to the Superior Court building. The sheriff, who is normally elected, is Kirk Martin. He was appointed by the governor to fill the remaining two years for Lance Bowen, who resigned for health reasons.
The Essex-Orleans Senate district includes all of Orleans County, as well as parts or all of Essex County, Franklin County and Lamoille County. It is represented in the Vermont Senate by Vincent Illuzzi (R) and Robert A. Starr (D).
Normally voting among the most conservative counties in Vermont, the county overwhelmingly supported the Democratic presidential candidate in 2008 with nearly 63% of the vote. No town supported the Republican opponent. Nevertheless, the county elected only Republicans to the state senate and legislature and voted overwhelmingly for a Republican governor and lieutenant governor, yet Democratic for all other state offices.
With one exception in the legislature for one district, the vote was not close for any office.
A record seventy-three percent of the voters turned out for the general election in 2000.
The county shares the same pre-Columbian history with the Northeast Kingdom.
In 1753, the Abenakis brought the ransomed John Stark down Lake Memphremagog and came ashore where Newport is now. They then traveled southeast to his home in New Hampshire.
Rogers' Rangers were forced to retreat through the county following their attack on Saint-Francis, Quebec in 1759. To confound their avenging pursuers, they split up on the east shore of Lake Memphremagog. One group followed the Clyde River. Another followed the Barton River south to the falls at the outlet of Crystal Lake where they were able to catch fish. From there, they continued south over the summit into the Passumpsic River Valley.
The British Crown sent out surveyors to mark the border between its two colonies of Canada and America in accordance with the Quebec Act of 1774. This was supposed to be on the 45th parallel. The result, however was a crooked line up to  north of this intended border. This was resolved in favor of the crooked line by the Webster   Ashburton Treaty of 1842. This affected Orleans County, particularly Derby Line, which would have otherwise reverted to Canada.
In 1779 or 1780, General Moses Hazen constructed the Bayley-Hazen Military Road from Newbury, Vermont through Hardwick, Greensboro, Craftsbury, and Albany to Hazen's Notch in northern Vermont. This purpose of this road was to invade Canada. It was never used for that purpose, but was instrumental in the settlement of this area. However, it was five or more years before the wilderness was inhabited by other than a few Abenaki Indians, and that during the summer.
Vermont was divided into two counties in March, 1778.  In 1781 the legislature divided the northernmost county, Cumberland, into three counties: Windham and Windsor, located about where they are now. The northern remainder was called Orange county. This latter tract nearly corresponded with the old New York county of Gloucester, organized by that province March 16, 1770, with Newbury as the shire town.
The state granted a town to Ebenezer Crafts, and sixty-three associates, on November 6, 1780. The town name was changed to Craftsbury, in honor of Ebenezer Crafts on October 27, 1790. Crafts was the first settler in the county.Gazetteer of Lamoille and Orleans Counties, VT.; 1883-1884, Compiled and Published by Hamilton Child; May 1887
On September 3, 1783, as a result of the signing of the Treaty of Paris the Revolutionary War ended with Great Britain recognizing the independence of the United States. Vermont's border with Quebec was established at 45 degrees north latitude.
From 1791 to 1793, Timothy Hinman built what is now called the "Hinman Settler Road" linking Greensboro north to Derby and Canada.
On November 5, 1792, the legislature divided Chittenden and Orange counties into six separate counties, as follows: Chittenden, Orange, Franklin, Caledonia, Essex, and Orleans.  No reason is given for the county being named after Orleans, France.
Orleans lost territory when the new Jefferson county was created in 1797. 
In 1810, Runaway Pond suddenly flooded the Barton River Valley with millions of gallons water in the greatest natural catastrophe in Orleans County post-Columbian history. Incredibly, no lives were lost.
On December 27, 1813, the county was invaded by British militia from nearby Stanstead, Quebec, during the War of 1812 in order to destroy an undefended barracks at Derby and to forage for supplies. No one was injured. Until the invasion, local inhabitants, like most New Englanders, opposed the war. A number had smuggled supplies to the British. After the invasion, their enthusiasm for their neighbors diminished substantially. 
June 1816 brought  of snow to the county followed by agricultural devastation. 1816 became known as the Year without a summer.
When Lamoille county was formed in October 1835, Orleans lost the towns of Eden, Hyde Park, Morristown, and Wolcott.
In 1858, Barton (and Orleans County) obtained a triangular piece of land from Sheffield (and Caledonia County) which included all of May Pond, the entire area south of Crystal Lake, and the village of South Barton.
In 1864, 267 men from the 11th Vermont Infantry were captured at the Weldon Railroad in the Overland campaign.  today better known as the Battle of Jerusalem Plank Road. It was a considerable source of local concern when it was learned that these prisoners had been taken to Andersonville prison, a place known, even then, for its poor living conditions. 54 of these prisoners were from Orleans County. Many of them died in prison.
French immigration into the county started before the Civil War. It continued afterwards.
Like the rest of the state, Orleans County sent up to one-quarter of its eligible men to the Civil War. Ten percent of these died. Others came back too maimed to continue working their farms, which most volunteers had left. The sudden offering of many farms for sale in the mid-1860s resulted in a precipitous drop in farm prices. Nearby French-Canadians took advantage of this. As a result of this and loss of native farm labor to other states, Vermont, particularly the northern part, saw many migrants then and through the turn of the twentieth century.
After increasing in population since its founding, the county began losing population starting in 1900. It reached a twentieth century low in population in 1960 at 20,143. The population has risen ever since.
In 1903, a state law allowed each town to decide whether to permit the sale of liquor within their boundaries. By 1905, no town in the county allowed the sale of alcoholic beverages. The change was not that dramatic since state law had theoretically forbidden alcohol prior to 1903, but this law was unevenly enforced.
In 1967, researcher and scientist Gerald Bull constructed a laboratory for hisSpace Research Corporation in Highwater, just north of the county's Canadian border. The property overlapped into the county in North Troy. His intent was to fire research packages into orbit using heavy artillery.
In 2004, what was then billed as the final concert of the band Phish was held in Coventry on August 14   15. The concert was the single largest gathering of people in the town's history. With 70,000 tickets sold, Coventry's augmented population was one of the largest in the state's history.
The county has twenty-three places on the National Register of Historic Places.
In 2008, the state notified residents of Albany, Craftsbury, Irasburg, Lowell, Newport Town, Troy, Westfield and six towns in the adjacent counties of Lamoille and Franklin, that a review of health records from 1995 to 2006 had revealed that residents within  of the former asbestos mine on Belividere Mountain had higher than normal rates of contracting asbestosis. The state and federal government continues to study this problem. A critic replied that the entire basis of the study were three unidentified people who died from asbestosis 1995-2005 out of a total population of 16,700. In April 2009 the Vermont Department of health released a revised study which found that all of deaths related to the asbestos mine were caused by occupational exposure. The report also concluded that people living near the mines had no increased risk of asbestos related illness than people living anywhere else in Vermont. However, the site will still need to be cleaned up. In 2009, the expected cost of cleanup was $300 million.
See Historical U.S. Census Totals for Orleans County, Vermont.
Of the four Vermont counties bordering Canada, Orleans County is the largest. That said, all four counties have the lowest population in Vermont.
At the 2000 census
The racial makeup of the county
94.5% were born in the United States. 90.58% spoke English at home, while 7.72% spoke French.
In the county, the population was distributed by age as follows: 
The median age was 39 years.
For every 100 females there were 98.60 males.
For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 95.10 males.
In 2000, the following were counted by denomination:
An estimated 2,500 military veterans reside in the county.
Orleans County has the fifth lowest average household spending in the country.
In 2004, Orleans County had the least expensive rental housing in Vermont. In 2008, one-third of  residential housing were used as second homes.
The poverty rate for Orleans County was highest in Vermont for 2003. Median wages were the second lowest in the state.
In March 2008, the unemployment rate was 9.1% seasonally uncorrected, the highest in the state, which averaged 5.3%.
There were 838 private non-farm establishments, employing 7,392 people. In 2002, there was $238 million manufacturer's shipments. That year, the county had $240 million in retail sales. Retail sales per capita were $9,000. 24% of firms were owned by women.
In 2003, there were 194 dairy farms in the county. This was the third largest number in the state. In March 2010, the number of dairy farms had declined to 139. In March 2007 county farms produced  of milk. The total number of farms increased between 1992 and 2007. Total area farmed decreased from  in 1992 to  in 2007.
For forest products, from 1988 to 2004, Orleans County showed the greatest employment increase in the state.
There are five pharmacies in the county, three are regional chains. When the Rite Aid drugstores bought the Brooks pharmacies in 2007, this would have reduced competition by one in the area. The Vermont Attorney General intervened and one of the two drugstores will be sold to a competitor.
There are four national chain fast food restaurants in the county, one in Orleans, one in Derby and two in the city of Newport.
There are two regional chain supermarkets in the county, both in Derby. There are local groceries as well.
There is one cinema, a tri-plex, in Newport.
The county is tied for first place in Vermont with the highest percentage of second home ownership.
78.2% of residents had at least a high school education. 16.1% had at least an undergraduate degree.
There are three public high schools in the county: North Country Union High School (1063 students), Lake Region Union High School (396), and Craftsbury Academy (59). Wheeler Mountain Academy, grades 7-12, aids students who have emotional, behavioral or learning challenges. 15 are enrolled. United Christian Academy is a private religious school K-12, enrolling 108 students.
In 2007, the juniors in three public secondary schools in three different schools districts, North Country, Lake Region, and Craftsbury, scored lower than the state averages on standardized tests with one exception. North Country scored better than average in reading. Areas tested were math, reading and writing.
In 2008, there was no correlation between the performance of students on the standardized New England Common Assessment Program tests and poverty (free lunch). The five wealthiest schools were among the ten worst performers; of the five poorest schools, three were among the top ten performers in the county. Schools in the Orleans Central Supervisory Union(the top four) appeared to outperform the North Country Supervisory Union (eight out of ten worst performing).
There are about 85 home schooled students in the county, grades 1-12.
The Central Orleans Family Education Center was establishined in 2002 to offer childcare, pre-K programs, after-school programs, and migrant education classes in the village of Orleans.
Craftsbury Common is home to Sterling College, an accredited four year institution with nearly 100 students.
The city of Newport is home to a branch of the Community College of Vermont which enrolls nearly 300 students. It awards an Associate's Degree for these undergraduate studies.
There are thirteen libraries in the county, all of them 501(c) corporations. This includes two full time libraries in Derby Line and the city of Newport. The rest often have one part-time paid librarian. Much of the staff are volunteers. One is endowed. The rest depend upon fundraising and municipal contributions.
With the French immigrants came their religion, Catholicism, which is the plurality religion in the county today. Formal dance included the galop.
There are eighteen towns and one city in the county.
Most towns contract with the County Sheriff for policing.
Fairpoint Communications supplies hard line telephone coverage for the entire county.
In 2007, AT&T bought out Unicel in Orleans County, and in the next year replaced Unicel.
Verizon Wireless covers Newport city and the south Derby-I-91 area. Owl's Head in Canada may provide "roaming" service in the North part of the county.
The opening of Interstate 91 north from Barton on November 9, 1972 and opening south from the county in 1978 had an impact on the county comparable to the opening of the railway a century earlier. In 1980, the county registered its first population gain in a century.
The interstate has five exits in the county. Two are in the town of Barton, servicing the villages of Barton and Orleans; three are in the town of Derby: the southernmost one, exit 27, actually services Newport city a mile away, 28 services village of Derby Center and the shopping areas, 29, the village of Derby Line. 
Derby has the most road mileage, 102; Westfield the least with 31.
The county has seven stoplights, six in the city of Newport and one in Derby. Five are on Route 5.
The RCT (Rural Community Transportation), a non-profit organization, runs out of Saint Johnsbury and services Caledonia, Essex, Lamoille and Orleans Counties. For general use, there are four buses north and south during the week from west Newport city to Derby Center, and two buses each way on Saturday. The fare is US 25 cents.
There are no stops in the county. A line once ran up the east side of Lake Memphremagog, but this line has been abandoned and in some cases, torn up for use as hiking trails. This crossed the line near Beebe. The line still in operation goes northwest to Canada through North Troy.
The county is served by the Newport State Airport. It contains two runways of  each 05-23, and 18-36.
The Nature Conservancy has acted to protect areas against development. Specific areas in the county include: May Pond, Barton, Wheeler Mountain, the north beach at Willoughby Lake, the Westmore Town Forest, the Willoughby Falls Wildlife Management Area, and the South Bay Wildlife Management Area (Memphremagog).