The company was founded in 1986 in Milan by Ennio Capasa, fresh from working in Japan as an assistant to Yohji Yamamoto, and by his brother Carlo. Its first womenswear collection was presented in Milan in the same year. In 1991 the    Woman Collection    was presented in Paris. Between 1995 and 1998 the fashion house opened stores in Milan, New York, Rome, Los Angeles and Paris.
In 2000 a menswear collection was streamed online in collaboration with Kataweb. Over the following three years the company extended its range of products to include perfumes, eyewear, ready to wear apparel and footwear, plus accessories tageted at the younger generations.
In 2010 the Japanese-Chinese merchant bank Sequedge acquired a  acquired a 17% stake in the company, with an option to with an option to double that holding by the end of 2011., imagesfashion.com, 24 April 2010.
The company   s Thiene factory is responsible for the man and woman   s Ready To Wear production. The factory is mainly responsible for: cutting-room, pattern-making and finished product quality control.
CN Shoes factory, based in Fosso, develops and produces footwear. 
Leather bags and leather accessories are produced by selected partners and commercialised by CN Production.
Leather clothing production is licensed to Leather Company, that works in exclusive for Costume National. 
Costume National has 5 flagship stores which were designed with the same concept of classical  edginess and minimalism. 
C   N   C Costume National, produced and distributed through a licensing agreement with ITTIERRE, offers Ready To Wear apparel for Men and Women as well as footwear and accessories.
ITTIERRE, the Isernia based company of the Holding, has become the undisputed leader of young fashion. 
PLUS IT, the accessories division which features shoes, bags and a line of small accessories, also has a worldwide distribution network. 
The production facilities are located in Italy, while the distribution has a worldwide network.
1997: Ennio Capasa was invited to show his Costume National Homme Collection in Florence by Pitti Immagine Uomo     51st edition.
2003: Ennio Capasa is declared designer of the year in Italy, winning La Kore, the Academy Awards of Italian Fashion, for his creations.
2004: Ennio Capasa receives an award as Designer of the Year in the    Contemporary Chic    category presenting in Sanremo Costume National and Costume National Homme FW2004/2005 Collections.
2005: Ennio Capasa is declared designer of the year in Italy, winning La Kore for the second time. He also received    Premio Barocco    for his work.
2006: Ennio Capasa received    Premio Renoir    from Apulia, his homeland region.
2007: He receives the    Moving Fashion    Award during the Rome Film Festival for the use of techniques that merge both the fashion and the movie industry.
2009: Ennio Capasa receives for the Solar Bag, a bag shown for the first time for C   N   C Costume National FW2008/2009 Collection, the    Chi e Chi Award    for the best eco-friendly fashion product.
2010: Homme,Costume National male fragrance, is rewarded by the Accademia del Profumo with the    Best Made in Italy Product    Award.
In 2005 Ennio Capasa created the DUCATI Black Dogo: a motorcycle similar to the Argentine mastiff it got its name from. This collaboration allowed him to design a series of special items of clothing under the C   N   C Costume National Ducati label.
To celebrate its 21st anniversary in 2007, the company presented the book ''21'' (a photographic journal of Capasa   s career), a version of the Absolut Vodka bottle dressed in black vinyl with images of two catwomen, the Alfa 147 C   N   C 21 (a limited edition car costume), a unisex fragrance called    Costume National 21   , and a line of luxury sneakers under the name    Costume National Active   .
During Milan Design Week of 2009 the Dutch designer Maarten Baas presented his show-event entitled    Real Time    in the C   N   C Costume National showroom.  C   N   C Costume National showed the SS2010 Collection in Piazza Duomo in front of 40.000 guests, rather than to a limitied number of    those who are active in the industry   . To celebrate Christmas 2009 the company participated in the Water Project, an Amref initiative.
In 2010 C   N   C Costume National showed the FW2010/2011 Collection at the Teatro dell   Arte of the Triennale di Milano.
In 2009 the company   s    Solar Bag   , which featured solar panels which charged a battery  concealed in the lining able to supply power to mobile phones, iPods and other digital accessories, received the    Chi e Chi Award    for the best eco-friendly fashion product. In 2008 Ennio Capasa designed a limited edition t-shirt to support the Climate Project, an Al Gore initiative. To celebrate Christmas 2008 Costume National collaborated with Planete Urgence, an organization dedicated to environmental and social change, in a    Plant a Tree    project.