Germanna Community College is one of the twenty-three community colleges in Virginia that comprise the Virginia Community College System. It is a two-year public institution of higher education established in 1970. The College serves the residents of Caroline, Culpeper, King George, Madison, Orange, Spotsylvania, and Stafford counties and the City of Fredericksburg.
Germanna Community College is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools, Commission on Colleges to award Associate's degrees. The college's Associate in Applied Science nursing program is also accredited by the National League for Nursing Accrediting Commission and both the Associate in Applied Science nursing and practical nursing certificate programs are approved by the Virginia Board of Nursing.
The College is governed by policies set by the State Board for Community Colleges with support and advice from the Germanna Community College Board. Primary funding for the College is provided by the State, supplemented by contributions from seven counties and one city and by student tuition.
Germanna Community College is a public institution of higher education in the Virginia Community College System.
Fredericksburg Area Campus 
The Fredericksburg Area Campus is located at Lee   s Hill in Spotsylvania County near the intersection of Interstate 95 at Routes 1 and 17 South. Phase I of the Fredericksburg Area Campus opened January, 1997. 
The  building includes classrooms, laboratories, library, student lounge, bookstore, and offices for faculty and administrative staff to provide a full range of services to students. The College received funds during the 2000 legislative session to construct a second building at the campus. Additional facilities, including tennis courts, playing fields, nature trails, jogging paths, and picnic areas, are planned for future development of the  campus.
Phase II, The Workforce Development and Technology Center, opened in October 2004, is a  building devoted to the use of technology for the delivery of instruction and advanced technology training programs.
Located at the junction of U.S. Route 29 and State Route 3 adjacent to the town of Culpeper, the Germanna Center for Advanced Technology occupies . Built on two levels, the  facility is designed primarily for workforce development instruction and technology training. A wide variety of credit classes are also offered. 
The Locust Grove campus is located on Route 3 midway between Culpeper and Fredericksburg. The campus consists of 100 wooded acres adjacent to the Rapidan River in Orange County. 
The campus building of approximately  includes classrooms, laboratories (including a state-of-the-art technologies laboratory), a wellness center, bookstore, administrative and faculty offices, a library, information services, business office, and student lounge. Outdoor facilities include tennis courts and a playing field, as well as nature trails, jogging paths, and a picnic area.
Phase III will be a science and library building. The plans are to break ground in January, 2011.