Geotagging is gaining popularity with photographers to produce geotagged photographs. A few cameras have built-in geolocation capability.  Most do not, so many photographers rely on external GPS receivers to determine location.  Location may be inserted immediately into the picture file by tethering with Bluetooth or suitable wired connection, which are about as rare in cameras as the built-in autogeotagging feature, or later using a user's computer or a geotagging photo sharing web site.  It has even been proposed that in future, it may be possible to deduce the locations of photos purely by comparison with large numbers of geotagged photos.
GPS units, internal or external, require a lock from at least three satellites (for position), which usually requires up to 60 seconds.  However, acquisition time is decreasing rapidly with hardware improvements.  Some 21st century GPS receivers use cell tower location and one global positioning satellite to obtain a faster lock on location.  This technology known as assisted GPS (aGPS) is becoming more popular in cellular phones since it leverages cell tower locations.
One alternative to GPS is WiFi triangulation which uses the MAC addresses of nearby wireless access points to determine position.  Automatic geotagging relies on media acquisition devices that contain GPS, aGPS, or WiFi or other local positioning systems.  Some camera phones are also equipped to use the methods of mobile phone tracking.  Some geotagging techniques rely on post-processing of media, recorded tracks and/or MAC addresses, but this cannot be used for real-time geotagging.
With numbers of separate GPS receivers and cameras declining relative to mobile phones which integrate their functions, , these phones are prime candidates for autogeotagging.  Those that don't include this ability in their stock software may acquire it by use of added application programs.
Wireless data transfer allows real-time mapping of media. Transferring images from cell phones to social networking sites is gaining popularity. Applications for real-time mapping include travel, real estate, geosocial networking, people tracking, security, and geofencing.
Geotagging allows presenting the geotagged media via a map.  Some examples of location-based social networking sites include Flickr, Panoramio and Picasa.   However, presenting the data using online maps is a challenging problem, especially when combined with collaborative mapping.  One example of such a project using real-time geotagging is MapWith.Us.
Since real-time geotagging provides the real-time location of the person operating the device, it is possible to track that person using the data that they publish. Where this is a problem, the geotagger can choose to restrict online access to their data by means of access privileges.