Moved to language desk.
Hi, we get questions at   from time to time along the lines of what kinds of borders to use around pictures, how to arrange the elements of a page to meet good desktop publishing and graphic design principles, etc.  Can you guys recommend any links? - Dan   ( ) 04:06, 10 April 2008 (UTC)
Could someone clear up werewolves for me?
When a werewolf transform during the full moon I remember in a book reading that they transform and wait for the moon to wane.
So that would mean that its like a woman's menstrual cycle once a month for a whole week?
Do they transform back into their humans form when the sun comes up?
Or do they stay like a werewolf until the moon disappears?
I read the werewolf article. It helped, but not a lot. I was just asking this question cause it still is very confusing. I want to write a good werewolf story. I don't want to make it sound fake or untrue to the werewolf.
Lately, stories have said that silver bullets kill vampires. I remember when I was young wart hog when silver bullets killed werewolves not vampires. So I wanted to keep to that mythos. But I still need to know how I'm going to do the transformation. Anything the writer wishes them to.
So could it be for a whole week?  ( ) 15:21, 10 April 2008 (UTC)Cardinal Raven
Thanks for the idea Sturat. Sounds good. Thanks for all the help.  ( ) 17:14, 10 April 2008 (UTC)Cardinal Raven
You might also consider adding the element of Clinical lycanthropy to your story.--  ( ) 21:51, 10 April 2008 (UTC)
My wife has a Fiat car, which is pretty much a budget car in the UK. She is American and she told me that when she tells her friends in the US that she has a Fiat they will be impressed. On the other hand Volkswagen is seen as a quality brand in the UK, but a budget brand in the USA. The pricing follows the perception. Do the car manufacturers deliberately market their cars at different market segments in different countries, or is this something that just happened? --   ( ) 07:21, 10 April 2008 (UTC)
There have been increasing references recently on eco sites to some sort of huge island of plastic debris circling in the Pacific Ocean. The references all seem to contain similar phrases which might indicate a spreading urban myth. Can anyone point me to a site that has photos of this alleged phenomenon.   ( ) 07:49, 10 April 2008 (UTC)
Hey, thanks Julia and Shantavira and Antilived and Richardrj - very helpful, it seems it is true. Now we wonder how long before we can walk from California to Japan.   ( ) 15:21, 10 April 2008 (UTC)
I'm compiling a list of probable reasons why, bottom line, Yahoo wants nothing to do with Microsoft. Do you know other reasons why Yahoo may not be interested in merging with Microsoft besides its low purchase offer? So far, I have the following:
Do you know other reasons besides immediate financial gains or losses why Yahoo has jilted Microsoft?
Starting in 2005 I noticed a serious trend where people were taking their health and diet a lot more seriously. I think there is a health revolution going on. If there were, and in the future we will have people routinely living to 150 and beyond, there would be little or no statistical sign of it now. So just because the average age in the western world is about 73 and the longest-lived person was about 120, that doesn't mean that both average age and maximum age can't be pushed up and up ad infinitum.
And of course your phrasing, 'what are the odds' is a bit naive. Chance has nothing to do with it. Genetics, mental health, geographical location, and the will to live all play huge roles in determining your 'odds' to live to 150.   ( ) 15:37, 10 April 2008 (UTC)
Hi david. Barring a Civilization-ending catalolypse, you will live forever. See Technological Singularity. -  ( ) 02:16, 11 April 2008 (UTC)
Written on my vitaminwater bottle, next to the "1 PETE" plastic symbol is the phrase "30 may be the new 20, but green is definitely the new black. Please recycle". I was wondering what "30 may be the new 20" is referring to. Is it some kind of pop culture reference I'm not aware of?   ( ) 16:11, 10 April 2008 (UTC)
Reading the table at the bottom , I was startled by the caramel-and-chocolate covered vs chocolate covered shortbread. Out of interest, does anyone know if caramel digestives are charged the same VAT as chocolate digestives? (digestive biscuit for those external to the UK)   ( ) 17:03, 10 April 2008 (UTC)
I'm watching the fourth series of ''The Last Detective'', which is set in Willesden.  Several times I've noticed, in the background, a structure that might be a stadium, with an oblique arch over it.  I'll bet one of you knows what it is!       ( ) 23:00, 10 April 2008 (UTC)