The '''''air mass coefficient''''' defines the direct optical path length through the Earth's atmosphere, expressed as a ratio relative to the path length vertically upwards, i.e. at the zenith.
The air mass coefficient can be used to help characterize the solar spectrum after solar radiation has traveled through the atmosphere.
The air mass coefficient is commonly used to characterize the performance of solar cells under standardized conditions, and is often referred to using the syntax "AM" followed by a number.
Solar radiation closely matches a black body radiator at about 5,800&nbsp;K.or more precisely 5,777&nbsp;K as reported in  retrieved 27 April 2011 "Effective Temperature ... 5777&nbsp;K"
As it passes through the atmosphere, sunlight is attenuated by scattering and absorption; the more atmosphere through which it passes, the greater the attenuation.
As the sunlight travels though the atmosphere, chemicals react with the sunlight and absorb certain wavelengths.
Perhaps the best known example is the stripping of ultraviolet light by ozone in the upper atmosphere, which dramatically reduces the amount of short wavelength light reaching the Earth's surface.
A more active component of this process is water vapor, which results in a wide variety of absorption bands at many wavelengths, while molecular nitrogen, oxygen and carbon dioxide add to this process. By the time it reaches the Earth's surface, the spectrum is strongly confined between the far infrared and near ultraviolet.
Atmospheric scattering plays a role, removing higher frequencies from direct sunlight and scattering it about the sky.
This is why the sky appears blue and the sun yellow - more of the higher frequency blue light arrives at the observer via indirect scattered paths; and less blue light follows the direct path, giving the sun a yellow tinge.   
The greater the distance of atmosphere the sunlight travels through, the greater this effect, which is why the sun looks orange/red at dawn and sundown when the sunlight is traveling very obliquely through the atmosphere - progressively more of the blues and greens are removed from the direct rays, leading to orange or red appearance of the sun; and the sky appears pink - because the blues and greens are scattered over such long paths that they are very greatly attenuated before arriving at the observer, resulting in the characteristic pink skies at dawn and sunset.
For a path length L through the atmosphere, for solar radiation incident at angle z relative to the normal to the Earth's surface, the air mass coefficient is:
The air mass number is thus dependent on the Sun's elevation path through the sky and therefore varies with time of day and with the passing seasons of the year, and with the latitude of the observer.
The above approximation overlooks the curvature of the Earth, and is reasonably accurate for values of z up to around 75  . A number of refinements have been proposed to more accurately model the path thickness towards the horizon, such as that proposed by Kasten and Young (1989):
A more comprehensive list of such models is provided in the main article Airmass, for various atmospheric models and experimental data sets.
At sea level the air mass towards the horizon (z = 90  ) is approximately 38.The main article Airmass reports values in the range 36 to 40 for different atmospheric models
Modelling the atmosphere as a simple spherical shell provides a reasonable approximation:
These models are compared in the table below:
This implies that for these purposes the atmosphere can be considered to be effectively concentrated into around the bottom 9&nbsp;km, i.e. essentially all the atmospheric effects are due to the atmospheric mass in the lower half of the Troposphere.  This is a useful and simple model when considering the atmospheric effects on solar intensity. 
The spectrum outside the atmosphere, the 5,800&nbsp;K black body, is referred to as "AM0", meaning "zero atmospheres".  Solar cells used for space power applications, like those on communications satellites are generally characterized using AM0.
The spectrum after travelling through the atmosphere to sea level with the sun directly overhead is referred to, by definition, as "AM1".  This means "one atmosphere".
AM1 (z=0  ) to AM1.1 (z=25  ) is a useful range for estimating performance of solar cells in equatorial and tropical regions. 
Solar panels do not generally operate under exactly one atmosphere's thickness: if the sun is at an angle to the Earth's surface the effective thickness will be greater.  Many of the world's major population centres, and hence solar installations and industry, across Europe, China, Japan, the United States of America and elsewhere (including northern India, southern Africa and Australia) lie in temperate latitudes.  An AM number representing the spectrum at mid-latitudes is therefore much more common.
AM2 (z=60  ) to AM3 (z=70  ) is a useful range for estimating the overall average performance of solar cells installed at high latitudes such as in northern Europe.
Similarly AM2 to AM3 is useful to estimate wintertime performance in temperate latitudes, e.g. airmass coefficient is greater than 2 at all hours of the day in winter at latitudes as low as 37  .   
AM38 is generally regarded as being the airmass in the horizontal direction (z=90  ) at sea level.
However, in pactice there is a high degree of variability in the solar intensity received at angles close to the horizon as described in the next section Solar intensity.    
Airmass coefficient reduces with increasing altitude above sea level.  Therefore solar panels installed at high altitudes, e.g. in an Altiplano region, would use lower AM numbers than for the corresponding latitude at sea level: AM numbers less than 1 towards the equator, and correspondingly lower numbers than listed above for other latitudes.
Solar intensity at the collector reduces with increasing airmass coefficient, but due to the complex and variable atmospheric factors involved, not in a simple or linear fashion.
For example, almost all high energy radiation is removed in the upper atmosphere (between AM0 and AM1) and so AM2 is not twice as bad as AM1.
Furthermore there is great variability in many of the factors contributing to atmospheric attenuation,''Planning and installing photovoltaic systems: a guide for installers, architects and engineers'', 2nd Ed. (2008), Table 1.1,  with the International Institute for Environment and Development, Deutsche Gesellshaft fur Sonnenenergie. ISBN 1844074420.
Depending on level of pollution in the air, overall attenuation can change by up to   70% towards the horizon, greatly affecting performance particularly towards the horizon where effects of the lower layers of atmosphere are amplified manyfold.
One approximate model for solar intensity versus airmass is given by: retrieved 1 May 2011, Stuart Bowden and Christiana Honsberg, 
This formula fits comfortably within the mid-range of the expected pollution-based variability:
This illustrates that significant power is available at only a few degrees above the horizon, and hence the value of tracking solar collectors.
One approximate model for intensity increase with altitude and accurate to a few kilometres above sea level is given by:
Alternatively, given the significant practical variabilities involved, the homogeneous spherical model could be applied to estimate AM, using:
And then the above table or the appropriate equation ( or  or  for average, polluted or clean air respectively) can be used to estimate intensity from AM in the normal way.
These approximations at  and  are suitable for use only to altitudes of a few kilometres above sea level, implying as they do reduction to AM0 performance levels at only around 6 and 9&nbsp;km respectively.
By contrast much of the attenuation of the high energy components occurs in the ozone layer - at higher altitudes around 30&nbsp;km.
Hence these approximations are suitable only for estimating the performance of ground based collectors.
Silicon solar cells are not very sensitive to the portions of the spectrum lost in the atmosphere.  The resulting spectrum at the Earth's surface more closely matches the bandgap of silicon so silicon solar cells are more efficient at AM1 than AM0. This apparently counter-intuitive result arises simply because silicon cells can't make much use of the high energy radiation which the atmosphere filters out.
As illustrated below, even though the ''efficiency'' is lower at AM0 the ''total output power'' ('''Pout''') for a typical solar cell is still highest at AM0.
Conversely, the shape of the spectrum does not significantly change with further increases in atmospheric thickness, and hence cell efficiency does not greatly change for AM numbers above 1.
This illustrates the more general point that given that solar energy is "free", and where available space is not a limitation, other factors such as total '''Pout''' and '''Pout/$''' are often more important considerations than efficiency ('''Pout/Pin''').