A '''crown group''' is a group consisting of living representatives, their ancestors back to the most recent common ancestor of that group, and all of that ancestor's descendants. The name was given by Willi Hennig, the formulator of phylogenetic systematics, as a way of classifying living organisms relative to extinct ones. Though formulated in the 1970s, it was not commonly used until its reintroduction in the 2000s.
The usual definition of a crown group is the smallest monophyletic group, or "clade", to contain the last common ancestor of all extant members, and all of that ancestor's descendants. Extinct side branches on the family tree will still be part of a crown group. For example, if we consider the crown-birds (i.e all extant birds and the rest of the family tree down to their last common ancestor), extinct side branches like the dodo or great auk are still descended from the last common ancestor of all living birds, so falls within the bird crown group.
An alternative definition does not require all members of a crown group to be extant, only to have resulted from a "major cladogenesis event". The first definition forms the basis of this article.
Often, the crown group is given the designation "crown-", to separate it from the group as commonly defined. Both birds and mammals are traditionally defined by their traits, and contain fossil members that lived before the last common ancestors of the living groups. Crown-Aves and Crown-Mammalia therefor differ slightly in content from the common definition of Aves and Mammalia.
The cladistic idea of strictly using the topography of the phylogenetic tree to define groups, necessitate other definitions than crown groups to adequately define commonly discussed fossil groups like dinosaurs and various Burgess Shale fauna. Thus, a host of prefixes has been defined to describe various branches of the phylogenetic tree relative to extant organisms.
The most important of these groups is the stem group. Some organisms fall close to but outside a particular crown group.  A good example is ''Archaeopteryx'' which, although clearly related to modern birds, is not descended from the last common ancestor of all living birds and thus fall outside the Crown group.  Such organisms can be classified within the '''stem group''' of a clade.  In this example ''Archaeopteryx'' is a stem-group bird, but it falls within the vertebrate crown-group. In addition to non-Crown group primitive birds like ''Archaeopteryx'', ''Hesperornis'' and ''Confuciusornis'', Stem birds comprise dinosaurs, an assortment of non-crocodilian "thecodonts" and possibly the pterosaurs. All organisms more closely related to crown-group birds than to any other living group (i.e crocodiles) are referable to the bird stem group. Although the stem group is paraphyletic, it can be defined solely from the phylogenetic tree by subtracting the crown group from the total group. As living birds are by definition in the crown group, it follows that all members of the stem-group of a clade are extinct; and thus, stem groups only have fossil members.
Stem groups offer a purely phylogenetic route to classify fossils that otherwise do not obey systematics based on living organisms.  Stem group organisms always lack one or more features that are present at the base of the crown group to which they are attached.  Thus, ''Archaeopteryx'' lack the toothless beak, clawless wings and reduced tail bones of crown-group birds.  As a group evolves away from the last common ancestor of it and its nearest living relative, it accumulates the distinctive features of its crown group.  Hence, the last common ancestor of birds and crocodiles     the first crown group archosaur - was neither bird nor crocodile, and possessed none of the features unique to either. Evolution up the bird stem group (the dinosaurs) allowed the accumulation of distinctive bird features such as feathers and hollow bones, until all were finally present at the base of the crown group.
The crown-and-stem group concept was first mooted in 1979,
A crown group and its stem group considered together are known as the '''pan-group''' or '''total group'''. The Pan-Aves thus contain the living birds and all (fossil) organisms more closely related to birds than to crocodiles (their closest living relatives). Pan-Mammalia are all mammals and their fossil ancestors down to the phylogenetic split from the remaining amniotes (the Sauropsida). Pan-Mammalia is thus an alternative name for Synapsida.
A '''zygon-group''' is a crown group containing the group in question and their most closely related crown-group and ancestors down to their last common ancestor. Thus, Zygon-Aves contain birds and crocodiles - their closest living relatives - and a host of extinct groups like dinosaurs and various Thecodonts that hails from the last common ancestor of birds and crocodiles. Zygon-Aves and Zyogn-Crocodilia are thus just two ways of naming the same crown group, a group normally known as Archosauria.
Any side branch on the phylogenetic tree splitting off before the most recent common ancestor of the crown group itself is termed a '''plesion-group'''. By the very definition, all members of a plesion-group are extinct. As it is very unlikely that any fossil we find will be a member of an actual ancestor species, all fossils found not to be in a crown group will be considered members of a plesion-group.
A '''Scion-group''' is a group consisting of a crown group and one or more plesion-groups, down to the last common ancestor between the crown-group and the most removed plesion-group. Groups that contain one or more extinct "early offshoots" of the family tree are plesion-groups. Under the common definition of birds as including ''Archaeopteryx'', Aves is a scion-group, as ''Archaeopteryx'' represent an early side-branch without extant representatives. The same goes for the common understanding of Mammalia, as it includes extinct side-branches like ''Morganucodon'' and ''Hadrocodium''.
Placing fossils in their right order in a stem group allows the order of these acquisitions to be established, and thus the ecological and functional setting of the evolution of the major features of the group in question.  Stem groups thus offer a route to integrate unique palaeontological data into questions of the evolution of living organisms.  Furthermore, they show that fossils that were considered to lie in their own separate group because they did not show all the diagnostic features of a living clade, can nevertheless be related to it by lying in its stem group.  Such fossils have been of particular importance in considering the origins of the tetrapods, mammals, and animals.  
The application of the stem group concept also radically reformed the interpretation of the organisms of the Burgess shale. Their classification in stem groups to extant phyla, rather than in phyla of their own, made the Cambrian explosion much easier to understand without invoking unusual evolutionary mechanisms.
As originally proposed by Karl-Ernst Lauterbach, stem-groups should be given the prefix "stem" (i.e. Stem-Aves, Stem-Arthropoda), and the crown group no prefix. This approach has not been universally accepted for known groups. A number of paleontologists have opted to apply this approach anyway. This has led to a confusion over the exact extension of well known taxa like birds and mammals.