The park is home to some of the most prominent companies in world like Cypress Semiconductor  Motorola, Dover Corporation, Yahoo!, Oracle Corporation, HP, Juniper Networks, Lenovo, Texas Instruments, MphasiS, Samsung India Software Operations, First Indian Corporation, Sasken, Novell, Cognizant Technology Solutions, Volvo, Dell, Tesco Hindustan Service, Lifetree, and Phoenix Technologies.
The park consists of 10 Large Buildings , 9 completed and 1 in construction
1. I-flex park - House of  I-flex solutions (Changed to Oracle Corporation by the end of 2008.)
2. Bagmane Commerz - House of Lenovo, Juniper Networks, State Bank of India (Bagmane Branch) & SBI ATM. It also has Barista coffee centre, McDonalds, Citibank ATM, Corporation Bank office, Karvy Finapolis, a food court and shopping mall.
3. Motorola CVR - The building is solely owned by Motorola, which is a large research and development center of wireless technology and mobile handsets.
4. Texas Instruments - The building is solely owned by Texas Instruments itself.
5. Bagmane Lake view - It is the largest of all the buildings and House of Samsung India Software Operations, MphasiS, Bagmane Builders, a division of Motorola,  name changed now to CoreLogic ,Volvo.
6. Cognizant Technology Solutions India Pvt. Ltd.,
7. Bagmane Laurel - Its the House of Dover Corporation, MphasiS, Ogilvy & Mather Advertising, Cypress Semiconductor, Sandisk  and TVS ICS. Recently Novell has opened its Development Centre in this Building. Phoenix Technologies has opened one more development center in India here, ALSTOM Projects India Limited will be operating here shortly.
8. Bagmane Parin - Its the House of MphasiS, DELL R&D, and Sasken.
9. Bagmane Tridib - Its the House of Tecnotree Convergence Ltd, Volvo, Yahoo and Samsung India Software Operations.
Some companies like Samsung and Novell run their private pickup and drop bus services, while others rely on special BMTC service for employee drop and pickup. These buses run throughout Bangalore twice/thrice in the morning and twice/thrice in the evening/night.
Several companies in the tech park have come together and started Bagmanate Tech Park bus service using Bangalore Metropolitan Transport Corporation buses. The buses connect different parts of Bangalore to the tech park and is available only for people working on the tech park. The buses display the board 'BTP'.