The Solar Eagle is a world-class, solar powered car designed and built by the Cal State L.A. School of Engineering & Technology students, faculty and staff.
In July, the Solar Eagle placed fourth in the 1,643 mile GM Sunrayce. California's number one solar car finished ahead of 28 other colleges and universities including such prestigious institutions as MIT and Stanford.
The team's out-standing capabilities will be further demonstrated at the November 1990 World Solar Challenge in Australia.
Results from the GM Sunrayce
Overall finish: Fourth place
Daily race results: First place (twice), 
Second place (once), 
Third place (3 times)
Solar Eagle was the only car having no mechanical or electrical failures during the 1,643 mile race.
Department of Energy Awards: 
Society of Automotive Engineers Award: 
Fifth place for "Engineering Design and Safety"
Other Honors
Engineering Excellence Award: Unique Mobility, Inc.
The Governor's Energy Award: State of Florida
Team Honored by Los Angeles City Council, August 10, 1990
Nationally televised appearance on Into the Night, Starring Rick Dees, August 15, 1990
Team Honored by Department of Water and Power Board of Commissioners, August 23, 1990
City of Los Angeles, Mayor Tom Bradley: Commendation
Board of Directors, City of Pasadena: Commendation
City of Alhambra, Mayor Barbara Messina: Commendation
City of Monterey Park, Mayor Judy Chu: Commendation
U.S. Senator Pete Wilson: Commendation
U.S. Congressman Matthew G. Martinez: Congressional Award
Car Specifications Length: 6 meters
Width: 2 meters
Height: 1 meter
Weight: 459 pounds (without driver)
Drag Coefficient: 0.123
Frame: Welded 6061 T6 aluminum alloy tubing (Weight=23 pounds)
Body: Carbon fiber/NOMEX composite sandwich
Solar panel: Fiberglass/NOMEX composite sandwich
Solar cells: 8,945 Spectrolab K7 single-crystal silicon space quality cells
Motor: Unique Mobility, Inc. DC brushless motor
Batteries: Eagle-Picher silver-zinc batteries; 120 volt nominal buss voltage; 4 kW-hr total capacity at C20 rate
World Solar Challenge Start: Darwin, Australia
Finish: Adelaide, Australia Distance: 1,900 miles
Date: November 11, 1990
Entries: 40 cars from 9 countries (13 Australia, 11 Japan, 9 United States)
Image:SEITeam.jpg|World Solar Challenge Cal State LA
Image:Solar_Car_Sunset.jpg|World Solar Challenge  Australia
Image:SEITeamAust.jpg|World Solar Challenge  Darwin Australia
Image:SEIAust.jpg|World Solar Challenge  Australia
In June of 1993, the Solar Eagle II placed third in the 1000 mile SUNRAYCE 93     a cross-country race from Dallas, Texas to Minneapolis, Minnesota. The Solar Eagle II started the race in the pole position having qualified with the fastest time. Solar Eagle II finished ahead of 33 other universities including such prestigious institutions as Stanford, George Washington University and UC Berkeley. The car and team were honored with a second place award in Technical Innovation for Chassis Design, Propulsion and Aerodynamic Systems by the SUNRAYCE 93 judges and they received a third place award from the Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) for Design Excellence in Engineering Safety.  In November of 1993, the Solar Eagle II gained international recognition by placing thirteenth out of a fifty-four car field, and became the fourth U.S. team to cross the finish line at the 1993 World Solar Challenge, a grueling 1,882 mile race across the Australian outback.
Cal State L.A. was selected as one of 30 universities granted entry in the SUNRAYCE 95 competition and work will soon begin revamping the Solar Eagle II for that event. 
Major Corporate and Government Agency Sponsors
Vehicle Technical Specifications
Length: 16 feet
Width:	6.1 feet
Height: 3.3 feet
Weight: 360 pounds (without driver and batteries)
Structure: Welded aluminum space frame with carbon fiber composite battery box and underneath pan to provide shear and torsional strength.
Body: Carbon fiber skin with Rohacell structural foam core.
Solar power system: 754	single crystal BP Saturn cells (3.7" x 3/8") on top; 824 quarter-size cut cells on vehicle sides. Cerium doped and antireflective
Image:SEIIPoster800H.jpg| GM Sunrayce USA
Image:SEIITeam2.jpg| GM Sunrayce USA
Image:SEIICalPoly.jpg| GM Sunrayce USA
Image:SEIITeam.jpg| GM Sunrayce USA
Image:SEIISunrayceFinish.jpg| GM Sunrayce USA  
Image:SEIIAustFinish.jpg|World Solar Challenge Adelaide, Australia
Image:SEIIQual.jpg|Phoenix  Phoenix, Arizona
Solar Eagle III is the third chapter in Cal State L.A.'s exciting trilogy of solar-powered electric vehicle design projects. Engineered by students under the guidance of faculty and staff, the Solar Eagle III represents the culmination of learning, trial and redesign gleaned from the University's first two solar race cars, the Solar Eagle and the Solar Eagle II.
On Saturday, June 28, 1997, the Solar Eagle III won the prestigious Sunrayce 97, the national intercollegiate solar car race, crossing the Colorado Springs finish line under fittingly sunny skies. Setting a Sunrayce record for average speed of 43.29 mph, Cal State L.A. finished nearly 20 minutes ahead of second-place Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). The combined team of Stanford University/UC Berkeley finished third. Texas A&M, whose team used the molds from Cal State L.A.'s Solar Eagle II to build their entry, the MACH V, finished fourth.
Solar Eagle III's first-place finish at Colorado Springs marked the end of ten days of exciting intercollegiate solar car racing. Throughout the competition, Cal State L.A., MIT and Stanford/ UC Berkeley jockeyed in the top three positions. In the end, good design and solid engineering won the race: the beautifully built Solar Eagle III never broke down during the entire 1,230 mile course the only competitor in the Sunrayce to earn this distinction. (The car never even had a flat tire.)
The Solar Eagle III's technical specifications, described below, give the blueprint for a national champion     a world-class, space-age solar vehicle, meticulously refined and built on the successes of its first two solar cars, Solar Eagle and Solar Eagle II.
Technical Specifications
Overall standings for Sunrayce 97
Image:SEIIITeam800H.jpg| GM Sunrayce USA
The team has been featured in the following local, national, and international media:
Books