Following deregulation of the UK coach market under the Transport Act 1980 London Country Bus Services started Green Line route 701 from Maidenhead to London, in conjunction with Alder Valley in May 1982.   When Alder Valley was split in 1986, the route passed to the Berks Bucks Bus Company (Bee Line), which eventually became First Berkshire & The Thames Valley.
To bring together all of the Berks Bucks Bus Company routes which terminated at London Victoria into one depot, route 702 was extended into Bracknell, previously only having run as far as Legoland Windsor.
To begin with, Volvo/Jonckheere coaches were transferred from Slough for the services. Armchairs   s London commuter routes C1 and C2 became Green Line route 701, with the existing Slough to London Green Line route 701 passing to Armchair.
The route was operated by a fleet of Scania N113CRB/Berkhof Excellence 1000 coaches, displaced from the Reading RailAir service. In 2001 and 2002, a number of Plaxton Premiere and Expressliner were used on the service, but these were soon moved away. 
The services introduced the "Rainbow Fares" scheme in 2004, which enables passengers to choose the cheapest fares if they don't need to travel at a particular time.
In late 2006/early 2007, some Volvo B7R/Plaxton Profile were moved from First Cymru to operate the service. The run in standard First livery with Green Line stickers. After three new Volvo B12B/Plaxton Panther were put on the Reading RailAir service, three of the existing Scania K114IB/Irizar Century were painted into and are now used on the Green Line livery.
In April 2008, one of the Plaxton Profiles used on the route was repainted into a traditional version of the Green Line livery. In the October 2008 three Volvo B9TL/Wright Eclipse Gemini double deckers, with coach style leather seating, were also put in service for the 700/701/702 group of routes.
Route 702 is the standard service, running the whole route at a basic hourly frequency. Route 701 runs at peak times only, covering the whole route plus some Bracknell housing estates.
There are a number of different fares used on the service. These vary from the standard bus-like singles and day returns to season tickets. The service is most notable for the use a the "Rainbow Fares" scheme, which was introduced in 2004. This encourages passengers to travel on the less popular journeys, as they are priced the cheapest. In theory, if a passenger doesn't mind what time they travel at, a single journey will cost   1.
Ordinary bus fares are also available between Bracknell and Langley.
Unlike standard bus services, routes 701 and 702 offer season tickets. These can also be used most other First Berkshire & The Thames Valley buses. Tickets have to be purchased by calling the company, but weekly tickets are available from the driver.