Rivkin earned a B.A. (international relations) from Yale University where he sang with the famed Whiffenpoofs.  He then earned an M.B.A. from Harvard University in 1988.
He speaks fluent French and spent years as a youth studying, traveling and working in France, including one year of high school in Rennes as a student of School Year Abroad and an internship at Renault. Business interests have taken him to Paris or Cannes every year for the past 20 years.
Rivkin's father, William R. Rivkin, was a lawyer and the United States Ambassador to Luxembourg under President John F. Kennedy and United States Ambassador to Senegal and Gambia under President Lyndon B. Johnson.  His family has presented the "Rivkin Award" at the United States Department of State since 1968 as a way to honor constructive dissent in the American Foreign Service. The award was created in part with the help of Charles Rivkin's godfather, Hubert H. Humphrey, after the elder Rivkin's death at 47, in 1967.
Rivkin married his wife, Susan Tolson, in 1990. Aug. 5, 1990, ''The New York Times.''   Until becoming U.S. Ambassador to France, Rivkin and Tolson lived in Santa Monica, California.  They have two children,  William Elias (18) and Lily (16).
Prior to business school, Rivkin worked as a corporate finance analyst at Salomon Brothers.
Rivkin joined The Jim Henson Company in 1988 as director of strategic planning.  In 1995 he was named president and chief operating officer.  From 2000 until 2003, he served as the company's chief executive officer, making him the first chief executive who was not a member of the Henson family.
In September 2005, Rivkin became the president and chief executive officer of W!LDBRAIN, an entertainment and animation production company whose television series include ''Yo Gabba Gabba!'' and ''Higglytown Heroes''. Rivkin served as an executive producer of ''Yo Gabba Gabba!'', which airs on the Nickelodeon and Noggin cable networks.
Rivkin served as an at-large California delegate for Senator John Kerry at the 2004 Democratic National Convention and for Barack Obama at the 2008 Democratic National Convention. Rivkin was the California finance co-chair for President Barack Obama's 2008 presidential campaign, raising $500,000 toward Obama's campaign. The other co-chair was music executive and current U.S. Ambassador to the Bahamas Nicole Avant. by Brian Knowlton, ''The New York Times'', Aug. 16, 2009. Retrieved 8/16/09.
Mr. Rivkin   s brother, Robert, is general counsel at the United States Department of Transportation, and Robert's wife, Cindy Moelis, has been friends of the Obamas for 20 years, according to ''The New York Times.''