The matter was initially raised by Sean Hannity and other hosts on conservative talk radio programs, and then by moderator George Stephanopoulos during a debate between Clinton and Obama in April 2008. In October 2008, the matter was mentioned in attack ads, robocalls, mass mailings, and campaign speeches by Republican presidential candidate John McCain and vice presidential candidate Sarah Palin as an issue in the general election campaign. Obama has condemned Ayers' past, and stated that he does not have a close association with him.
Ayers was part of the five-member central committee heading the Weathermen starting at its creation in the summer of 1969.
In their time "underground," Ayers and Bernardine Dohrn formed a relationship, had sons born in 1977 and 1980, and in a late-1970s split of the group, were in the faction favoring surrendering to authorities; they took this step themselves in 1980, and they were both spared federal prosecution due to government misconduct in investigating them. (Dohrn received three years' probation and was fined $1,500 on Illinois state charges, and later served seven months in jail for refusal to testify to a grand jury regarding former colleagues in the Weathermen.)
Ayers and Dohrn are described as fixtures of their Chicago neighborhood of Hyde Park, "embraced, by and large, in the liberal circles dominating politics" there, according to Ben Smith, a writer for ''The Politico'', and their political and activist colleagues believe their achievements of the recent decades overshadow their Vietnam-era radical activities. Ayers has been described as "very respected and prominent in Chicago  a national reputation as an educator."
In conjunction with the approaching September 10, 2001, publication of a personal memoir, Ayers gave an interview to ''The New York Times'' in July, which they published on September 11. Ayers then wrote a letter to the editor stating the interview misquoted him and mischaracterized his views, particularly about their reporter's claim that Ayers wished he had set more bombs. "This is not a question of being misunderstood or 'taken out of context,' but of deliberate distortion." However, Dohrn has said, "There's no way to be committed to non-violence in one of the most violent societies that history has ever created. I'm not committed to non-violence in any way."
Obama and Ayers first met in 1995 when Ayers and Dohrn hosted a small gathering at their home in the Hyde Park section of Chicago, the neighborhood in which the Obamas lived, at which then-state Senator Alice J. Palmer introduced Barack Obama to the group as her chosen successor for the 1996 Democratic primary. Dr. Quentin Young, a longtime physician who also attended, said it was a small group&mdash;maybe a dozen or so people&mdash;who were being introduced to the next senator from Chicago's South Side.
Obama served as president of the board of directors for the Chicago Annenberg Challenge, a large education-related nonprofit organization that Ayers was instrumental in starting.
Obama and Ayers served together for three years on the board of the Woods Fund of Chicago, an anti-poverty foundation established in 1941. Obama had joined the nine-member board in 1993, and had attended a dozen of the quarterly meetings together with Ayers in the three years up to 2002, when Obama left his position on the board,
In 2008, a spokesman for the Obama campaign said the last time Obama and Ayers had seen each other was when Obama was biking in the neighborhood in 2007 and crossed paths with Ayers. The spokesman said "The suggestion that Ayers was a political adviser to Obama or someone who shaped his political views is patently false."
In a November 2008 interview, Ayers said that he knew Obama only slightly:    I think my relationship with Obama was probably like that of thousands of others in Chicago and, like millions and millions of others, I wished I knew him better.   
Obama's contacts with Ayers had been public knowledge in Chicago for years.
Obama's response led to an exchange with Clinton, in which Clinton said, "Senator Obama served on a board with Mr. Ayers for a period of time, the Woods Fund, which was a paid directorship position." Obama then referred to President Bill Clinton's pardoning of Linda Sue Evans and Susan Rosenberg,
On May 17, as the controversy continued, the Obama campaign issued their own "Fact Check" regarding Clinton's statements on the alleged relationship between Ayers and Obama.
In April 2008, John McCain began to question Obama's interactions with Ayers,
In August 2008, the Republican Party created the website, , as a spoof of Facebook, on which Ayers is listed as one of Obama's "friends." This website contains a mocked-up user profile for Ayers, which describes the controversy and Obama's alleged connections with him.
In October 2008, after the McCain campaign announced that it would step up attacks on the Democratic presidential candidate,
On October 16, the McCain campaign launched a massive robocall campaign which played an automated message linking Ayers to Obama.
The Obama campaign added a section about Ayers to its "Fight the Smears" website, where it argued that the attack by "a desperate McCain campaign" and other groups was a "smear", citing newspaper commentaries calling it "phony",
In August 2008, the Obama campaign's attorney Robert Bauer wrote TV stations running the American Issues Project ad, saying, "Your station is committed to operating in the public interest, an objective that cannot be satisfied by accepting for compensation material of such malicious falsity," and wrote Deputy Assistant U.S. Attorney General John C. Keeney, describing the ad as a "willful attempt to evade the strictures of federal election law." The Obama campaign ran a TV ad of its own in selected markets that said in part, "With all our problems, why is John McCain talking about the 60s, trying to link Barack Obama to radical Bill Ayers? McCain knows Obama denounced Ayers' crimes, committed when Obama was just eight years old."
In 2008 and 2009 some conservative commentators advanced claims that Obama's autobiography, ''Dreams from My Father'' was written or ghost-written by Ayers.  In a series of articles in American Thinker and WorldNetDaily, author Jack Cashill claimed that his own analysis of the book showed Ayers' writing style.  In late October, US Congressman Chris Cannon and his brother-in-law attempted to hire an Oxford University professor, Peter Millican, to prove Ayers' authorship using computer analysis.  Millican refused after they would not assure him in advance that his results would be published regardless of the outcome.
Ayers himself kept a low profile during the controversy.  After the election, he wrote an op-ed piece in which he explained:
His post-election piece argued that the attacks on Obama had been a "profoundly dishonest drama," including a false depiction of Ayers as a terrorist ("I never killed or injured anyone") and an exaggeration of his connection to Obama ("We didn't pal around, and I had nothing to do with his positions").
In late May 2008, Michael Kinsley, a longtime critic of Ayers, argued in ''Time'' that Obama's relationship with Ayers should not be a campaign issue:
The Obama-Ayers connection was mentioned in Jerome Corsi's ''The Obama Nation,'' a book published in August, intended to defeat Obama's election campaign, and in conservative author David Freddoso's ''The Case Against Barack Obama,'' where he wrote that the situation raised questions about Obama's judgment and influences.
On September 9, journalist Jake Tapper reported on a comic strip published on Ayers' blog, that explained the soundbite: "The one thing I don't regret is opposing the war in Vietnam with every ounce of my being ... 'When I say, 'We didn't do enough,' a lot of people rush to think, 'That must mean, "We didn't bomb enough shit." ' But that's not the point at all. It's not a tactical statement, it's an obvious political and ethical statement. In this context, 'we' means 'everyone.' "
Stanley Kurtz, a conservative commentator and Senior Fellow at the Ethics and Public Policy Center, examined the University of Illinois at Chicago records for the Chicago Annenberg Challenge (CAC) for the period in the 1990s when both Obama and Ayers were employed there, and reported his findings and opinions in the ''Wall Street Journal'' in late September 2008. "The Obama campaign has cried foul when Bill Ayers comes up, claiming "guilt by association," Kurtz wrote. "Yet the issue here isn't guilt by association; it's guilt by participation. As CAC chairman, Mr. Obama was lending moral and financial support to Mr. Ayers and his radical circle."
William C. Ibershof, the lead federal prosecutor of the Weather Underground case, wrote to ''The New York Times'' on October 9, 2008: