Rick can lose limbs, but is able to grow them back over time. Arms can be used as clubs to fight enemies.
Throughout the game, Rick collects blood from defeated enemies. Collecting a certain amount will allow the player to unlock new moves and perform special attacks. Players can find journals documenting Dr. West's history while photos of Rick's girlfriend serve as a breadcrumb trail to follow. He can perform "Splatter Kills", extremely gory finishing moves. There is also a platforming element with jump nodes to keep instant death falls to a minimum.
The game also comes with the original ''Splatterhouse'' arcade game, ''Splatterhouse 2'' and ''Splatterhouse 3'' as unlockables.
Jennifer Willis is to have an interview with Dr. Henry West M.D., professor of necrobiology, at his house. Her boyfriend, Rick Taylor, comes along so nothing bad happens. Just as Rick is about to propose to Jennifer, the two are attacked by Dr. West's experiments, kidnapping Jennifer and leaving Rick mortally wounded. Rick knocks over a sarcophagus revealing a mask. Close to death, the Terror Mask calls out to Rick, saying it will save him and help save Jenny if he puts it on. Having no choice, Rick puts the mask on and is transformed into a hulking beast powered by the blood of others.
Rick follows Dr. West and Jennifer through other dimensions and time periods and learns of Dr. West's plan to bring dark deities, known as "The Corrupted", into this world by sacrificing Jennifer. Dr. West believes The Corrupted will resurrect his dead love Leonora, who bears an uncanny resemblance to Jennifer. The Corrupted intended to lay waste to Earth instead. It is revealed Rick was the one who supposedly killed Leonora, according to Dr. West, who witnessed it. In truth, she was burnt in a wicker man by a witch hunting mob, who were possessed by demons. In an attempt to save Leonora, thinking she was Jennifer, Rick was attacked by her reanimated corpse, forcing him to kill her.
In the end, Rick succeeds in rescuing Jennifer and thwarting West's plans. However, West still managed to summon one of the Corrupted, which constructs itself by using all of the experiments Rick killed. Rick manages to kill it, but in the process, a stray spirit possesses Jennifer. Believing his deal with the Mask to be done, he tries to pry it off. However, aware of Jennifer's possession, it refuses. It is implied from West's reaction that the stray spirit is of Leonora's.
In early 2009, BottleRocket revealed that Namco Bandai Games had made the decision to cut the developer from the project, and had already taken back their console development kits. With no other projects or funding on their plate, BottleRocket was effectively shuttered as a result. Namco Bandai Games explained that the move was due to a "performance issue." The project was handed over to the internal development team at Namco Bandai Games who had recently completed ''Afro Samurai''. Weeks later, it became known that Namco Bandai Games hired members of the original development staff from BottleRocket to help finish the game.
The game's story and dialogue was penned by comic book writer Gordon Rennie. Howard Drossin composed original scores and the protagonist Rick Taylor (in his non-possessed look) was modelled after him.
Response to the game was mixed. Eurogamer gave ''Splatterhouse'' 6/10, stating "Splatterhouse is only reasonably good at being the classless procession of shock and bad taste that it wants to be."Dread Central gave ''Splatterhouse'' 4.5/5, stating it "is most likely going to be considered the premiere horror game of 2010." Cheat Code Central gave it a 3.9 out of 5 criticizing its platforming levels, voice over work and texture quality, but saying fans of the old franchise will enjoy it. Gamespot's Kevin VanOrd scored it a 4.5 out of 10, claiming: "All the gore in the world can't disguise Splatterhouse's laundry list of clumsy mechanics." He criticized the camera, load times, glitches and cheap deaths, but praised the story and the inspired artistic touches. IGN's Arthur Gies scored it 4.0 out of 10. He said that: "Some occasionally slick visuals and funky design is undermined by camera and framerate problems and enemy variety that dries up halfway through." ''Fangoria'' gave the game a 3.5/4, praising the overall fun gameplay and stating the game "defines its own genre of horror gaming," separating it from survival horror Blistered Thumbs gave "Splatterhouse" a 7/10, calling it a "ridiculously violent, tasteless romp full of gore and sprinklings of Jennifer with her clothes off, and every single moment of it is incredibly fun."