Locations used in Watford are:  The cemetery (where most of the deceased characters are interred), most interior and exterior church scenes of various churches, the snooker club, and the County / Magistrate Courtrooms.
It has been suggested that Watford was chosen for much of the exterior scenes due to its close proximity, and that the town name is so similar to Walford.  Thus, any stray road signs or advertising boards which are accidentally filmed in the back of shots will appear to read Walford.
Bridge Street also includes many shops and businesses, such as a mini-supermarket named Minute Mart (originally First 'Til Last), which is owned by Patrick Trueman. There is also the Walford launderette which is owned by Mr Papadopoulos, though he is rarely seen. The launderette is run by Dot Branning. Pauline Fowler works at the launderette for over 30 years until her death in 2006. Dot works with Pauline much of that time, and continues to run the launderette after her death. After Pauline's death, Shirley Carter, Yolande Trueman, Honey Mitchell, Heather Trott and Carol Jackson work there at various times.
Also in Bridge Street is Kathy's Cafe (named after Kathy Beale), which is owned by Ian and Jane Beale until their divorce, when Jane becomes the sole onwner, and Carol Jackson becomes the manager. It is originally run by Ali and Sue Osman and Ian is employed there. At one point, the cafe is named Laura's when it is owned by Phil Mitchell, though Ian buys it back again. The cafe undergoes a refurbishment in 2009 after it is destroyed by fire.
The name Bridge Street was chosen as the street connects Albert Square to the market.
The houses in '''George Street''' would seem to be a step up from the houses in Albert Square. There is also the Argee Bhajee, an Indian restaurant, which is bought by Masood Ahmed and Zainab Masood in 2010 and is run by themselves along with their son Tamwar. There is also Walford East tube station, outside which Danielle Jones is run over and killed by Janine Butcher in April 2009. King George House is a Bed & Breakfast establishment on George Street where many characters have stayed.
In '''Turpin Road''' there is a bookmakers, run by Carol Jackson and also former employees Glenda Mitchell, Ryan Malloy and Janine Malloy. There is also Beale's Plaice, the local chip shop, owned and run by Ian Beale and his wife Jane. The Turpin Road war memorial is also here; it pays tribute to residents of Walford who died in the First and Second World Wars. However, in real life the memorial features names of people involved with ''EastEnders'' along with past stars. Walford Video is on Turpin Road for a number of years and managed by Nigel Bates, Barry Evans and later Billy Mitchell, until Phil Mitchell sells it to Manju Patel, who turns it into a Sari shop.
There is also a nightclub called R&R. It is originally named The Market Cellar until George Palmer buys the club and renames it the Cobra Club. When George moves, he sells it to Steve Owen who renames it e20. It is later sold to Sharon Watts who names it Angie's Den. In 2005 the club extends its space when Johnny Allen buys the next door snooker club. It is named Scarlet after Johnny's daughter who died in a fire. In 2007 Ronnie Mitchell reveals her plans to buy the club, which she does with her business partner Jack Branning. Ronnie and sister Roxy Mitchell name it R&R. In January 2011, Jack sells his share of the club (60%) to Phil Mitchell.
The post office on Turpin Road is managed by Zainab Masood until it becomes Gilly's Massage Parlour. The massage parlour is built in 2009 as a cover for a brothel that is run from there. 10 Turpin Road is a beauty salon, originally named Booty and owned by Tanya Branning, who is forced to sell. Roxy buys it and names it Roxy's, and employs Kim Fox, Jodie Gold and later Tanya as manager, whilst Syed Masood rents a room for his massage business. Roxy later sells the salon to Tanya and she re-names it to its original name, Booty.
The name Turpin Road was chosen after the show's creators read that the East End was the haunt of notorious highwaymen, such as Dick Turpin.
Pete, Kathy and Ian Beale live in a flat in Walford Towers in 1985. Carol, Alan, Bianca, Robbie, Sonia, and Billie Jackson live here before moving to Albert Square in 1994. Billy and Honey Mitchell move with their children to a flat in Walford Towers in 2008 after a period of homelessness.
Walford's High Street is often mentioned by characters, who usually go there to buy items not available in the shops featured. The High Street itself has never been shown.
Walford is also home to Walford General Hospital, Walford Primary School, Walford High School and Walford Town Football Club and Walford College. Diggory Passage is another road whose sign is seen in promotional videos for '' ''.