The road system of Warren County, New York, consists of roads maintained by the state of New York (through the New York State Department of Transportation or NYSDOT), the county, and its towns and villages. The county and state-maintained roads account for about  of the highway system in New York. Most roads within the county are short connectors, while others are sections of  long highways. There is one Interstate Highway in Warren County, Interstate&nbsp;87 (I-87), also known as the Adirondack Northway. There is one U.S. Highway, U.S. Route&nbsp;9 (US&nbsp;9), and eight state-numbered signed touring routes in the county, the longest being New York State Route&nbsp;9N (NY&nbsp;9N). There are three other state-maintained reference routes in the county, the longest being NY&nbsp;917A, commonly known as the Prospect Mountain Veterans Memorial Highway. Additionally, there are 81 county-maintained routes, most of which are short connectors between more major roads.
The longest state route within the county is NY&nbsp;9N, which spans  in the county alone. The shortest state-maintained route is NY&nbsp;911E, a  reference route. These roads supply some of the major municipalities in Warren County, including the city of Glens Falls, the towns of Warrensburg and Queensbury, along with the village of Lake George.
I-87 is the only Interstate Highway that enters Warren County. It travels for  within the county and has nine interchanges along the way. Exits off the highway serve Glens Falls, Queensbury, Warrensburg, Lake George, Bolton Landing, and Chestertown. The highway once terminated in downtown Lake George, with its former two-lane end becoming NY&nbsp;912Q after the highway was extended northward.
 Since its designation in 1926, US&nbsp;9 services the city of Glens Falls, Queensbury, the village of Lake George, Warrensburg and Chestertown before leaving for Essex County. US&nbsp;9 once had four suffixed routes in the county; however, only two still exist. Also assigned in 1926 was US&nbsp;4, which initially terminated in Glens Falls at US&nbsp;9. It was realigned as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York to follow the Hudson River south from Hudson Falls to the Capital District, bypassing Warren County to the east.
Touring routes are signed with black and white route markers, and small, green reference markers are posted along the state-maintained sections of the routes. There have been 18 state signed touring routes in Warren County since the modern state touring system was established in 1924; however, only 10 of them remain. Three routes created in 1924   NY&nbsp;6, NY&nbsp;10, and NY&nbsp;30   entered the Warren County limits, crossing the county in a north   south manner. Another route, NY&nbsp;47, was assigned by 1926 to an alignment extending from Chestertown to Ticonderoga via Hague. NY&nbsp;6 was replaced by US&nbsp;9 in 1927, and the three other routes were realigned out of the county or eliminated entirely as part of the 1930 renumbering.
 and again to Saratoga Springs in the early 1950s, supplanting NY&nbsp;9K. Also assigned in the renumbering was NY&nbsp;32B, an alternate route of NY&nbsp;32 that began in Glens Falls and followed the Hudson River east into Washington County. NY&nbsp;9M, a north   south spur connecting US&nbsp;9 to NY&nbsp;8, was assigned by the following year, but eliminated ca. 1939.
By 1940, NY&nbsp;32 was extended into Warren County, passing through Glens Falls and Queensbury on its way to a terminus in Washington County. NY&nbsp;32B initially overlapped with NY&nbsp;32 along Warren Street; however, it was truncated eastward to begin in Queensbury ca. 1962 and eliminated ca. 1965. It was partially replaced by NY&nbsp;254, a northeasterly bypass of Glens Falls from I-87 to Washington County.
Of the 10 current routes, NY&nbsp;418 in Warrensburg is the shortest while NY&nbsp;9N is the longest. Other active routes in Warren County include NY&nbsp;8, which spans the northern part of the county; NY&nbsp;9L, a short suffixed route of US&nbsp;9; NY&nbsp;149, a connector from I-87 to the Vermont border in Warren and nearby Washington Counties; NY&nbsp;28, which serves western Warren County and terminates in Johnsburg; and its suffixed route, NY&nbsp;28N, which ends in the western part of the county.
There are 13 New York State Scenic Byways in the Adirondacks alone, three of them in Warren County. The first is the Roosevelt   Marcy Trail, which runs on NY&nbsp;28N. The second is the Dude Ranch Trail, a loop in Warren and nearby Saratoga counties, and the third is the Central Adirondack Trail, which utilizes parts of NY&nbsp;9L, US&nbsp;9 and NY&nbsp;28.
There are three state-maintained reference routes in Warren County. A reference route is a road owned by the state but are signed only with reference markers. The shortest of these is NY&nbsp;911E, an east   west highway connecting NY&nbsp;32 to NY&nbsp;254. The route is the only portion of NY&nbsp;32B's former alignment in Warren County that did not become part of NY&nbsp;254. Although it is the shortest reference route in the county, the New York State Department of Transportation has reserved NY&nbsp;656, a replacement touring route designation, for the highway. A date for the renumbering has not been determined. The longest of Warren County's three reference routes is NY&nbsp;917A, better known as the Prospect Mountain Veterans Memorial Highway. The final reference route is NY&nbsp;912Q, a two lane freeway spur leading east from I-87 exit&nbsp;22.
 In some cases, a single county route designation has been assigned to several different highways. An example is CR&nbsp;11, which begins at an intersection with CR&nbsp;10 just east of the Northway (I-87) in Chestertown, but splits into two east of Riverbank. Until 2009, Warren County Routes were not signed like normal touring routes; instead, they were marked with tab&ndash;like signs mounted on the back of poles. There was one exception, as CR&nbsp;23 was signed as a normal county route would.
In November 2007, locals of Warren County produced concern that the salt used on several county highways including CR&nbsp;7, CR&nbsp;11, and CR&nbsp;35 was starting to harm the fragile environment of Lake George and the surrounding area. The Warren County Highway Department uses an average of  of salt on the roads around the Lake George area annually. The salt is beginning to flow into the lake, causing a harmful environmental impact. Since the amount of salt in Lake George has doubled since the 1980s, the highway department switched from using sand entirely to using salt for safety of drivers, rather than the environment. Local officials recognize the problem at hand and are trying to find ways to minimize salt usage.
In late 2009, Warren County DPW began adding the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices-standard pentagon shield to their county roads. Signage is generally limited to the terminus of a single road, and roads are not signed at intersections with other county or state roads or when numbers change. One example of the latter is CR&nbsp;32 (Call Street) and CR&nbsp;28 (Corinth Road), where the only visible shield heading east is for CR&nbsp;32 at CR&nbsp;16 (East River Drive).
The chart below shows current Interstate, U.S., and state highways by year of creation, length, and towns crossed. "Formed" displays the year or time period in which the route was assigned; "Length" shows the highway's total length in Warren County.
The chart below covers the county routes in Warren County. The county route system was established by 1991.