The '''Ateneo de Davao University (AdDU)''' is a private and research Catholic university administered by the Society of Jesus in Southern Mindanao in the Philippines. It was established in 1948. At the undergraduate level, the Ateneo de Davao University is divided into four units namely the School of Arts and Sciences, School of Business and Governance, College of Nursing, and the College of Engineering and Architecture. The graduate programs are housed as well in these units. The College of Law is deemed as a separate unit from mentioned schools. It also runs grade school and high school units. It has two campuses, the Jacinto Campus (which houses the schools and colleges of the university, including the Graduate Programs and the College of Law) and the Matina Campus (the elementary and high school) 
The Ateneo de Davao offers a wide array of programs in the elementary, secondary, undergraduate, and graduate levels. The school's academic offerings include the Humanities, Education, Accounting, Business, Law, Social Sciences, Philosophy, Nursing, Social Work, Theology, Biology, Chemistry, Mathematics, Computer Science and Information Technology, Engineering, Architecture, and Public Administration.http://www.addu.edu.ph/?option=com_content&task=view&id=81&Itemid=100 The university also heavily engages itself in research and community social involvement.
 Based on international rankings, the Ateneo de Davao University was placed on the 127th place in the whole Asian region, according to an academic peer review survey done by the QS 2009 Asian University Rankings. Likewise, also according to the QS 2009 Asian University Rankings, the university continentally ranked 153rd based on a recruiter review survey.
The Ateneo de Davao University operates in two campuses in the city of Davao with both campuses housing several research and academic units. Faculty members serve a student body in different academic levels, from pre-school to the postgraduate level. The Jacinto Campus, which houses the tertiary unit of the University, caters to around 8000 students. The Jacinto Campus is mainly a metropolitan campus as it is situated in the downtown area of Davao City. The grade school and high school units of the university are located at the Matina Campus, along the McArthur Highway of Davao City.
The Ateneo de Davao University, at the tertiary level, is divided into four main units. These units are the Schools of Arts and Sciences, School of Business and Governance, College of Nursing, and the College of Engineering and Architecture. The College of Law, which is housed under the Dotterweich Hall, is a separate unit from the graduate programs from the mentioned four units of the university.
As one of the nine schools in the Philippines owned and operated by the Society of Jesus, the Ateneo de Davao University is committed towards a strong tradition of academic excellence, greater social service, and Jesuit core values. Largely because of the traditional Jesuit educational philosophy for the social world, the university is engaged in community service and involvement. In the spirit of social involvement and service, the different units, levels, and departments of the Ateneo community reach out to local areas and institutions as it remains true to its mission, Ad Majorem Dei Gloriam (For the greater glory of God).
Some of the Ateneo de Davao University   s projects and initiatives include the    Arrupe Program    under the Social Involvement Coordinating (SICO) of the tertiary level in which the students immerse themselves in a local marginalized community such as street children, indigenous people, and the urban poor.  In coordination with the Gawad Kalinga, some students and members of the faculty volunteer themselves in order to build houses for internally displaced people. 
The Ateneo formation operates both on the undergraduate and graduate levels. The University   s College of Law has many pro bono programs that are handled by the office of the Ateneo Legal Aid Services. Students enrolled in the graduate program of the School Business and Governance help in creating business plans for not-for-profit organizations in the city. For the School of Arts and Sciences graduate programs, most of the academic courses are focused on environment, education, and peace.http://www.addu.edu.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=80&Itemid=99
The Ateneo de Davao is operated by a Board of Trustees, which is currently chaired by Mr. Paul G. Dominguez. The central administration is led by the current university president Fr. Antonio Samson. The university president has several committees and councils at hand in helping the overall governance of various concerns and aspects of the university.
 Dr. Danilo Te, and Dr. Patria Manalaysay, respectively The High School unit is currently headed by the new principal, Fr. Mike Pineda. The Grade School unit of the university is headed by a headmaster who is currently Mrs. Suzette Alino.
The different units of the Ateneo de Davao have their own way of admitting students into their respective programs. The High School Department requires all applicants to submit his or her academic report card and a recommendation form accomplished by a principal, guidance counsellor or class adviser. In addition, the applicant must pass the Ateneo Qualifying Test (AQT). For the undergraduate programs, applicants are required to take and pass the Ateneo College Admissions Test (ACAT). Moreover, the Admissions Committee of the university doesn   t only look at the scores garnered by the applicant in the ACAT but it also considers different aspects like at the high school academic performance, recommendations, application materials and essays, and interviews as well.
The university offers various financial aid programs in its different units. The Ateneo College Scholarship Program under the College Scholarship Committee offers financial assistance to deserving and financially needy students. Scholarship funding is usually springs from external benefactors. Scholarship grantees are selected based on academic competence, financial need, and commitment to service.
The High School Unit of the Ateneo de Davao University is a Catholic preparatory school for young students. The current principal of the department is Fr. Mike Pineda, S.J. He assumed the post in the year 2006, shortly after Fr. Irvin G. Salanio, S.J. occupied the same post as an OIC officer.
The high school department has its main library housed on the second floor of the administration building. The library itself contains an self-regulating computer laboratory which caters to all high school students. The department also has a Student Development Center which serves as a supporting function in the educational process through the directing and controlling activities to help each individual develop his/her potential. Some of the goals of the center are incorporated in the academic curriculum which includes individual analysis of the student, information and career development, individual counseling, and the conduction of psychological educational classes regularly. There are also other unique support services in the High School unit. The Instructional Media Center (IMC) aims to provide an environment, which facilitates the realization of the academic excellence and the formation of Christian values. The IMC provides an adequate collection of print and audio-visual materials which includes books, magazines, records, videotapes and other materials that are all necessary for the academic development of the student body. Another one is the Information and Communication Technology (ICT) Services Office which is responsible for the designing of the Interactive Learning System (ILS) programs for the different subject areas. The office also offers seminar-workshops for the faculty and staff and assists them in coming up with computer aided instructional materials. It also works closely with the Information Technology Department of the high school, from the first year level to the fourth year level.
As part of the Jesuit educational tradition, the High School also provides religious formation programs, such as the Christian Service and Involvement Program (CSIP), which sends students to different communities in order to immerse in the environment and reach out. The academic curriculum also includes a CLE (Christian Life Education) which also known as the Religious Studies subject area. The 4-year CLE course aims to produce an Ateneo graduate who projects the Jesuit values of being men and women for others and who will actively serve as catalysts for social transformation while living life with an informed Christian perspective.
The High School classifies its students into honors (St. Xavier) and general sections (St. Berchmans, St. Bellarmine, St. Borgia, St. Canisius, St. Campion, St. Chabanel, St. de Brito, Bl. Favre, St. Gonzaga, St. Jogues, St. Kostka, St. Pignatelli, St. Realino, St. Regis). All entering freshmen are all equally put into regular sections. Starting sophomore year, the students are then academically evaluated in order to determine the composition of the honors class of the batch. Their curriculum is more advanced and rigorous than that of the regular sections. An example of this would be in the math curriculum in which additional competencies are added like analytic geometry (2nd year level), trigonometry (3rd year level), and calculus (4th year level).
The Ateneo de Davao Grade School is an elementary school for young and qualified children. The Grade School Unit is housed, along with the high school unit, within the Matina Campus. The department also provides the student body with many support services. The grade school   s Student Development Center offers integral development programs which subsequently helps in the holistic formation of the student. The Grade School Instructional Media Center (IMC) is the information center of the Ateneo de Davao Grade School Department. The center attempts to fulfil the needs of the grade school community supplying books, learning materials, programs and services for academic, personal and individual enrichment. The department also has the Ateneo Education for Elementary Gifted Student (Ateneo EDGES Program) which admits intellectually gifted elementary students and engage them with a more rigorous academic program in order to maximize their learning potentials and make the students become more critical, creative, and independent.
The library system of the Ateneo de Davao University comprises several libraries housed in the Jacinto Campus and the Matina Campus. The main library of the tertiary level is located inside the Gisbert Hall, in the Jacinto Campus. The main library has four levels and mainly serves the School of Arts and Sciences, School of Business and Governance, and the College of Nursing. The first level of the main library accommodates the space for the study area, newly processed books, general circulation books, CD-ROM library, PROQUEST, and the Online Public Access Catalog (OPAC). The second level contains the Union Card Catalog and the Graduate and Reserved Sections which contain theses, dissertations, and other studies that are requested by the members of the faculty for their classes. The third level includes the Reference and Filipiniana Library and a self-regulating computer library for the students. The fourth level houses the Periodical Library which provides a vast collection of current and retrospective newspapers, magazines, and journals. 
The Law and School of Business and Governance Graduate Library is located on the fifth floor of the Dotterweich building. Its vast collection largely caters to law students and graduate students who are taking up Master of Arts in Business Administration (MBA), Master in Public Administration (MPA) and Doctor in Business Administration (DBA).
The Faculty Resource Center (FRC) is located on the second level of the Finster Hall. The resources in the FRC are exclusively used by the faculty members of the university. It also contains its own computer laboratory for the faculty.
The American Corner (AC) or the American Library is located on the second level of the Wieman Hall. It aims to strengthen the American Studies program of the university, provide various materials and resources about the United States, and educational advising services to those who want to study in the US.http://library.addu.edu.ph/library_ASRC.html
Also integrated in the library system of the Ateneo de Davao are the distinct libraries of the pre-school, grade school, and high school departments. The said three libraries are all located in the Matina Campus. The Ateneo de Davao Library System is connected to the library system of its sister schools all over the Philippines namely the Ateneo de Manila University, Ateneo de Naga University, Ateneo de Zamboanga University, and the Ateneo de Cagayan University (Xavier University).
The American Studies Resource Center or the American Corner (AC)of the Ateneo de Davao University was established on May 12, 1992. In the year 2003, it was closed for renovation and improvement of the facilities under a new Memorandum of Agreement which was duly signed by Mr. Ronald Post from the US Embassy and Fr. Edmundo M. Martinez, S.J.. The aim of the center is to fortify the American Studies Program of the university, provide various materials and resources about the United States in different aspects, and advising services for those individuals who want to study in the United States. The American Library boasts an array of books, periodicals, CD-ROMs, videotapes, VCDs, DVDs, posters and publications of private and public American organizations and agencies. The American Studies Resource Center is located on the second level of the Wieman Hall, in the Jacinto Campus.
Each semester more than 1500 Ateneo undergraduates follow the Jesuit philosophy of "men and women for others."
The School of Arts and Sciences (SAS) was opened in 1951 with 130 students enrolled in various offerings namely: liberal arts, commerce, education, associate in arts, pre-law, secretarial, and elementary teacher's certificate program. In subsequent years, other college programs were added. After the University obtained University status in 1977, a number of other programs were included in the list.
At the present, the SAS offers different degree programs both at the undergraduate and graduate level. The SAS is subdivided into six divisions namely: Humanities, Natural Science and Mathematics, Philosophy, Social Science and Education, Theology and Computer Studies.
The undergraduate business courses of the Ateneo de Davao University were under the School of Arts and Sciences; the MBA, MPA and MAN programs were under the Graduate business Programs and the MGA program was under the Graduate School of Arts and Sciences. In an effort to have all the business courses integrated, the AdDU School of Business & Governance (SBG) was born.
April 1, 2000 was the date the SBG was launched. Under its aegis are accountancy, business management, entrepreneurship, human resource management, finance, management accounting, marketing and graduate business programs as well as support programs in computer literacy and research and extension offices.
The School of Business and Governance at the undergraduate level is subdivided into two divisions namely the Accountancy Division which houses  Accountancy and Accounting Technology programs, and the Business Management (B&M) Division with seven academic programs namely:  Management, Entrepreneurship, Finance, Human Resource Management, and Marketing.
The SBG is noted for garnering high passing rates in the CPA board exam in the country.
The University had been offering a master   s degree program in Nursing Administration since the 1970s. It opened an undergraduate BS Nursing in 2001. The program started under the auspices of the Natural Science and Math Division. The program eventually became the College of Nursing. 
The Commission on Higher Education (CHEd) released the Top 20 Nursing Schools in the Philippines who have met the standards set by the Professional Regulation Commission (PRC) for the year 2009 and the College of Nursing of the Ateneo de Davao University has landed on the 18th spot in the Top 20 Nursing Schools in the Philippines.
In the school year 2010-2011, the Board of Trustees of the university approved the separation of the Engineering and Architecture Division from the School of Arts and Sciences in order to create its own college, namely the College of Engineering and Architecture. Dr. Randell U. Espina was appointed to be the first dean of the new college.
The College of Engineering and Architecture, at the present, offers eight academic programs namely: Architecture, Civil Engineering, Computer Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Electronics and Communications Engineering, Electrical Engineering, Industrial Engineering, and Mechanical Engineering.
In June, 1961, then Rector Rev. Hudson Mitchell, S.J. established the College of Law.  In 1990, Atty. Hildegardo F. Inigo, one of the first graduates of the College of Law and member of its faculty since 1967 assumed the position of Dean of the College of Law. The first graduates of the College  took the bar examinations in 1965.
The College of Law of the Ateneo de Davao University is recognized as one of the best performing law schools in the country. The college has been able to produce quality lawyers within different professions. In spite of the increasing standards of the Bar examinations at the national level, the College of Law has been able to maintain a high passing rate through the years of its existence. The Ateneo College of Law is also distinguished as a producer of top Bar examinees. Last October 2010, Ms. Janette R. Nancog of the AdDU College of Law placed 4th place with a grade of 85.9 percent.
According to the Supreme Court of the Philippines, the AdDU College of Law is ranked within the top ten law schools in the whole Philippines. The school has maintained this tradition for many years.
The university Law Forensic Guild debating team was declared the Winner and Champion, taking home Acer laptops and the CD-ROM Lex Libris Law Library Series. Arellano's Rochelle Marie C. Roxas, Luis Warren and Charles Francis Decangchon, opposed the proposition that "term limits of elective officials should be lifted." With CVC Raoul R. Angangco, Simeon V. Marcelo, Head Judge, former defense secretary Avelino "Nonong" Cruz, Jr. bestowed upon Arellano's Luis Anthony K. Warren, the Judges' and Texters' Choice awards for Best Speaker, winning a cameraphone,  a trophy and a three day trip for two to Boracay. The Best Speaker's scores were tied between Luis Warren and ADDU's Therese Gemelo. CVC's Pancho Villaraza announced: "These debates are worth doing again. We will do this again."
The student publication of the university (excepting the College of Law) is the Atenews. Founded in the 1950s, Atenews serves as a stalwart guardian of students' rights from its inception up to the present. Notable alumni of the Atenews include Dr. Macario Tiu, three-time awardee of the Don Carlos Palanca Award for Literature and former moderator for the publication.
Blue Knights FM (94.7&nbsp;MHz), the official radio station of the University, was launched in January 2008 . The station serves as a training ground for Mass Communication majors. Blue Knights FM airs from 10 AM - 12 NN, Monday to Saturday. The station is located inside the Humanities Division. Blue Knights uses the frequency of Mellow Touch FM 94.7&nbsp;MHz.
The ''Samahan Central Board'', also referred to as SAMAHAN, is the official student government of the University. Together with the Campus Clubs Organization (CCO) and the General Assembly of Class Presidents (GACP), the Samahan Central Board is under the supervision of the Office of Student Affairs (OSA).
The Campus Clubs Organizations (CCO) has the mandate on all student organizations within the university, except the Special Organizations created by the Office of Student Affairs.
The GACP has the mandate for all duly elected class presidents.