The ACT and New South Wales have gross feed-in tariffs. Other State Governments have enacted net feed-in tariff schemes which have been criticised for not providing enough incentive for households to install solar panels and thus for not effectively encouraging the uptake of solar PV.
A uniform federal scheme to supersede all State schemes has been proposed by Tasmanian Greens Senator Christine Milne, but not enacted. National feed-in tariff systems have been enacted in numerous countries including Brazil, Canada, China and many EU countries.
The Federal Parliament has not yet enacted a national gross feed-in tariff scheme for renewable energy. However, a capital grant/rebate was offered of up to $8,000 per household for domestic installations and 50% for school installations up until June 2009.
In July 2008, a bill was introduced by Australian Greens Senator Christine Milne, (Tasmania), called the "Renewable Energy (Electricity) Amendment (Feed-In Tariff) Bill 2008". The bill is the subject of an inquiry by the Senate Standing Committee on Environment, Communications and the Arts.
22,000 people have signed a petition for a national gross feed-in tariff.
In a speech, the Federal Minister for Energy, Martin Ferguson, said that feed-in tariffs are technologically prescriptive and ideologically based, rather than being a market based mechanism. In response to the German feed-in tariff for solar, he suggested that Germany's solar subsidy meant German consumers paid more than    1 billion in additional power bills in 2007 to generate around 0.5% of Germany   s gross electricity consumption, suggesting that the policy does not deliver value for money. He also suggested than an Australian solar feed-in tariff may lead to greater PV panel imports rather than a significant expansion of Australian production.
Capped at $5 per day,
As the Australian Capital Territory ("ACT") scheme is a gross feed in scheme, it is a relatively easy task to estimate the payback time for various system sizes because the calculation is independent of electricity consumption. e.g. a well positioned location in the ACT could produce approximately 1800 kWh per year from a 1&nbsp;kW system or A$1,080 per year at a price of 60 c/kWh. On this basis payback for a 1&nbsp;kW system costing $5,000 net (includes $8,000 federal rebate & 22 RECS) would be around 5 years. Larger systems would take longer but would have a larger income stream over the life of the system.
The ACT Government established an inter-departmental committee to look at feed in tariffs in November 2007. There is some concern that a proposed commercial solar power plant, the feasibility of which is to be examined by a joint study be ACT government and ActewAGL, may undermine the proposed feed in tariff proposal.
The submission of the Independent Competition and Regulatory Commission 25 February 2008 was that there were issues to be resolved including:
Announced: September 2006
Come into force: The first of July this year, 2008.
Name of Law: "Electricity (Feed-In Scheme-Solar Systems) Amendment Bill 2008"
Runs out: 30 June 2028.
Normal tariff for electricity: $0.22 / kWh
Feed-in tariff: $0.44 / kWh.
Result: Not only will thousands of South Australian homes have solar systems installed, but many businesses will now have the opportunity to embrace this technology and turn their roofs into mini-renewable power stations. The South Australian Premier, Mike Rann, wants the government to be carbon neutral by the year 2020.
Note it is not clear whether there is a provision for the feed-in tariff to increase with natural increases to the price of electricity, at a multiple of two. This was the original intent, but may have got negotiated out. The 44 cent tariff is only paid for any electricity exported, so only when the system output exceeds domestic demand.
Rebates: The South Australian government does not offer any additional rebates or incentives to domestic customers, it   s a solar schools program.
Estimated payback: It   s very hard to calculate, but it will be best for systems of largest eligible size, where the domestic demand is smallest, or mainly occurs at night and low power consumption during the day. Houses without air-conditioning would seem to fit the bill.
Note: Whilst this, and many other schemes, on the surface, appear cost effective and even perhaps lucrative, at the current rates the reality is that it is no more financially effective than leaving your money in the bank, and less effective than investments. This is especially the case for the individual citizen. In addition to this, it is the citizen that has, so far, invested most in this technology. The only real benefit is the reduction in emissions, which in itself is debatable as production of panels and green technology takes place in developing countries that do not have regulatory control. Many citizens have therefore opted to not invest in this technology until feed-in rates are substantially increased, and/or major corporations, including the governments themselves lead by example.
On 8 May 2008, the NSW government announced that it intended to introduce feed in tariffs. Further details of the solar feed in tariff in NSW were announced on 23 November 2008 
NSW Feed-in Tariff Taskforce was established to advise the NSW Government on the details of a feed-in tariff scheme for NSW. Its representatives are from the Department of Water and Energy, the Department of Environment and Climate Change, the Department of Premier and Cabinet and NSW Treasury. In January 2009, the Taskforce issued a submission on the design of a feed-in tariff scheme for NSW.
On 23 June 2009, the government announced a Solar Bonus Scheme. This is a net feed-in tariff for the state rather than a gross tariff. Under this 20-year scheme, some residents, schools, small businesses and community groups will be paid $0.60 per kwh for the net amount of electricity sold back into the grid. As few as 42,000 households are expected to take advantage of the scheme. The scheme was set to begin on 1 January 2010 and to be reviewed in 2012. The Solar Bonus Scheme is payable to energy customers with solar panel systems up to 10&nbsp;kW in size;.
On 10 November 2009 it was reported that NSW will switch to a gross feed in tariff. This is expected to increase the average amount received by a household with solar panels by $1500 pa, a 60% increase, highlighting the difference in effect of gross compared to net feed in tariffs. This is expected to reduce the payback period for installation costs to about 8 years. The gross tariff will cost all households about $2 pa.
In October 2010 the New South Wales government has cut the solar feed in tariff to $0.20 per kWh, to the lowest level in Australia.
The Western Australian Government had committed to a limited Gross feed in tariff for household scale PV.  The scheme was to be funded for four years to the tune of $13.5m and based on a payment of 60c kW/h to re cover the capital cost of the system after any rebates.  After the capital cost is paid back the tariff will be reverted back to a lower rate or the existing Renewable Energy Buyback Scheme (REBS).
On 2 June 2009 the state government backflipped on this promise and has deferred the introduction of the scheme for 1 year until 1 July 2010.  In the new scheme a net metering system would be applied rather than gross.  The $13.5m of funds had already been allocated to systems installed prior to the 1 July 2009 implementation date in a public display of support for the concept.  The over-subscription highlighted the imbalance between public and state support for the renewable energy industry.
On 1 August 2010, the net feed in tariff commenced and existing customers can migrate to the new billing system. New customers will need to sign up the Renewable Energy Buyback Scheme from their state electricity provider, Synergy.
The Feed In Tariff offered by the state government is 40c whilst Synergy offers 7c via the Renewable Energy Buyback Scheme. Once the customer signs up, they will receive both incentives for 10 years. 
The situation is better for Horizon Power  residential customers, who are offered renewable energy buy-back rates equal to their electricity tariff rate (A2 tariff) less the GST component (10%). The current Electricity charge - cents per unit is 20.83c inc GST. Horizon Power's rebate is more than double the rate paid by Synergy.  
The Queensland Government Solar Bonus Scheme is a program that pays domestic and other small energy customers for the surplus electricity generated from roof-top solar photovoltaic (PV) systems that is exported to the Queensland grid. It commenced on 1 July 2008. The scheme provides for 44c/kWh (around twice times the current general domestic use tariff of 21.35c/kWh (inc GST))on the net amount exported to the grid, subject to having proper metering installed.
A feed-in tariff will ensure that Queenslanders benefit from the federal Photovoltaic Rebate Program. 
Victoria has legislated a net metered feed-in tariff scheme, which commenced in November 2009.
On 25 June 2009 it was announced that under the new net feed-in tariff scheme, households will be paid 60 cents for every excess kilowatt hour of energy fed back into the state electricity grid. This is about three times the current retail price for electricity. The feed-in tariff scheme is to run for 15 years from November 2009. The scheme applies to all household systems of up to 5&nbsp;kW capacity and has a cap of 100MW of generating capacity and/or a $10 per annum increase in the average household electricity bill.
The feed-in tariff system originally announced on 7 May 2008 had been described by environment groups as ineffective, as the then proposed 2&nbsp;kW cap on array size, combined with net metering, meant that very little surplus power would be put into the grid so very little of the high tariff would actually be paid.  Environment groups and renewable energy companies called for the Victorian feed-in tariff to be paid on gross metering with a 10&nbsp;kW cap on array size to overcome these problems, but these concerns were only partially addressed in the system now legislated.
On Tuesday, 3 March 2008, the Premier of Tasmania announced that the Government will consider a mid-year report on the introduction of minimum feed-in tariffs to support householders and small energy consumers using solar panels and other forms of domestic renewable energy and that provide surplus energy into the electricity grid.
Northern Territory is yet to make an announcement on feed-in tariffs as a means of subsidising and encouraging solar PV, other than in relation to Alice Springs.
In 2006 there was a bid to make Alice Springs a Solar City. Australian Government funding would give four different regions in Australia the chance to become a Solar City and share $75m funding to make solar power projects a reality. If successful, the Alice Springs project would involve solar power generation plus investigating energy efficiency, smart metering and tariff pricing.
In Alice Springs, an official Solar City, from May 2008 people with grid connected PV systems can sell all the solar electricity they generate back to Power and Water Corporation at 45 cents per kilowatt   hour, which is more than double the cost of purchasing electricity from the grid.
Outside of the Alice Springs Solar City area, people with Solar PV in the NT can arrange to sell their gross electricity production to the Power & Water Corporation of the Northern Territory at 14.38c. They can effectively use the grid as a bank and notionally re-purchase  the electricity at night.
Some electricity retailers are offering feed in tariff rates above the minimum stipulated by government. Many of the larger corporate retailers offer these incentives to capture larger proportions of the green electricity customer base, who are known to have lower churn rates.
According to the COAG communique released in November 2008 COAG agreed to a set of national principles to apply to new feed-in tariff schemes and to inform the reviews of existing schemes. These principles will promote national consistency of schemes across Australia.
These principles do not appear to support a gross feed in tariff as exists in Germany, but rather a net feed in tariff.
A Bill for a national feed-in tariff introduced by Senator Milne has not progressed after the Rudd government indicated it would not support such legislation. Some reasons were provided through the majority report of a Senate Committee examining the Bill. In the ACT, in February 2010, the ACT Independent Competition and Regulatory Commission proposed reducing the amount paid to RE generators under the Territory's FIT law.