As of the 2010 census, the population of the county and MSA was 151,131.  Its county seat is Graham.
Before being formed as a county, the region had at least one known small Southeastern tribe of Native American in the 18th century - the Sissipahaw who lived in the area bound by modern Saxapahaw, the area known as the Hawfields, and Haw River in the county  European settlers entered the region in the late 17th century chiefly following Native American trading paths, and set up their farms what they called the "Haw Old Fields", fertile ground previously tilled by the Sissipahaw. The paths later became the basis of the railroad and interstate highway routes.
Alamance County was named after Great Alamance Creek, site of the Battle of Alamance (May 16, 1771).  This pre-Revelutionary War battle  in which militia under the command of Governor William Tryon crushed the Regulator movement.  The Great Alamance Creek, and in turn the Little Alamance Creek, according to legend, were named after a local Native American word to describe the blue mud that was found at the bottom of the creeks.  Other legends say that the name came from another local Native American word meaning "noisy river" or for the Alamanni region of Rhineland, Germany, where many of the early settlers would have come from.
During the American Revolution, several small battles and skirmishes occurred in the area that would one day become Alamance County, several of them during the lead-up to the Battle of Guilford Courthouse, including Pyle's Massacre, the Battle of Lindley's Mill and the .
In the 1780s, the Occaneechi Native Americans returned to North Carolina from Virginia, this time settling in what is now Alamance County rather than their first location near Hillsborough. In 2002, the modern Occaneechi tribe bought  of their ancestral land in Alamance County and began a Homeland Preservation Project which includes a village reconstructed as it would have been in 1701 and a 1930s farming village.
During the early 19th century, the textile industry grew heavily in the area, and as such, the need for better transportation grew.  By the 1840s several mills were set up along the Haw River and near Great Alamance Creek and other major tributaries of the Haw.  Between 1832 and 1880, there were at least 14 major mills powered by these rivers and streams.  Mills were built by the Trollinger, Holt, Newlin, Swepson, and Rosenthal families, among others.  One of the mills, built in 1832 by Ben Trollinger, is still in operation.  It is owned by Copland Industries and sits in the unincorporated community of Carolina and is the oldest continuously-operating mill in the state of North Carolina.http://www.textilehistory.org/AlamanceCountyNC.html
One of the notable textiles produced in the area were the "Alamance Plaids" or "Glencoe Plaids" used in everything from clothing to tablecloths.  The Alamance Plaids manufactured by textile pioneer Edwin M. Holt were the first colored cotton goods produced on power looms in the South, and paved the way for the region's textile boom. (Holt's home is now the Alamance County Historical Society.) But by the late 20th century, most of the plants and mills had now gone out of business, including the mills operated by Burlington Industries, a company that was based in Burlington.
By the 1840s, the textile industry was booming, and the railroad was being built through the area as a convenient link between Raleigh and Greensboro. The county was formed January 29, 1849  from Orange County.
In 1861, the United States began to fragment due to growing questions of states' rights concerning issues of slavery, money, agriculture, and representation.  In February of that year, a peace conference was held in Washington, DC.  North Carolina sent five delegates to this conference, including Chief Justice Thomas Ruffin of the town of Haw River.  Justice Ruffin was opposed to secession, but was voted down.  Later on, President Buchanan said that if Ruffin had persisted, the war might have been averted.  In March, 1861, Alamance County residents voted overwhelmingly against North Carolina's secession from the Union, 1,114 to 254.  Two delegates were sent to the State Secession Convention, Thomas Ruffin and , were both in favor of remaining with the Union, as were most of the delegates who were sent to the convention.http://members.aol.com/jweaver303/nc/convvote.htm  At the time of the convention, around 30% of Alamance County's population were slaves (total population of c. 12,000 people including c. 3,500 slaves and c. 500 free blacks).
Overall, North Carolina was reluctant to join other Southern states in secession from the United States.  It opposed secession during the Peace Conference of 1861, and refused to secede from the Union when Abraham Lincoln was sworn in as President.  Repeated efforts by secessionists failed to convince the state legislature to secede from the Union failed.  Commencement of hostilities in Fort Sumter, South Carolina on April 12, 1861, however, changed public opinion towards secession.  When Lincoln called up troops, Governor John Ellis replied, "I can be no party to this wicked violation of the laws of the country and to this war upon the liberties of a free people. You can get no troops from North Carolina."  After a special legislative session, North Carolina's legislature unanimously voted in favor of secession on May 20, 1861.
Alamance County joined the rest of North Carolina as the state split off from the Union and joined the Confederate States.  Although no battles took place in the county itself, Alamance County did send its share of soldiers to the front lines.  In July 1861, for the first time in American history, soldiers were sent in to combat by rail. The 6th North Carolina was loaded on to railroad cars at Company Shops and transferred to the battlefront at Manassas, Virginia (First Battle of Manassas). 
Although the citizens of Alamance County were not directly affected throughout much of the war, in April 1865, the citizens witnessed firsthand their sons and fathers marching through the county, just days before the war ended with the surrender at Bennett Place near Durham.  At Company Shops General Joseph E. Johnston stopped to say farewell to his soldiers for the last time.  By the end of the war, 236 individuals from Alamance County had been killed in the course of the war, more than any other war since the county's founding.http://www.alamance-nc.com/Alamance-NC/The+Community/War+Memorial/Civil+War/
Some of the most significant effects of the Civil War were seen after the war. Alamance County briefly became a center of national attention when, in 1870, Wyatt Outlaw, Town Commissioner in Graham, was lynched by the "White Brotherhood," the Ku Klux Klan. He was president of the Alamance County Union League of America (an anti Ku Klux Klan group), helped to establish the Republican party in North Carolina and advocated establishing a school for African Americans. His offense was that Gov. Holden had appointed him a Justice of the Peace, and he had accepted the appointment. Outlaw   s body was found hanging thirty yards from the courthouse, a note pinned to his chest read:    Beware! You guilty parties     both white and black.    Outlaw was the central figure in the political cooperation between blacks and whites in the county.
Governor Holden declared Caswell County in a state of insurrection (July 8) and sent troops to Caswell and Alamance counties under the command of Union veteran George W. Kirk, beginning the so-called Kirk-Holden War. Kirk   s troops ultimately arrested 82 men.
The Grand Jury of Alamance County indicted sixty-three Klansmen for felonies and eighteen for the murder of Wyatt Outlaw. Soon after the indictments were brought, Conservatives within the legislature passed a bill to repeal the law under which the indictments had been secured. The sixty-three felony charges were dropped. The Conservatives then used a national program of    Amnesty and Pardon    to proclaim amnesty for all who committed crimes on behalf of a secret society. This was extended to the Klansmen of Alamance County. There would be no justice in the case of Wyatt Outlaw.
Support for the cause of Reconstruction led to the impeachment and removal of Governor William Holden by the North Carolina Legislature in 1871.
The county was once the state leader in dairy production. Several dairies including Melville Dairy in Burlington were headquartered in the county. With increasing real estate prices and a slump in milk prices, most dairy farms have been sold and many of them developed for real estate purposes.
During World War II Fairchild built airplanes at a plant on the eastern side of Burlington. Among the planes built at the plant were the AT-21 gunner used to train bomber pilots. Near the Fairchild plant was the Western Electric Burlington works. The plant built radar equipment and guidance systems for missiles on top of many other electronics for the government. The guidance system for the Titan missile was built there. The plant was closed in 1992 and sat abandoned until 2005, when it was purchased by a local businessman for manufacturing.
Alamance County is a member of the regional Piedmont Triad Council of Governments.  The county is led by the  and the , who is appointed by the Board of Commissioners.  County residents also elect 2 other county government offices: the Sheriff and Register of Deeds.
Alamance County adopted the council-manager form of government in the 1970s, where the day-to-day management of county business is done by an individual hired by the commissioners board.  Since the establishment of the office, the following persons have served as county managers of Alamance County:
Craig F. Honeycutt began serving as county manager in April 2009.  He came to Alamance County from the City of Laurinburg, North Carolina.
David I. Smith and D. J. Walker held dual roles as county manager and county attorney during their terms of service as county manager.
Hugh Webster was appointed to serve out the remaining 2 years of David Barber's term, when Barber was elected as Clerk of Court.
Alamance County is home to a local public education system, several private elementary and secondary schools, a community college, and a private university.
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which  is land and  (1.10%) is water.
The county is in the Piedmont physiographical region. The county has a general rolling terrain with the Cane Creek Mountains rising to over .GIS System Contours found on the  in the south central part of the county just north of Snow Camp. Bass Mountain one of the prominent hills in the range is home to a world renowned Bluegrass music festival every year.  There are also isolated monadnocks in the northern part of the county that rise to near or over . above sea level.
The largest river that flows through Alamance County is the Haw River, which eventually feeds into Jordan Lake in Chatham County, eventually leading to the Cape Fear River.  The county is also home to numerous creeks, streams, and ponds, including the Great Alamance Creek, where a portion of the Battle of Alamance was fought.  There are 3 large municipal reservoirs: Lake Cammack, Lake Mackintosh, and Graham-Mebane Lake (formerly Quaker Lake).
Alamance County has several state and federal highways running through it.
Going east-west in the county:
Alamance County, Burlington, Graham, Elon, Haw River, Swepsonville, and Mebane all have other small parks that are not listed here.  Major parks include:
Cedarock Park, located  south of the intersection of Interstate 85/40 and NC Highway 49.  Cedarock Park is home to the Cedarock Historic Farm, an Old Mill Dam, and two Disc Golf Courses.
The Burlington Royals are a rookie league baseball farm team based in Burlington.  They were previously known as the Burlington Indians, but changed affiliations in 2006 from Cleveland to Kansas City.  This version of the team has been active since 1985, but Burlington did host a minor league baseball team for many years under the Burlington Indians and Burlington Bees.
The Elon University Phoenix play in the town of Elon.  The Phoenix compete in the NCAA's Division I (Championship Subdivision in football) Southern Conference.  Intercollegiate sports include baseball, basketball, cross-country, football, golf, soccer, and tennis for men, and basketball, cross-country, golf, indoor track, outdoor track, soccer, softball, tennis, and volleyball for women.
Up until 1999, the mascot of Elon was the Fightin' Christians.  The moniker is said to have been coined by a sportswriter covering a contest in the 1930s between Elon and nearby Guilford College, a Quaker school. Prior to the 1930s, Elon was known simply as the Christians.  The nickname was chosen due to Elon's proximity to the Wake Forest Demon Deacons, and the Duke Blue Devils.  However, many did not feel that the nickname was universal enough for a team making the transition to Division I athletics, so a new mascot was adopted, the Phoenix.  The choice came from the 1923 fire that destroyed almost the entire campus.  Soon after the fire, the university trustees began planning to make Elon "rise from the ashes".  The Phoenix was a mythical creature that rose from the ashes of its predecessors.  The Christian symbolism is not lost with the Phoenix, however, which can be seen as a symbol of the Resurrection.
Today, Alamance County is often described as a "bedroom" community, with many residents living in the county and working elsewhere due to low tax rates, although the county is still a major player in the textile and manufacturing industries.
The current county-wide tax rate for Alamance County residents is 57.5 cents per $100 valuation.  This does not include tax rates imposed by municipalities or fire districts.
As of the census of 2000, there were 130,800 people, 51,584 households, and 35,541 families residing in the county.  The population density was 304 people per square mile (117/km  ).  There were 55,463 housing units at an average density of 129 per square&nbsp;mile (50/km  ).  The racial makeup of the county was 75.61% White, 18.76% Black or African American, 0.35% Native American, 0.90% Asian, 0.02% Pacific Islander, 3.19% from other races, and 1.16% from two or more races.  6.75% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.
There were 51,584 households out of which 31.10% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 52.10% were married couples living together, 12.70% had a female householder with no husband present, and 31.10% were non-families. 26.00% of all households were made up of individuals and 10.10% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older.  The average household size was 2.46 and the average family size was 2.95.
In the county the population was spread out with 23.80% under the age of 18, 9.90% from 18 to 24, 29.90% from 25 to 44, 22.30% from 45 to 64, and 14.10% who were 65 years of age or older.  The median age was 36 years. For every 100 females there were 92.50 males.  For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 89.00 males.
The median income for a household in the county was $39,168, and the median income for a family was $46,479. Males had a median income of $31,906 versus $23,367 for females. The per capita income for the county was $19,391.  About 7.60% of families and 11.10% of the population were below the poverty line, including 13.30% of those under age 18 and 12.90% of those age 65 or over.
Alamance County's Incorporated Cities and Towns are home to over 93,850 people.
The county is divided into thirteen townships, which are both numbered, named, and contain the following municipalities:
Over 54,000 people do not live in an incorporated community in Alamance County.
According to a 1975 study of the history of post offices in North Carolina history by Treasure Index, Alamance County has 27 ghost towns that existed in the 18th and 19th centuries that no longer exist.  Additionally, five other post offices no longer exist.  These towns and their post offices were either abandoned as organized settlements, or were absorbed into the larger communities that now make up Alamance County.