It is uncertain in what year Mitchell was born. Some sources suggest 1912, others 1913, and others list her year of birth as 1914. She weighed only a little over 3 pounds when born in Fall River, Massachusetts to parents Virne Wall Mitchell and Dr. Joseph Mitchell. When she learned how to walk, her father took her to the baseball diamond and taught her the basics of the game. Her next door neighbor, Dazzy Vance, taught her to pitch and showed her his "drop ball" a type of breaking ball.  Later, Vance would pitch in the major leagues and eventually be inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame. 
When Mitchell was 17, she played for a women's team in Chattanooga, Tennessee and attended a special baseball school in Atlanta, Georgia. There, she attracted the attention of Joe Engel, the president and owner of the Chattanooga Lookouts, who offered her a contract to play for the  season. On March 28, Mitchell signed a contract and became an official member of the Lookouts, a Class AA minor league team.
The New York Yankees and the Chattanooga Lookouts were scheduled to play an exhibition game in Chattanooga, Tennessee on April 1, 1931. Due to rain the game was postponed until the 2nd. Seventeen-year-old Jackie Mitchell, brought in to pitch in the first inning after the starting pitcher had given up a double and a single, faced Babe Ruth. After taking a ball, Ruth swung and missed at the next two pitches. Mitchell's fourth pitch to Ruth was a called third strike. The crowd roared for her. Babe Ruth was quoted in a Chattanooga newspaper as having said: "I don't know what's going to happen if they begin to let women in baseball. Of course, they will never make good. Why? Because they are too delicate. It would kill them to play ball every day."
Next up was Lou Gehrig, who swung through the first three pitches to strike out.
A few days after Mitchell struck out Ruth and Gehrig, baseball commissioner Kenesaw Mountain Landis voided her contract and declared women unfit to play baseball as the game was "too strenuous". Mitchell continued to play professionally, barnstorming with the House of David, a men's team famous for their very long hair and long beards.  While travelling with the House of David team she would sometimes wear a fake beard for publicity.  She retired in  at the age of 23 after becoming something of a side show     once being asked to pitch while riding a donkey.  She refused to come out of retirement when the All-American Girls Professional Baseball League formed in 1943. Major League Baseball would formally ban the signing of women to contracts on June 21, . The ban lasted until  when Carey Schueler was "drafted" by the Chicago White Sox for the 1993 season.
In  she was invited to throw out the ceremonial first pitch for the Chattanooga Lookouts on their season opening day.
She died in Fort Oglethorpe, Georgia on January 7, 1987, and was buried in Forest Hills Cemetery in Chattanooga.