The '''Prudential Tower''', also known as the '''Prudential Building''' or, colloquially, '''The Pru''', is a skyscraper in Boston, Massachusetts. The building, a part of the '''Prudential Center''' complex, currently stands as the 2nd-tallest building in Boston, behind the John Hancock Tower. The Prudential Tower was designed by Charles Luckman and Associates for Prudential Insurance.  Completed in 1964, the building is  tall, with 52 floors. It contains 1.2 million square feet (111,484 m  ) of commercial and retail space. Including its radio mast, the tower stands as the tallest building in Boston and the 26th-tallest in the United States, rising to  in height. A 50th-floor observation deck, called the "Prudential Skywalk", is currently the highest observation deck in New England that is open to the public, as the higher observation deck of the John Hancock Tower has been closed since the terror attacks of September 11, 2001. The building also has a restaurant on the 52nd floor, called Top of the Hub.
The Prudential Tower began construction in 1960. Upon its completion in 1964, the Prudential was the tallest building in the world outside of New York City, surpassing the Terminal Tower in Cleveland, Ohio.  It dwarfed the 1947 John Hancock building, seen at the left in the photo. This spurred the rival insurance company to build the 1975 John Hancock Tower, which is just slightly taller at .
Today, the Prudential is no longer even among the fifty tallest buildings in the USA in architectural height. Within Boston, in addition to the nearby John Hancock tower, many other tall buildings have since been built in the financial district, including the  Federal Reserve Bank. The Prudential and John Hancock towers still dominate the Back Bay skyline, but other tall buildings have arisen there since the late 1990s, perhaps most notably 111 Huntington Avenue, which is also part of the Prudential Center.
In the 1999, 2003, 2004 and 2007 Major League Baseball playoffs, the building's tenants turned on and off their lights to spell out "GO SOX", providing a visual for Boston Red Sox fans at nearby Fenway Park.
The Prudential Center is currently owned by Boston Properties.  The building is one of several Prudential Centers built around the United States (such as the tower in Chicago) constructed as capital investments by Prudential Financial (formerly, The Prudential Insurance Company of America).  Preceding Prudential Financial's demutualization, Prudential sold off many of its real estate assets, for instance most of the air rights in Times Square, and the Prudential Center in Boston, to put cash on the corporate balance sheets. 40% of the space was once home to The Gillette Company, now a unit of Procter & Gamble, but many of these floors have since been vacated. Boston-based law firm Ropes & Gray moved into many of these floors, including the 37th through 49th, in fall 2010.  Other major tenants include Partners HealthCare, Club Monaco, Accenture and CSN Stores. The building was sold to Boston Properties. However, Prudential Financial's then head of global marketing, and Boston native, Michael Hines, suggested that the real estate deal only go through with the condition that Prudential retain the name and signage rights for the Prudential Center and Prudential Tower.  Signage rights in Boston are very limited, and Prudential's are grandfathered.  The other notable backlit signs allowed above  include The Colonnade Hotel, Boston, State Street Bank sign, Sheraton sign, and Citgo Sign.  Using similar negotiations, Prudential retains two notable signs in Times Square.
The main rooftop mast supports two FM master antennas, and a top-mounted television antenna previously used by WBPX. The upper master antenna, manufactured by Electronics Research, Inc. (ERI), serves WZLX 100.7, WBMX 104.1, WMJX 106.7, and WXKS-FM 107.9.  The lower master antenna was installed in the late 1990s, also by ERI, and serves WBOS 92.9, WTKK 96.9, and WROR 105.7. The FM stations each transmit with approximately 22,000 watts ERP and in HD Radio.  The roof also has a smaller tower with standby antennas for all of the FM broadcast tenants.
The Prudential Center, situated on , is in the Back Bay neighborhood at 800 Boylston Street and houses a   shopping mall, the Shops at Prudential Center, in the base.  Known to locals as "the Pru," it is bordered by Belvedere, Dalton, Boylston, and Exeter streets, along with Huntington Avenue. Before the Prudential development, the site was a switch yard for the Boston and Albany Railroad. By 1965, a part of the negotiations for the Massachusetts Turnpike extension included the construction of the roadway below parts of the Prudential complex. The Prudential still has its own (eastbound only) exit from the turnpike for this reason.
The new skyscraper at 111 Huntington Avenue was completed in 2002, directly across the street from The Colonnade Hotel, at 120 Huntington Avenue. The third tower of the Prudential Center is 101 Huntington Avenue; at a mere 25 stories, it is overshadowed by the other two.
The Hynes Convention Center is connected to the complex, which combined was considered the first mixed-use development in New England and awarded the Urban Land Institute's Best Mixed Use Development Award in 2006. By the fall of 2007 another major development was completed along Boylston Street at the Prudential Center complex: the Mandarin Oriental, Boston hotel.
The complex has direct indoor connections to two MBTA stops, Prudential and Back Bay. Prudential is on the Huntington Avenue side of the building directly outside the Colonnade Hotel, and is the first station on the Green Line "E" Branch after the split from the main line at Copley Square. Back Bay is a stop on the Orange Line and is accessible to the complex via the Copley Place mall, to which it is attached by a walkway over Huntington Avenue. Back Bay is also served by Amtrak, including the Acela high-speed train. This means it is possible to travel from the observation lounge in the Pru to the top of the MetLife Building in New York City without going outdoors (by walking through the mall to Back Bay Station, hopping on Amtrak to Penn Station in New York, and taking the subway to Grand Central Terminal).
In addition, the Prudential Center serves as one of two starting locales for the Boston Duck Tours, a popular tourist attraction in the city.
The Prudential Tower's most notable film credit was the 2007 Disney film Underdog. It can be seen with 111 Huntington Avenue and the John Hancock Tower as Underdog is flying over the city of Boston.
The tower can also be seen with 111 Huntington Avenue and the John Hancock Tower on the opening and closing shots of most NECN news reports.