The '''family of Barack Obama''', the current President of the United States of America, is made up of people of African-American, English, Kenyan (Luo), and Irish heritage, who are known through Obama's writings and other reports.RTE news report March, 2007:   His immediate family is the First Family of the United States. The Obamas are the first First Family of African-American descent.
 and has often referred to his family during his candidacy and term as President.
The Obamas are members of the Luo, Kenya's third-largest ethnic group, which is
Barack Obama has called his wife Michelle "the most quintessentially American woman I know."  Her family is of African-American heritage, descendents of Africans of the American Colonial Era. Michelle Obama's family history traces back from slavery to Reconstruction to the Great Migration North. Some of Michelle's relatives still reside in South Carolina.
Michelle's earliest known relative on her father's side is her great-great grandfather Jim Robinson, born in the 1850s, who was an American slave on the Friendfield plantation in Georgetown, South Carolina. The family believes that after the Civil War he remained a Friendfield plantation sharecropper for the rest of his life and that he was buried there in an unmarked grave.
Jim married twice, first to a woman named Louiser with whom had two sons, Gabriel and Fraser, Michelle Obama's great-grandfather. There was also a daughter born to the family, but there is no reference to a name and she is believed to have died as a  child. His second marriage to Rose Ella Cohen bore 6 other children. Fraser had an arm amputated as a result of a boyhood injury. He worked as a shoemaker, newspaper salesman and in a lumber mill. Carrie Nelson, Gabriel Robinson's daughter, now 80, is the oldest living Robinson and the keeper of family lore.
At least three of Michelle Obama's great-uncles served in the military of the United States. One aunt moved to Princeton, New Jersey, where she worked as a maid, and cooked Southern-style meals for Michelle and her brother, Craig, when they were students at Princeton University.
 Robinson was formerly a secretary at Spiegel catalog and a bank. While Michelle and Barack Obama were campaigning in 2008, Robinson tended the Obama's young children and does the same while currently living in the White House itself as part of the First Family; she is the first live-in grandmother there since Elivera M. Doud during the Eisenhower administration.  Some media outlets have dubbed Robinson the "First Granny".
According to genealogists, Barack Obama's distant cousins include the multitude of descendants of his maternal ancestors from all along the early-American Atlantic seaboard as well as paternal, Kenyan relations belonging to the Luo tribe, many descending from a 17th century ancestor named Owiny. For example, George W. Bush, the 43rd U.S. president, is the eleventh cousin of Barack Obama. ''The New York Times'' science writer Nicholas Wade argues that with eleven generations leading back to their common progenitor, Samuel Hinckley, the relationship between the 43rd President and the 44th President is "genetically meaningless".
Five volumes of family genealogy (as compiled at the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints' Family History Library in Salt Lake City, Utah), were presented by Mormon leaders to Obama in July 2009. In a statement, Obama said he was "looking forward to reading through the materials with my daughters. It   s something our family will treasure for years to come."