The film is a remake of the 1941 film ''It Started with Eve'', with the genders reversed.
Young heiress Cynthia Dulaine (Sandra Dee) visits a fancy nightclub, where she is charmed by performer Warren Palmer (Andy Williams), who proposes to her in front of the entire audience. Shortly after, she is informed that her wealthy grandfater Philip Dulaine (Maurice Chevalier) is dying. Even though the media are on top of the case, Cynthia boards the next plane in Boston to visit him. Philip admits that he regrets that she has never found the right man, but she insists that "kind, considerate and handsome" Warren is the one who she wants to spend the rest of her life with. Philip fears that Warren loves her only because of her money and fame, but Cynthia tells him that he is just as rich.
Stuck because of airport difficulties, Warren is unable to follow Cynthia. Realizing that her grandfather will not die a happy man if he does not meet Warren, Cynthia takes the first man she sees and makes him pose as Warren. This man happens to be Paul Benton (Robert Goulet), who impresses Philip without even trying. Problems seem to have been solved quickly, until Philip unexpectedly regains his health. Sylvia quickly follows Paul to the airport to prevent him from leaving for Cleveland by offering him to help his business through strong connections.
Philip tells the 'couple' that business is in danger. A meeting shortly after proves disastrous for Cynthia: a $5 million loan will be withdrawn by the bank due to Philip's heart attack. Paul tries to help out by announcing that Cynthia will put in her own money. Cynthia is outraged and cuts their arrangement short. Paul later comes crawling back in front of Philip, aware that the title of the soon to be grandson-in-law of Dulaine will give him a great deal of power. Cynthia later yells at him for his action, and Philip overhears Paul mentioning that he will pose as Warren Palmer until his own formula will be authorized a test within the Dulaine company. Cynthia, though, announces that the real Warren Palmer will arrive soon, meaning that Paul's presence is not required any longer.
Deciding to give his granddaughter a hard time over lying to him, Philip pretends to still be ill in order to get away with unrealizable requests. Cynthia is ordered to bring back 'Warren Palmer' (Paul Benton), and the real Warren Palmer must pose as Paul Benton, while being given a hard time by Philip's servants. Even though they still think that Philip is under the understanding that she is engaged to 'Warren Palmer' (Paul Benton), Cynthia and Warren arrange a romantic getaway in the forest. Soon, they find that their vacation has been sabotaged, which sparks them to leave early. Back in town, Cynthia reluctantly takes 'Warren Palmer' (Paul Benton) to a formal ball, and is surprised how much she enjoys his company. Returning home, they find Warren in a jealous rage, eventually starting a fight with Paul.
Cynthia is ashamed by the fight and takes refuge with her grandfather, who makes her realize that she is in love with Paul. The next morning she kisses both Paul and Warren to find some answers on her true feelings. Paul catches the couple and announces his plans on leaving for good. Philip tries to prevent this by revealing to Cynthia that he knew the entire truth all along. Together, they make a plan to stop Paul from boarding a plane by cancelling his reservation. Warren, meanwhile, has resorted himself to the airport as well, and tells Paul that Cynthia broke off their engagement. Paul immediately returns to the Dulaine mansion, where he grows convinced by Cynthia that he is the person she is in love with.