Warren Lockridge, the son of Augusta and Lionel Lockridge, was a callow young man whose chief interest seemed to be seducing the young women of Santa Barbara. After realizing that he would not get far with Jade Perkins, Warren took an interest in Summer Blake, the sister of  Gina DeMott, but their love story was cut off when Summer was brutally murdered by the carnation killer, later known as Peter Flint. Warren had little time for grieving because he was one of the suspects in the murder of Channing Capwell Jr., but he was eventually cleared of all suspicion.
After a short fling with Elizabeth Peale, Warren met Maggie Gillis, a promising young cop, and they fell in love. That relationship was ruined when Warren learned Maggie was taking care of her invalid husband and that she would never leave him. Warren then started gambling and losing large amounts of money, and eventually decided it would be best if he left town. He returned shortly thereafter but discovered that most of the people he cared about were also gone, so he decided to leave once again.
Four years later, Warren returned to Santa Barbara a much wiser man. He received a shock when he learned that his grandmother Minx Lockridge was the mother of Cassandra Benedict, a woman with whom Warren had had a fling. Warren ended up with Angela Raymond, but Cassandra constantly tried to break up the couple. Warren was accused of murdering Amado Gonzales, but discovered that the real murderer was Craig Hunt.
Cassandra stopped at nothing to break up Warren and Angela, even trying to poison Angela, which resulted in Warren's father, Lionel, ending up in a hospital. Warren received the shock of his life when his mother revealed to him that Lionel was not his biological father. Augusta left town without naming Warren's real father. Warren had a hard time accepting and dealing with this revelation.
Warren and Lionel remained friends, and Angela had stood by him. Warren took up a career in journalism, where he met a young and talented boy named Troy.  It later turned out was actually a girl, B.J. Walker, in a disguise. While B.J. was engaged in a court case, Warren showed his support for her and the couple fell in love. Angela had left Warren to be with Ted Capwell, so the road was clear for B.J. and Warren. Warren asked her to marry him, and their wedding took place in the final episode of the series.