In addition to his responsibilities as a church leader, he has taken the "CA Worship Band" on numerous overseas trips, including several trips to Southeast Asia and the Philippines.  He has worked alongside Franklin Graham, Greg Laurie, Jack Hayford, Bill Hybels, Rick Warren and at Promise Keepers events.
In 2000, Walker released his album ''Never Gonna Stop'', which earned a larger reception than his previous albums, peaking at number one hundred and fifty three on the billboard 200 chart. The album included several of Walker's well knowns songs, including "Only A God Like You" and "He Knows My Name". In 2004, Walker released his album, ''Make it Glorious'', which was recorded live at Regent University with a 50-member choir. A choral arrangement, arranged and orchestrated by Bradley Knight, of songs previously written by Tommy Walker entitled, ''That's Why We Praise Him: Celebrating the Songs of Tommy Walker'', was also released in 2004. The choral collection was followed by a second choral collection of songs by Walker, ''Great and Marvelous: Celebrating the Songs of Tommy Walker Volume 2'', in 2005, which earned Walker a dove award nomination. On March 18, 2008, following eight live recordings and many years as a worship leader, Tommy Walker released his first studio recording, ''I Have A Hope''. The album was produced by producer Ed Cash and labeled by Maranatha! Music. In support of his national studio debut, Walker made appearances at the National Christian Musicians Summit, Liberty University and the National Worship Leadership Conference, run by ''Worship Leader Magazine''. In an interview, Walker said that he had been offered deals by record labels and publishers when his songs where first being recorded, but he had declined the offers because he had grown up with a negative perception on the music industry.
Tommy Walker has cited Justo Almario, Abraham Laboriel, Andre Crouch, Lindell Cooley and Darlene Zschech as influences.
Tommy Walker is the son of Fred and Eileen Walker, who were once the pastors of an independent charismatic church. Walker's sister, Janey Stewart, and her husband, Sam Stewart, are the founders and overseers of Charlie's Lunch, a worldwide faith based relief organization. One of Walker   s brothers, Dale Walker is the founder and director of Heart of the World, an interdenominational, worldwide ministry, that operates Borderland Kids program, which is a program that provides food to needy children in the United States. Hilary (Walker) Overton, a niece of Tommy Walker, and her husband David, administrate Glory Reborn, a midwifery clinic in the Philippines. Tommy Walker is married to Robin Walker, and together, the couple has four children, Jake, Levi, Emmie and Eileen.