This is a '''list of diplomatic missions in the United States'''. At present, 176&nbsp;nations maintain diplomatic missions to the United States in the capital, Washington, D.C. Nine nations also attribute their missions at the United Nations in New York as their official embassies to the United States. However, only those offices in New York that serve as an official diplomatic mission to the United States are listed here. For a complete list of diplomatic missions to the United Nations, see List of current Permanent Representatives to the United Nations.
Note: As of April 2008, there were 1,175 consulates and trade offices in 134 U.S. cities in addition to the missions listed here. The United States Department of State maintains the official consular list.
The following countries maintain chanceries (embassy buildings) in Washington, D.C. as their primary diplomatic missions to the United States. Entries marked with an asterisk (*) have chanceries located on or near a portion of Massachusetts Avenue known as Embassy Row.
The following countries or entities have missions in Washington, D.C., though they may not have full diplomatic relations with the United States government.
New York City is the largest city in the United States. It is home to the General Assembly of the United Nations and all 194 member and observer states send permanent delegations. Nine diplomatic missions in New York City listed below are also formally accredited as each country's official embassy to the United States. All are consulates-general unless otherwise noted.
Los Angeles, the second-largest city in the United States, is home to 60 diplomatic missions, more than any other city on the West Coast and any U.S. city except New York and Washington. Many of these consulates are located along Wilshire Boulevard
Chicago is home to 52 missions, the fourth-most after Washington DC, New York and Los Angeles.
San Francisco is home to 39 missions.
Houston, the largest city in Texas and the Southern United States, is home to 37 missions.
Miami is home to 35 diplomatic missions.  Due to its location, many Latin American and Caribbean countries maintain consulates there.
Atlanta is home to 24 missions.
Boston is home to 22 missions.
Many cities have only one or two consulates; these are often with Mexico (which has 50 offices in the United States), or Canada (which has 23).
Guam is home to six missions, all of which are Asian or Pacific countries
Honolulu is home to eight missions, all of which are Asian or Pacific countries
San Juan, Puerto Rico has eight consulates, seven of which are with Latin American countries.  It has the largest number of consulates outside of the Continental United States.
Seattle has six consulates, the third-most of any city on the West Coast
Due to the large number of Mexican Americans, Mexico has 50 diplomatic missions in the United States, more than any country has with any other country.  Many of these are smaller cities in the Southwestern United States