The same route is also followed by Midland service 9 (which extends to Lodge Farm via Bentley), National Express West Midlands route 333 (which extends to Wolverhampton via Lodge Farm & Willenhall), National Express West Midlands, Finesse Coaches & Sandwell Travel route 334 (which extends to Bilston via Rough Hay) and National Express West Midlands & Midland Bus Company route 339 (which extends to Bilston via Moxley). 
Services 333E currently links Walsall with Darlaston via Pleck, travelling along the Wednesbury, Walsall and Darlaston Roads. This is the same route which is followed by buses on services 333, 334 & 339. 
However, thanks to a bit of good luck on National Express West Midlands behalf, A2Z Travel had their licence revoked on 31st March 2009, meaning they completely withdrew from the corridor.
It is worth noting that, while operators had withdrawn from the route since the 337 has been introduced, they were instantly replaced by other companies up until early December 2009, when Golden Line withdrew its journeys on the 334 without replacement.
Currently over 15 buses an hour serve the corridor, National Express West Midlands operate their services to a combined six minute frequency, whilst the other operators run their services at a half hourly basis. Evening and Sundays see a drastic reduction in services, just two buses, both run by National Express West Midlands run along the corridor per hour.
The 333E is now operated using Volvo B6LEs. Previously it was operated using MCW Metrobuses, with regular appearances from the B6LEs. It is however quite regular to see variety on the route, it is quite regular for Volvo B10Ls, Volvo B7RLEs and Volvo B7TLs to appear on the route.
Other National Express West Midlands services along the corridor are operated by Volvo B6LEs, Volvo B7RLEs and Volvo B10Ls.
Dennis Darts, (Step-Entrance) operate on all other services on the corridor, with the exception of the 9, which is operated by low floor Darts and also run by Optare Solos.
No known changes are due.