In 1990, four members of the legendary AIDS activist group ACT UP   Keith Cylar, Charles King, Eric Sawyer and Virginia Shubert   decided to dedicate themselves to serving one of New York City   s most neglected populations: the tens of thousands of homeless men, women, and children in New York City living with HIV and AIDS. The activists called their new group Housing Works because they believed that stable housing was the key to helping HIV-positive people live healthy and fulfilling lives and to prevent the further spread of the virus.
The organization runs a chain of ten thrift shops, a bookstore, a catering company and a screen printing business as social enterprises to support their work and lower their dependence on grants and donations.  They also provide health care and legal aid services.  The group has satellite offices in Albany, New York and Brooklyn, New York.
The charity hired famous chef Michael Sherman as its catering chef for its bookstore cafe.  The bookstore puts on a series of odd workshops; one in February 2010 focused on marketing some feminine hygiene products, another was an anti-love book talk, and yet another was a Tumblr talk.  Past events have included a spelling bee for adults, and a "story time" for toddlers.
Housing Works is well known in New York City for its chain of upscale thrift shops.  The ''New York Times'' frequently mentions the shops in its neighborhood reviews.
In early 2010, Housing Works became involved in providing assistance to victims of Haiti's earthquake, especially those living with HIV/AIDS, by re-building three health clinics.Ben Smith, "Warren bids on ponytail," Blog, ''Politico'', February 4, 2010, found at , citing . Accessed February 23, 2010.Staff, "Delta Helps HIV/AIDS Haiti Relief Workers," ''On Top Magazine'', February 2, 2010, found at . Accessed February 23, 2010.AP staff, "AIDS activist cutting 14-inch ponytail for Haiti benefit", ''New York Post'', February 5, 2010, found at . Accessed February 23, 2010.  Housing Works CEO Charles King auctioned off his trademark pony tail, and one bidder was Evangelical preacher Rick Warren.  When Housing Works relief workers were forced to "abandon eight carry on bags filled with relief supplies" due to high fees, Delta Air Lines agreed to ship the supplies for free.
Housing Works is involved in advocating for health care reform.