Note:  If you are seeing this page as a result of an attempt to re-nominate an article for deletion, you must manually edit the AfD nomination links in order to create a new discussion page using the name format of  .  When you create the new discussion page, please provide a link to this old discussion in your nomination. -->
The result was delete.  I'll be creating a redirect to Dreams from My Father, but that's a simple editorial decision seperate from the closing of this deletion debate. -   04:18, 7 July 2008 (UTC)
This is yet another distant relative of Barack Obama for whom an article has been created. His only notability is that he is (very rarely) mentioned in articles about Obama and has no inherent notability. As has been demonstrated many times on previously deleted articles such as Malia Obama and Family of Barack Obama, notability is not inherited.  All of the prior arguments are as applicable here.  Obama's coffee mug is often mentioned in profiles of him, but we don't need to start an article called Coffee mug of Barack Obama.   ( ) 03:25, 30 June 2008 (UTC)
Check out this article http://blogs.abcnews.com/politicalpunch/2008/06/from-the-fact-c.html ABC is reputable, not sure where an ABC blog ranks. I had never heard of Malik. Not sure if this mostly pro-delete crowd is much concerned, but it seemed related enough to this discussion to mention. --  ( ) 06:55, 5 July 2008 (UTC)
This article from 2004 http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/6333496 makes Malik and Abongo sound like they ''must'' be the same man. It also says Obama was 43 in the mid 1980s . . . . so much for the mainstream media getting this stuff right, but it was written even before Barak was a U.S. senator.--  ( ) 07:05, 5 July 2008 (UTC)
A number of news articles in the past 1-2 weeks prominently mentioned Malik Obama. As mentioned above, it seems it must be Abongo/Roy. If pro-deletion wikipediaites succeed in removing this article we may never know how all of these people fit together (though I am sure some enterprising journalist will put the pieces together). We all know the mainstream media wastes time on non-noteable people, I am just not convinced either Abongo or Malik fit that category.--  ( ) 07:13, 5 July 2008 (UTC)
It looks like at least one other person is as concerned about this deletion movement as I am. And this is from a previous go around where Roy's article was successfully deleted.
See: http://www.songwave.com/articles/abongo-obama.htm
I don't know that I agree with all that that author says, but I do agree that it raises interesting questions about what is kept and what is deleted on Wikipedia. ''This is especially odd since I don't see that there is anything worth covering up here''.--  ( ) 02:35, 6 July 2008 (UTC)
I've seen references that this has been debated before. Is this true? If so, how many times? Where are those debate records? Was it done under the name Roy Obama?--  ( ) 03:26, 6 July 2008 (UTC)
Another Wikipedian directed me to this, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Deletion_review/Log/2008_February_24
It would be good to know if this article has been deleted more than once prior to this early July 2008 discussion. 
Author James B. Stewart wrote a brilliant book on the Clintons called ''Blood Sport''.
In it he is highly critical of Hillary Clinton for being the leading advocate of sweeping Whitewater under the rug. As we all know, that was a strategic blunder that nearly cost Bill Clinton the presidency.
It is wrong to cover things up and the cover-ups are almost always worse than the facts.
Abongo Obama is a minor character in the news this year. But he is in the news (especially if Malik and Abongo are one in the same). 
Notability is subjective but it would be easy to find countless numbers of less notable people with articles on Wikipedia.
Barack Jr. has an important relationship with his brother, however limited it might be.
Political extremists and conspiracy minded folks are using Abongo and others to twist the facts about Barack Obama.
If the facts are easier to find, they will be harder to twist.--  ( ) 03:09, 6 July 2008 (UTC)
Here is the definition of red herring as found at http://www.nizkor.org/features/fallacies/red-herring.html
A Red Herring is a fallacy in which an irrelevant topic is presented in order to divert attention from the original issue. The basic idea is to "win" an argument by leading attention away from the argument and to another topic. This sort of "reasoning" has the following form: 
Topic A is under discussion. 
Topic B is introduced under the guise of being relevant to topic A (when topic B is actually not relevant to topic A). 
Topic A is abandoned. 
If you have voted for delete, please re-read the actual article which I updated this morning. Abongo is an important man in the life of Barack Obama. Barack makes this clear in his memoir. That alone makes him worthy of an article on Wikipedia. 
I don't know that notability is actually irrelevant, but it is at best suspect as the primary reason for deletion.--  ( ) 18:47, 6 July 2008 (UTC)
A reading of   makes this article a no-brainer for keeping. Barack wrote extensively on his brother in his memoir. Numerous other sources have written about him, though not at as much length as Barack himself. While ''Dreams from my Father'' could be called an autobiography, it is Barack's not Obama/Roy's autobiography. If it were the latter it looks like it might fail the Wikipolicy on acceptable sources. 
The overwhelming deletion movement on this page is very confusing.--  ( ) 18:58, 6 July 2008 (UTC)
Since the person B's family knows as Abongo or Roy is known to be the "Malik" Obama of any number of prestigious news reports, eg
More from Utahredrock: Even I cannot believe I have anything else to say about saving this article, but I do.
I   ve tried to keep the tone civil and on target. I see a difference between arguing passionately for something I believe in and attacking those that disagree. I mean no disrespect to anyone who has weighed in on the deletion side of this debate.
Yet my impassioned language has raised the ire of some and I've dealt with some of the most personal attacks since I started contributing.
One user who voted delete, LotLE, on a related topic did research on me and inserted my real name into that discussion. I thought that that was unacceptable, and at least one other Wikipedian agreed, though LotLE never apologized. 
Another user, Tvoz, defended LotLE by pointing out that LotLE just used my first name (a ''common'' one she said) and a "random" initial. Yet that random initial is the first letter of my last name. 
S. Dean Jameson seemed fed up with me. Who can blame him? Then when I thought I was agreeing with him he told me to    just stop    and pointed out that I wasn   t being persecuted, people just disagreed with me.
Of course he is right, nobody has persecuted me here. But personal information has been revealed. No I haven't been persecuted, but I still feel burnt.
My opinion that deletion has the same effect as suppression drew attack. They're not the same, but the result is similar. If it's deleted, it's also supressed--at least in wiki-land. 
To whatever individual or group that makes the final decision on this article be aware that if you delete this, it will almost certainly come up again. Abongo Obama is too prominent based on his own brother   s book and his own brother   s prominence. Vote how you will. (I won   t create it--and didn't create this one--I don   t have the time or energy.)
Abongo   s article was already deleted at least once.
Why it does a service to sweep this article out of existence is beyond me. Tvoz fears that it will be used as a coatrack for Obama haters. With editors like Tvoz on the job, I am sure all mistruths will be promptly removed as they should be.
I asked rhetorically if there was a conspiracy among the deletionists. I don   t believe there is an actual organized group, but I do believe there is a misguided notion that by deleting this article we are doing the right thing. When I asked that question before S. Dean Jameson deleted my comment. S. Dean claimed it was a personal insult to all those that voted to delete. I did not mean it that way. 