The '''Moment of Truth World Tour''' was the second worldwide tour by American R&B/Pop singer, Whitney Houston. The tour started in North America during the summer of 1987, following the release of her second album ''Whitney''. The tour continued overseas during 1988 in Europe, Japan, Hong Kong, and Australia.
Following the release of ''Whitney'', Houston began promoting the album with a world tour. She began on July 4 in Tampa, Florida, where she played to over 70,000 people.  She returned to the Sunshine State where she ended her North American leg at the Orange County Convention Center in December, 1987.
In Europe, Houston visited 12 countries, playing to over half a million fans. Houston played nine consecutive nights at Wembley Arena in London. At the same time, the singer had just broken The Beatles' record of seven consecutive #1 singles in the US. A party was thrown with guests such as Elton John, Fleetwood Mac, and Clive Davis. Houston cancelled an Italian concert date after agreeing to fly back to London to pay tribute to a then-imprisoned Nelson Mandela who was celebrating his birthday. Houston performed a set at Wembley Stadium, playing to over 72,000 fans during the historic event. Following this, Houston resumed her tour in Italy. In 1988, Houston returned from the European leg to perform a benefit concert for the United Negro College Fund on August 28 at Madison Square Garden in New York. It was Houston's only North American date during 1988 after playing 89 dates the previous year. The concert raised over $300 million for the UNCF.
The tour was one of the ten highest-grossing tours of the year. The North American leg of the tour alone grossed over $24 million, enough to make her the second highest-earning female entertainer of the year according to Forbes. In addition, the European leg was sold out.
Like her previous tour, Houston again performed on a round stage in the center of the arena or auditorium so that everyone can see her. The seven-piece band was situated below her.  There were two outfit changes; no stage props. However, unlike her previous tour, Houston called upon three backup dancers during the uptempos. Jonathan Butler and Kenny G opened during the North American leg.
 Like her debut tour, Houston proved herself to be a creative musician. She rearranged most of the songs into soulful jazzy numbers and did a lot of improvisation. ''The Montreal Gazette'' said, "Whatever faults the 24-year-old singer has, she is first and foremost a creative musician." The pop hit "How Will I Know" was given a jazzy beginning and gospel-like ending. "You Give Good Love" was slowed down into a steamy and sensual slow jam. Houston often scatted with sax player Jay Davidson on "Just the Lonely Talking Again". Most critics noted "He/I Believe" and "Greatest Love of All" as being the show's highlights.
Despite the praise for her voice and arrangements, many critics noted her lack of dancing and movements. ''The Richmond Times'' said "she is about as stiff as a cardboard box." Some noted that she lacked a true personality. Others complained that despite the name of the tour, she followed the same formula as her previous tour.
Note: Not all the North American dates are listed.
One of the Wembley Arena shows in London was recorded and broadcast live on Rai Uno TV in Italy. There were no recordings released to the public.