Note:  If you are seeing this page as a result of an attempt to re-nominate an article for deletion, you must manually edit the AfD nomination links in order to create a new discussion page using the name format of  .  When you create the new discussion page, please provide a link to this old discussion in your nomination. -->
The result was    '''merge''' to an article to be determined through the editorial process.
Our first approximation, the headcount, indicates that there are on the order of 25 people who want the article deleted; this includes circa 5 "speedy delete"s and circa 5 "delete or merge"s. About ten people want the article to be merged somewhere (Early life and career of Barack Obama and Barack Obama, Sr. have been proposed as a target, among others). Finally, circa 15 people want the article to be kept. (These figures include rounding and probably counting errors; a few oddball opinions were also discounted.)
This is (so I'm told) not a vote, so I must consider the strength of the arguments. To determine that strength, I'm reviewing them in the light of our applicable policies, guidelines and precedents. Essentially, the "keep" camp is of the opinion that the subject meets   on account of his coverage by the media, while the others say that this coverage occurred only because of (and viewed through the lens of) his brother's fame, and that notability is not inherited. Neither of these arguments is evidently more persuasive than the other, and both are present to some degree in our rules and current practice. In the rules, we have   but also  ; in precedent, we have deleted numerous articles about children of pop stars ''et al'', but also kept others who have found some recognition in their own right. Malik Abongo Obama is clearly on the border between the two outcomes, and I won't pretend that I can objectively determine who's right in his case.
So we're back to the headcount. It tells me that a) there is no consensus to delete this content outright, but also that b) there is consensus that Malik Abongo Obama does not currently deserve an article of his own. The only outcome consistent with these observations is that the article is to be merged into another article. It's up to the community of editors to decide on the target; in the meantime, I'm editorially redirecting the article to Barack Obama. Feel free to change the redirect target at will. The amount of material that is to be merged will have to depend on the scope of the eventual target article, so that it will have an appropriate weight within the article. Should Malik Abongo Obama later become distinctly more notable, his biography can be spun off into a separate article again, once there's consensus for that.
A note on procedure: The "speedy delete" opinions are discounted insofar as they don't also express an opinion on the merits of the article, because the article is now substantially different from its previously deleted version, and because the volume of the discussion here clearly requires a review ''de novo''. Just please don't immediately open a third AfD. Thanks for bearing with me.   21:01, 12 July 2008 (UTC)
The person known by various news organizations (eg----
Well, this is a bit of a mess now, isn't it?  I can only apologise that RL prevented from doing the follow-up conversations that would have prevented this...  Regardless:
The only difference would be that this article is visible (and may be improved) during the time an additional examination takes place.  So, my opinion as the closing administrator is that this debate should be allowed to have it's "time in court" despite that not being strictly by  .  My opinion as a random editor is that this article does not merit inclusion on its own, but that a section within '''Obama Family''' or some such would serve. -   06:49, 7 July 2008 (UTC)
The main argument to delete is the alleged non-notability of Abongo/Roy/Malik? Obama. The guy   s life is forever changed because of his remarkably talented brother who has a good chance at becoming the president of the United States. We edit Wikipedia, I hope, less as voters and more as arbiters of facts.
What got me interested in the family of Barack Obama was the viral email that was going around claiming he is not a Christian and he is a _________ extremist. While I could see through the lie immediately, I had friends who just as immediately bought in to it. When I tried to find information on the supposed accomplices to Barack   s supposed religious views, it was hard to find a thing on the Internet.
As editors of Wikipedia we have responsibility and power. We have a responsibility to do our best to get the facts out. We have power because in this age of Google and Wikipedia circa 2008, tens of millions of people look to us, as imperfect as we are, as a source for information. In the case of Obama the numbers could be higher.
Do all of those people read Wikipedia? Not necessarily, but the power of this online encyclopedia to disperse information is enormous.
If this article is deleted again, for at least the third time, life will go on. 
What will be lost is a place that could serve as a small beacon of truth in a world filled with those who will twist the truth.
Not notable? Who are we kidding? 
Barack wrote extensively about his brother in his bestselling book. That fact alone, given Barack   s international prominence makes Abongo/Roy notable. It   s a burden that Roy didn   t ask for and I wish him the best. 
I ask my fellow Wikipedians to offer a simple place where people can easily get well sourced facts on this man and not be left wondering if the latest viral email they received is true or not.--  ( ) 04:50, 9 July 2008 (UTC)
Were there additional deletions of this? One user directed me to the logs, but I couldn't even find the earlier of these two listed. I don't know the answer to this, but it seems possible, if not likely, that there may have been other previous deletions as well. If a more experienced editor could definitively answer this it would help regarding quality and completeness of the discussion this time around.--  ( ) 13:30, 9 July 2008 (UTC) '''Note:''' User Nfitz moved this question from the top of the page, where he had listed some of the previous deletions, to the bottom. A comprehensive list is relevant and important.--  ( ) 14:04, 9 July 2008 (UTC)
While I personally could care less what somebody   s religion is or isn   t, it   s an unfortunate fact that many people do care and a person   s religion is often included in encyclopedic entries (something I   ve argued against before).
Those on this page may have not noticed, but there is a struggle in this world between Muslim extremists and others. Few people who do pay attention would deny this.
It is a historic and '''notable fact''' that the brother of a major candidate for the president of the U.S. is Muslim. '''To my knowledge it is a historic first,''' and firsts are usually notable to writers of encyclopedias.
Again, it is just ''not credible to say this man is not notable''. I mean no offense by that, but it is not.--  ( ) 14:47, 9 July 2008 (UTC)