Besides  , there are various search engines that can provide domain-specific searches, which let you search Wikipedia specifically. Searches are based on the text as shown by the browser, so wiki markup is irrelevant. Depending on your browser, you may also be able to use   that allow you to search Wikipedia using bookmarklets.
In general, external search engines are faster than a Wikipedia search. However, because the search engine's cache is based on when the site was indexed, the search may not return newly created pages. Similarly, the search engine's cached version of the page will not be as up-to-date as the link to Wikipedia itself. Also, when returning Wikipedia articles in a regular search,   of Wikipedia content frequently rank higher than the actual Wikipedia articles because of search engine optimization techniques.
These issues may be less of a problem when using certain search engines that process Wikipedia differently:
For a Multi-lingual Wikipedia search try Google, Yahoo! or Qwika.
The internal search can handle all the logical combinations Google and other major search websites can, using logical combinations of AND, OR and "()". It can search in page titles or with page title prefixes, and in specific   and  , or limit a search to pages with specific words in the title or in specific categories or namespaces. 
It can also handle parameters an order of magnitude more sophisticated than most external search engines, including user-specified words with variable endings and similar spellings. 
The internal search is also able to search all pages for project purposes, whereas external search engines cannot be used on any talk page, a large part of projectspace, and any page tagged as  .
Finally when presenting results, the internal search understands and will link to relevant sections of a page (although to a limited degree some other search engines may do this as well).
By following the link below, you can use the Clusty search engine to search and cluster Wikipedia in English only.
If you frequently search via Clusty, consider installing the  (beta).  Selecting the "Encyclopedia" search source allows you to quickly search the English version of Wikipedia. The Clusty Toolbar is available for Windows with Internet Explorer and Mozilla Firefox (beta).
FUTEF is a site, currently in beta, limited to Wikipedia content. Besides basic keyword and full text search providing a list of relevant articles, it also lists related categories in a sidebar. 
By following the links below, you can use the Google search engine to search Wikipedia     either all languages, or English-only. Google indexes all namespaces except user talk.
If you frequently search via Google, consider installing the Google Toolbar. Using the "search this site" button allows you to quickly search the English version of Wikipedia. The official Google Toolbar is available in versions for Firefox (Linux, Mac OS X, Microsoft Windows), and Internet Explorer (Microsoft Windows). 
There is a custom button for doing Google site searches from the Opera browser. See: . When viewing a page from the website of interest click the button and a Google site search form will pop up. Enter search terms and click OK. Hold down the shift key before clicking the OK button if you want the results to open in a new tab.
Wikipedia markup allows you to insert links to Google searches by including google: as the prefix for the link. This can sometimes be useful on talk pages. It is done like this:
Which looks like this:
To provide a link to a Wikipedia-specific search, include in the google-link +site:en.wikipedia.org (no spaces before or after), like this:
Which looks like this:
To clean up the link so that only the part you want to show is presented, use the pipe, like this:
Which makes it look like this:
Several   are available for creating links to various kinds of Google searches and services. These templates allow more options, such as to search for specific keywords, to link to initially blank search forms, and to search on a specific Web site or on a subdirectory within a site. These templates also allow spaces to separate multiple search keywords, so you don't need to use unusual punctuation. Since these templates create links to Google searches, they cannot search on Wikipedia's Talk: namespace (i.e.,    ). These searches should work on non-article talk pages. See the documentation for each template for usage details and examples:
In most cases you should not use these templates in   because they violate  . They are appropriate for pages in other namespaces, such as  , the  ,  , and so on. If you just want to run some searches without necessarily creating links to them, see the template pages which provide some example search links.
LuMriX is a dynamic query tool which uses lookahead to predict search terms in a list, similar to Google Suggest.
By following the link below, you can use the LuMriX search engine to search different language versions of Wikipedia.
If you frequently search via LuMriX, consider installing the  (works on all operating system platforms for which Firefox is available, such as Windows, Linux and Mac OS X). Site is down -->
There is a full-featured advanced search engine at .  It is more powerful than Wikipedia's search box, and you can limit searches to a specific URL, such as the Wikipedia website.  Here's how.  Click on the provided link above, and then enter your search term.  Then scroll down to the domain section and add "wikipedia.org" in the box provided.  Then click "Go".   "Domain section" not available anymore-->
Qwika is designed specifically to index wikis. Its main index is Wikipedia and includes:
This can assist editors contributing to non-English Wikipedias by being able to search in their own language across the entire English version and then view the machine-translated version in their language. 
Wikiwax is a dynamic query like LuMriX. It only searches English Wikipedia, but shows more list entries. 
By following the links below, you can use the Yahoo! search engine to search Wikipedia     either all languages or English-only.
If you frequently search via Yahoo!, consider installing the . Using the "Search Only the Current Site" button allows you to quickly search the English version of Wikipedia. The official Yahoo! Companion Toolbar is only for Windows with Internet Explorer and Mozilla.
Here are more   which make searching more convenient.