Note:  If you are seeing this page as a result of an attempt to re-nominate an article for deletion, you must manually edit the AfD nomination links in order to create a new discussion page using the name format of  .  When you create the new discussion page, please provide a link to this old discussion in your nomination. -->
The result was    '''no consensus to delete, default to keep.'''
I discounted some opinions from either side who did not address the problem at issue here ( ) or who gave no substantial reasons at all for their opinion (yes, Grsz11, you ''do'' need to bother explaining why). This leaves the community still about evenly divided about the notability of this family, with a slight tilt towards "keep." 
As far as I can tell, neither side has obviously stronger policy-based arguments. The "delete" side argues that the family as such has not received the level of coverage required per   and that notability is not inherited. Meanwhile, the "keep" side points to the media attention given to the individual members as evidence for the public interest in this family, and they argue that the article is really a   of the article about the very notable politician. I'm not sure whether I can agree with these arguments for keeping the article, but they are at least defensible under the applicable guidelines, and this means I can't discount them. So it's a no consensus outcome for today. (Note: I have removed the fair use soundclip previously inserted at the end of this discussion, per  .)   22:05, 20 July 2008 (UTC)
This is a collection of non-notable individuals, many of whom have previously had articles about them deleted or merged into Barack Obama for notability reasons after extensive discussion.  All of the same arguments apply here. The only notable people in this article (such as Barack Obama and Michelle Obama) already have extensive articles written about them.  For the others, notability is not inherited.  Their only notability is their connection to someone notable.  Further, notability is not cumulative. If they are not individually notable, how can they be considered notable as a group?
Note that this article was previously deleted after an AfD  discussion. This version is not ''substantially identical'' to that version so it is '''not eligible for speedy deletion'''.  However, the title and subject matter are identical, so all of the arguments from that AfD discussion are applicable here.    ( ) 13:47, 15 July 2008 (UTC)