In the 80   s he played with Peter Almqvist in <<Guitars Unlimited>> who among other things played intermission for 600 million viewers of the Swedish Melodi Grand Prix in 1986.  A stop in Rio de Janeiro resulted in a record with Sivuca ''Let's Vamos'' (Sonet 1987).
The cooperation with Niels-Henning Orstedt Pedersen also started this decade, and they also recorded ''This is all I ask'' (Verve, 1998) and ''Those who were'' (Verve, 1996).
His own U.W. Group released ''Venture'' (1991) with Jack DeJohnette drums, Bill Evans and Bob Berg sax, Randy Brecker trumpet, Niels Lan Doky piano, Chris Minh Doky bass and Lars Danielsson bass.
The work with Americam musicians continued in ''New York meeting'' with Niels Lan Doky piano, Ira Coleman bass, and Billy Hart drums.
His ''Enchanted Moments'' (Dragon, 1997) was recorded with Lars Jansson piano, Lars Danielsson, bass and Raymond Karlsson drums.
On ''Dig In'' (Sittel, 1997) he plays with Gosta Rundqvist piano, Yasuhito Mori bass and Jukkis Uotila drums.
Wakenius had together with Hakon Graf piano, in the early ninetees the group Grafitti with members from the John Scofield group, Dennis Chambers drums, Gary Grainger bass.
He   s appeared on ''Duke Ellington Swings'' (Telarc, 1998); with Oscar Peterson he released ''Summernight in Munich'' (Telarc, 1999) and ''Trail of Dreams'' with Oscar Peterson and Michel Legrand (Telarc, 2000).
With Ray Brown he played on ''Summertime'' (1998) and ''Seven steps to heaven'' (1999), as well as ''Some of my best friends are guitarplayers'' (Telarc, 2001).
With Pat Metheny he played Jazz Baltica 2003.
In Norway he has played with Hot Club de Norvege and Vertavo-quartet (Hot Club Records, 2005), and also participated on the record ''Guitaresque'' on Hot Club Records with Jon Larsen, Stian Mevik, Jimmy Rosenberg and others.  Other contributions has been on Lisa Nilssons ''Sma rum'' (2001), Caecilie Norbys ''First conversations'' (2002), as well as recordings by Victoria Tolstoy and Esbjorn Svensson.
2006 he toured with his show ''In the Spirit of Oscar'' with Kjell Ohman piano, Hans Backenroth bass och Jocke Ekberg drums.
A few quotes about Ulf :
Hockey Career
After playing with the Kelowna Spartans of the BCJHL Jason Cugnet was drafted by the Vancouver Canucks with their ninth pick in the NHL entry draft in 1995. Cugnet went on to play hockey for the Colorado College Tigers for two seasons before being dimissed by then head coach Don Lucia.
Cugnet reached the Frozen Four in his freshman year with the Tigers, losing to the eventual national champion University of North Dakota Fighting Sioux.
Personal
Jason Cugnet was featured in E!'s Executive News Editor Ken Baker's biopic "They Don't Play Hockey in Heaven"
Le Trio Joubran is a group of three Palestinian brothers-Adnan, Samir, and Wissam.
Sam Alessi's experience in the local community spans several decades. He was first elected to Whittlesea Council in 1987 and again in 1997. He has served three terms as City of Whittlesea Mayor in 1997/98; 1999/2000; and 2004/05. He is currently Deputy Chair of the Yarra Plenty Regional Library and Vice President of the Municipal Association of Victoria. He was educated at Moreland High School, Latrobe and Deakin Universities and the State College of Victoria and hold a Bachelor of Arts in Social Sciences; a Bachelor of Education, a Diploma of Teaching and a Post Graduate Diploma in Computer Science. As a teacher, he has taught in a number of schools, including two City of Whittlesea schools - Greenbrook and Thomastown Meadows Primary Schools and served on both school councils. Married with two daughters, he enjoys photography, gardening, going to the beach and supporting the Melbourne Football Club.
Kevin Wong is a professional beach volleyball player who currently competes on the AVP tour. In 2000, he placed fifth paired with Rob Heidger at the Sydney Olympics. Wong was named to People Magazine's "50 Most Beautiful People" issue in 2000. He currently lives in Hawaii. He is 6'7" and played his college volleyball at UCLA.
Golden had a successful high school career at Lake Taylor High School where he lettered in basketball and track and field, in addition to football.  Golden was named an All-American, and received scholarship offers from both Penn State and Virginia Tech.  Rivals rated Golden as a 3-star prospect and as the #14 prospect from the state of Virginia .  Golden committed to Penn State.
Golden struggled to find consistent playing time throughout his first three seasons at Penn State, tallying just 18 catches for 460 yards and two touchdowns .  Hampered by injuries, Golden found difficulty achieving consistency, but made a number of memorable catches.  However, by his senior campaign, Golden became a solid contributor, making 30 catches for 345 yards with three touchdown receptions.  That season, Golden was selected to be a captain for the Penn State football team.
Golden was not selected in the 2008 National Football League Draft, but was signed shortly after the draft by the Philadelphia Eagles.  However, he was cut from the team after the team's prospect mini-camp.
JobStreet.com is a leading regional provider of online recruitment services that facilitate the recruiting process between employers and jobseekers. Since 1995, its has developed to become one of the leading Internet recruitment websites ( www.jobstreet.com )  with offices in Malaysia, Singapore, Philippines, Indonesia, India, Bangladesh and Japan. The organization services over 50,000 corporate customers and over 5 million jobseekers.
In the year 1995, JobStreet.com founders, Mark Chang together with some graduate friends from MIT (Massachusetts Institute of Technology), believed that there are two critical aspects which are fundamental for any organization to be successful; their ability to tap financial capital and human resources. The founders thought that as Wall Street was the established global benchmark for raising financial capital to fuel corporate growth, that what was absent was an equivalent    street    institution for    raising    human capital.
They also were convinced that in the final analysis it would be people and human talent that would prove to be the major differentiator as everything else would commoditized. But matching the right people with the right company was steeped in traditional methods and had seen very little innovation, especially in the Asian region. In addition, current methods for both employers and employees are complicated in terms of efficiency and transparency.
The founders set out then to ambitiously build a web based exchange that would list all available jobs in Asia to job seekers; and make all available talent known to organizations; and this would be conducted with user convenience and utmost confidentiality.
Since the company   s simple beginnings, it has pioneered the way with a regional presence in Singapore, Malaysia, India, Philippines, Indonesia, Japan and Bangladesh and managing to attract the interests of over 5 million job seekers and 50,000 companies regionally.
6 October 1997 - JobStreet  was incorporated as a private limited company
12 March 1999 - JobStreet  was awarded TRUSTe certification, the official seal for Internet website privacy and confidentiality as approved by the US Department of Commerce and Federal Trade Commission
28 May 1999 - JobStreet Malaysia was granted MSC-status
17 July 1999 - JobStreet Singapore was incorporated as a private limited company
21 October 1999 - JobStreet Philippines was incorporated as a private limited company
16 February 2000 - JobStreet India was incorporated as a private limited company
26 May 2000 - JobStreet Hong Kong was incorporated as a private limited company
22 July 2003 - JobStreet partners with CareerBuilder.com
28 September 2004 - JobStreet listed on Malaysia MESDAQ
19 September 2005 - JobStreet partners with The Network
20 February 2007 - JobStreet invested to take a 20% stake in RGL (Recruit Group Limited, Hong Kong) whose primary is the printing of a leading recruitment advertising magazine in Hong Kong called Recruit
15 March 2007 - JobStreet Singapore wins Hitwise Singapore On-line Performance Awards for 2006 in the    Business & Finance     Employment and Training    category.
6 December 2007 - JobStreet joint ventures with Asian Commission Corporation to form JobStreet Japan
28 December 2007 - JobStreet transfers to Main Board of stock exchange Malaysia
This is the core service offered by JobStreet as an online recruitment solution. It is made up of the following:-
Job Posting
This is an exchange that facilitates a two-way exchange of information between employers (job postings and descriptions) and jobseekers (applications and resumes). Regionally, over 50,000 employers and 5 million registered jobseekers have participated in the exchange.
Jobseekers who visit www.jobstreet.com can search the site for suitable openings. In addition, they are invited to register their job preferences and resume details in their personal MyJobStreet career management account. Once registered, registrants will have the benefit of LiNA, a personal job-tracking virtual agent. As soon as an employer posts a job description that matches the registrant's preferences, the registrant is notified by email of the position. If the position is of interest to her, she will then proceed to apply for the job and submit her resume online.
SiVA is a proprietary browser-based applicant tracking and resume management application that speeds the processing aspect of recruitment dramatically. Based on an ASP model, this recruitment management system, called SiVA, which sits on JobStreet   s servers, is available to JobStreet   s customers comprising potential employers who will be assigned with a unique password and user identification to access the system over the Internet.
JobStreet SELECT is a search and selection solution through which JobStreet has undertaken projects for some major customers including HSBC Electronic Data Processing , Scope International , ExxonMobil Exploration and Production with high success rates. JobStreet has been able to reach a large pool of jobseekers, and through its recruitment management system, shorten the process of identifying the most suitable candidates much faster than conventional recruiters.
JobStreet IMPACT is a career site management service where companies can license career site and candidate database management services from JobStreet instead of setting up and maintaining their career website themselves. Upon licensing these, HR personnel can post job postings on their own corporate website directly without involving web designers. HR personnel will also have the benefit of SiVA where they can screen and process candidates efficiently.
The attractiveness of JobStreet IMPACT to the Group is that a portion of the revenue from this service is recurring. Customers are charged an initial set-up fee as well as an annual maintenance fee. The maintenance fee portion is recurring as long as JobStreet continues to host the client   s career site.
This service is essentially to provide employees on a contract basis to customers who desire to allocate permanent headcount to core positions or who have project/variable work requirements. Leveraging on its strong database, JobStreet can offer high-quality staff on short notice. There are opportunities to expand this business further given the desire by most companies to develop a more flexible workforce structure and focus on core competencies.
JobStreet CAMPUS provides a unique service of allowing companies which subscribe to the service on an annual basis to mine a database of fresh graduate candidates. Companies subscribing to the JobStreet CAMPUS service are allowed to leverage on JobStreet   s presence when it conducts visits to universities or participate in education and career fairs.
Free Jobseeker Services
JobStreet jobseekers have access to large number of free services which facilitate their job hunting efforts as well as career management.  Services provided for free may include:
Premium Jobseeker Services
Due to the unique requirements of each jobseeker, there exists a market for JobStreet to introduce fee-based premium user services targeted at specific users which have high priority or specialised job hunting or information requirements. Examples of such services are JobStreet Priority Application, SMS Alerts, SMS Apply and Career Profile.
JobStreet CLASSIFIEDS - Essentially a    no frills    service, JobStreet CLASSIFIEDS is designed for employers that require immediate placement from the mass market. While suitable for all positions, it is mainly targeted for positions that do not require niche skills e.g. clerks, domestic helpers, sales personnel etc.
JobStreet SALARY REPORT - The JobStreet SALARY REPORT is based on a local survey covering more than 150,000 professionals. Priced affordably, the report provides invaluable information for employers to create or improve salary guidelines in their companies and determine the appropriate salary scale for their employees. This tool compares the salaries of people based on industry, position level, region etc.
JobStreet has introduced three non-recruitment related products, namely:
This is a targeted direct marketing service offered to companies to market their products and services to JobStreet   s database of jobseekers. Using innovative matching technology, JobStreet DIRECT ensures that customers    products and services are marketed to the database members who match the criteria of the targeted segment stipulated by customers, therefore increasing their sales prospects. '''JobStreet ensures that the confidential profiles of the jobseekers are not provided to third parties at all cost.
This is an online advertising and marketing service designed for training and education service providers.  JobStreet LEARNING allows colleges, universities, external trainers, event organizers etc to advertise their training courses and education programs on www.jobstreet.com to a highly targeted audience of jobseekers.
More information about JobStreet.com   s products and services can be obtained by clicking on the links below:
A '''context sensitive user interface''' is one which can automatically choose from a multiplicity of options based on the current or previous state(s) of the program operation.''Context sensitivity'' is almost ubiquitous in current graphical user interfaces, and should, when operating correctly, be practically transparent to the user.
For example:
Clicking on a text document automatically opens the document in a word processing enviroment. The user does not have to specify what type of program opens the file under standard conditions.
The same methodology applies to other file types eg:
The primary reason for introducing context sensitivity is to simplify the user interface.
Advantages include :
Context sensitive actions may be perceived as dumbing down of the user interface - leaving the operator at a loss as to what to do when the computer decides to perform an unwanted action. Additionally non-automatic proceedures may be hidden or obscured by the context sensitive interface causing an increase in user workload for operations the designers did not forsee.
A poor implementation can be more annoying than helpful - a classic example of this is Office assistant.
At the simplest level each possible action is reduced to a single most likely action - The action performed is based on a single variable (such as file extension). In more complicated
The method is not only limited to the response to imperative button presses and mouse clicks - pop up menus can be pruned and/or altered, or a web search can prune results based on previous searches.
At higher levels of implementation ''context sensitive'' actions require either larger amounts of meta-data, extensive Case analysis based programming, or other artificial intelligence algorthyms.
Context sensitivity is important in video games - espesially those controlled by a gamepad, joystick or computer mouse in which the number of buttons available is limited.
Implementations range from the embryonic 'Quick Time Event' to context sensitive sword combat in which the attack used depends on the position and orientation of both the player and opponent, as well as the virtual surroundings. A similar range of use is found in the 'action button' which dependent on the in game position of the player's character may cause the avatar to pick something up, open a door, grab a rope, punch a monster or opponent, or smash an object.
The response does not have to be player activated - a on screen device may only be shown in certain circumstances eg 'targetting' cross hairs in a flight combat game may indicate the player should fire. An alternative implementation is to monitor the input from the player (level of button pressing activity etc) and use that to control the pace of the game in an attempt to maximise enjoyment or to control the excitement or ambiance.
The method has become increasingly important as more complex games are designed for machines with few buttons (keyboard-less consoles). Bennet Ring commented (in 2006) that "''Context-sensitive'' is the new lens flare"
Context sensitive help is a common implementation of context sensitivity, a single help button is actioned and the help page or menu will open a specific page or topic related 
Tyrone Winston Childs II, better known by his stage name 2 Complexx, or simply
T.C, is an American rapper.
Chronic kidney disease (CKD), an irreversible deterioration in renal function is a growing worldwide health problem. The aetiology varies between countries but Diabetes and Hypertension are usually dominant factors in other parts of the world.
In recent years we have noticed a very distressing abnormal increase in the number of patients with chronic kidney Disease in certain parts of the North central, Eastern and Uva Provinces in Sri Lanka. Here I would like to name this disease as    Rajarata Kidney Disease   . (Rajarata was an important area belongs to the ancient Sinhala kingdom. Today, almost all of the areas with high prevalence of this disease belong to this region)
Unfortunately some so called researchers in our country still name this disease as    chronic kidney disease in North central Province in Sri Lanka   . It may be due to their poor knowledge of the geography of the country. I can say without any doubt that some of them have not visited these areas more than one or two times for their life time.
Interestingly we can observe higher number of CKD patients from Sinhala Buddhist villages located adjacent to the so called Tamil homeland,
Madawachchiya, Padaviya, Sripura, Madirigiriya, Hingurakgoda,, Girandurukotte
Tamil homeland is one of the major aspirations of Tamil racism. Tamil Racism considers the Tamils to be a separate nation in there so called traditional homeland and they want to live as a separate nation. Over the centuries Tamil racism has developed in to separatism to obtain a separate mono ethnic Tamil state by dividing the Sri Lanka. L.T.T.E terrorism is the highest military product of Tamil racism.
Unfortunately still no proper national Chronic Kidney Disease database is available in Sri Lanka. But according to the rough estimation done by me more than 7000 cases have been reported for the last 5 years. Almost all the patients are Sinhalese and they are from above mentioned areas where we can dub    CKD Belt   .
The Disease onset is seen in adolescence and number of cases Reported increases with increasing age. These patients typically present with non specific symptoms and signs such as Lethargy, Weakness, moderate anaemia and mild hypertension.
Western medical Studies performed so far suggest that a common although yet unknown aetiology, leading to marked Tubulointerstitial fibrosis of the kidney that finally causes Irreversible kidney failure.  Renal Biopsies showed TubuloInterstitial disease in more than 80% of the cases.
Even though several studies have performed regarding the aetiology still it remains largely unknown.  Following are some of the current Hypotheses put forward.
01.	Excessive quantities of naturally found fluoride in the ground water which can harm the kidney.
02.	Excessive use of fertilizers, Insecticides, and weedicides.
03.	The use of Aluminum utensils made out of low quality cheap Aluminum to store water and to          prepare food. The fluoride content found in the ground water reacts with the  Aluminum and creating Toxic compounds (ALF x)
04.	Entry of Toxic element  such as Cadmium via food chain
05.	Excessive consumption of poor quality illegal liquor.
When we consider the geographical distribution of the outbreak, any of the above theories are unable to give a consistent explanation for the existing problem. According to Prof. C.B. Dissanayaka (1991), high amount of fluoride in the ground water can be seen in all parts of the Dry zone. But this chronic kidney disease is confined to the certain part of the dry zone.
Excessive use of fertilizers, Aluminum utensils and poor quality illegal liquor are not limited to certain parts of the country, those are countrywide problems.
This disease shows some similarity with previously observed Balkan Endemic Nephropathy (BEN) which is also an Irreversible kidney disease of unknown origin. BEN geographically confined to several rural regions of Bosnia, Croatia & Serbia (former Yugoslavia), Bulgaria, Romania (all are former communist countries) where disease occurs only in rural areas located in alluvial valleys of tributaries of the Lower Danube River.
It is estimated that several thousand people in the affected countries are currently suffering from chronic kidney disease much similar to the condition in Sri Lanka. What we have to remember is, this Balkan area is also subject to experiencing separatism.
With regard to Rajarata kidney Disease here I am proposing a new concept, which is, this epidemic can be a result of Bioterrorism. The usual meaning of Bioterrorism is the use of biological agents, such as pathogenic organisms or agricultural pests, for terrorist purposes. This idea came after observing the geographical distribution of the disease. High prevalence of the disease can be seen in Sinhala Buddhist villages located adjacent to the proposed Tamil homeland. LTTE terrorists have been fighting for a mono ethnic Tamil homeland for more than 25 years.  For the last 2     3 decades these Sinhala Buddhist villages were repeatedly attacked by LTTE terrorists and hundreds of unarmed innocent Sinhala farmers were brutally killed.
Even after these killing sprees, Tamil Racism was not able to achieve their target of driving Sinhala Buddhist villagers away. It may be the reason, that they have changed their strategy in to Bio terrorism. The Representatives and/or Sponsors of Tamil Racism may be using Laboratory produced nephrotoxic substances or nephrotoxin producing organisms for their purpose. I wonder why so called researchers in our country have not yet considered about Nephrotoxin producing Fungi, Cyanobacteria and Algae.
Unfortunately the so called researchers in our country were not able to identify this simple correlation between the disease and geographical distribution even. Most of the time purpose of these researchers was totally academic rather than finding a solution for this problem. Only thing that they can do is to fill forms and prescribing drugs according to the western publications. We should never expect a solution from these third class academics in our country as they are only imitators of the western knowledge. They are not capable of producing good theories within the western system. If there was a similar kind of problem in USA, UK, or in Canada, genuine western intellectuals in those countries would have been created good theories by now. But at the moment there is no such a chronic kidney disease in those countries. So there are no theories. As a result of that pseudointellectuals in our country were not able to download theories from the Internet. That is why these third class academics were not able to give good consistent explanation for the existing problem.
Touro University Rome is a Jewish sponsored undergraduate University located in Zagarolo (Rome), Italy. It's a branch of Touro College located in New York City, which Dr. Bernard Lander founded and presides.
Institutional accreditation of Touro has been granted by the Commission on Higher Education of the Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools (3624 Market St., Philadelphia, PA 19104). The Middle States Association has recognized Touro University Rome as a Touro College branch campus.
Campus
On Friday, November 11, 2005 at the Italian Academy for Advanced Studies in America at Columbia University an agreement was signed between Touro College, the Province of Rome and the Municipality of Zagarolo, to give the use of one wing of the sixteen century Rospigliosi Palace.
As an integral part of its project and a prelude to the opening of its new branch, Touro University Rome, in collaboration with the City of Zagarolo, will be organizing, starting in Fall 2008, independent, not-for-credit English courses for the population of Zagarolo and the surrounding area.
The university is starting with the first semester of the School of Business and Management in Fall 2008, open to students of all denominations, the classes will be held in English.
The curriculum includes a choice of Jewish Studies program: Hebrew, Tefillah, Talmud and Jewish history and philosophy or general education courses (philosophy, history, sociology, art, etc.).
The official presentation of the new University was held on May 22, 2008 at a gala dinner in Rome at which Dr. Bernard Lander, Founder and President of Touro College awarded the degree of Doctor of Communication Arts, honoris causa, to Roberto Benigni, winner of an Oscar as Best Actor in 1998 for his movie,    Life Is Beautiful.   
Official site http://www.touro.edu/Italy
Once this article is published, the Italian article could be updated accordingly http://it.wikipedia.org/wiki/Touro_College_Rome,
These redirects should be created because the list of superclusters currently exists on the main article page. Since someone searching for a ''list of'' is likely to type that in.
BurnAware is the ultimate disc burning software. BurnAware Professional is the professional   s choice for complete CD and DVD duplication and disc burning. It is permitted for commercial use and includes extra features essential for business and professional users including: parallel erasing and simultaneous disc writing.
Record one or more titles to separate drives simultaneously, even while creating a new title.
Duplicate CDs and DVDs or store them as ISO image files on your hard disk. You can always burn them later to create and backup copy of the original movie/game/software.
Burn your photos, spread sheets, home work results etc. to CD/DVD/Blu-Ray Disc. A hard disk crash would no longer be fatal to your work or family archives.
You can use the same media for sequential recording daily. New data would perfectly co-exist with previously recorded data. The only limitation is the physical media capacity.
Official Site
880 yard World Record claimant Lon Spurrier's 1:47.5 March 26th, 1955.
2nd place 800 meters at Pan Am Game 1955 in Mexico City.
Member of 1956 Olympic team 800 meters (6th place)
The Hamayoni Decree is a clause in the Egyptian law that regulates Church construction. It is cause of much controversy due to the conditions it needs to be fulfilled in order to grant the permit.
The law requires that each permit must be issued by the Egyptian President.
KOREKA, komarnanska realitna kancelaria, spol. s r.o. Komarno bola zalozena v oktobri 1993 osobami, ktori sa snazili od jej zaciatku svojimi skusenostami zaradit sa medzi dobre zname subjekty v realitnej cinnosti. Je potrebne podotknut, ze realitna kancelaria KOREKA Komarno bola zalozena ako prva podobneho druhu v juznom regione zapadneho Slovenska. Hlavnou podnikatelskou aktivitou a teda predmetom cinnosti spolocnosti su komplexne sluzby v oblasti obchodovania s nehnutelnostami, to znamena sprostredkovanie predaja, kupy a prenajmu nehnutelnosti vratane zabezpecenia kompletneho pravneho servisu a poradenstva (rodinne domy, byty, obchodne priestory, polyfunkcne objekty, AB, chaty, pozemky, zahrady a pod.), zabezpecenie technickych a cenovych posudkov k nehnutelnostiam ako i vyhotovenie geometrickych planov vsetkeho druhu a podla poziadaviek klientury zabezpecenie projektovania a realizacie interierov objektov prostrednictvom nasich obchodnych partnerov     architektov.
K doterajsej posobnosti svojou cinnostou a sluzbami uspokojila velke mnozstvo klientov, mnohym pravnickym a fyzickym osobam poskytla kvalitny servis, na zaklade coho sa s doverou vracaju do prostredia, v ktorom je zarucena vysoka kvalita sluzieb. Najlepsou reklamou kancelarie je dobre odvedena praca v prospech klienta.
Prioritnou zasadou spolocnosti je seriozne vystupovanie, dovera, diskretnost, zabezpecit maximalnu spokojnost klientov, snazit sa uzatvorit co najefektivnejsi obchod a nadalej udrziavanie a budovanie dobreho mena kancelarie. Pri svojej cinnosti spolocnost uzko spolupracuje s viacerymi realitnymi kancelariami na uzemi Slovenskej republiky, dalej s Pozemkovym fondom, katastralnym odborom, notarmi, geodetmi, mestom a obcami. Ich klienti sa mozu so spolocnostou kontaktovat osobne, pisomne, telefonicky, faxom a e-mailom.
Spolocnost stavia na neustalom zvysovani odbornosti svojich pracovnikov, ako i na zvysovani kvality poskytovanych sluzieb, vedie databazu chranenych udajov o vsetkych svojich klientoch a ponukanych nehnutelnostiach.
Hlavnym presvedcenim a kredom realitnej kancelarie KOREKA Komarno je v obchodnych vztahoch bezproblemovo vytvarat pravne a ine vztahy a rychlo, pohotovo a kvalitne uspokojovat poziadavky klientov.
Aktualnu ponuku realitnej kancelarie KOREKA si mozete pozriet tu: http://www.koreka.sk/
The aircraft was named after Evette Branson, the mother of Richard Branson, Chairman of the Virgin Group. The jet plane has nose art of a blond woman holding the Virgin Galactic corporate flag.  '''ABC News''', , July 28, 2008, '''''LAUREN SHER'''''  The image is based on how Evette Branson looked like when she was younger, and is called '''Galactic Girl'''.  '''Chicago Tribune''', , July 29, 2008  The aircraft was officially launched on Monday, July 28th, 2008, in Mojave, California, USA, at the Mojave Spaceport, home of Scaled Composites. ''Eve'' will be used in the Virgin Galactic testflight program, preceding entry into commercial usage.  '''The Register''', , Tuesday 29th July 2008 10:32 GMT, '''''Scott Snowden'''''  It is expected that commercial service will start in 2010.
 Burt Rutan has dismissed fears that pressurization cycles might induce fatigue failure in the composite structure.  Richard Branson has also announced that it will be highly fuel efficient.  '''National Geographic''', , July 28, 2008, '''''Ker Than''''' 
This also requires a redirect from Virgin Galactic Eve
Description:
Hard Times was a Club that had various locations around West Yorkshire .
The man who started it all was Stephen Raine. A farmer who went from herding sheep ( The Hard Times March was produced by Masters at Work under the name 200 Sheep, named because Steve was in the process of buying "200" Sheep when the track was played to him, allegedly)
Steve turned his interest into music business in the early 90's. Opening in Mirfield in 93 it then moved onto Huddersfield, to the Bel Air Club (a church) with residents Miles Holloway and Elliot Eastwick.
When a late license was refused the move to Leeds was the only other choice. Hard Times took over the old Back to Basics haunt of the Music Factory, where the legendary "A Night in the Life of Todd Terry" album was recorded (a live recording was a 1st in the music business)
Later on it moved to NATO until its closer, although it did return to Huddersfield in late '96 for one off nights.Whch was then followed by a move back into space at Leeds, which again proved to be hugely successful. The night ended when Steve Raine decided he needed a rest and went back to his farming routes once again. One of the last nights at space was the 10th Birthday with the likes of
Masters at work.
DJ   s to play at the night include;
Masters at Work
Roger Sanchez
Todd Terry
Frankie Knuckles
David Morales
Satoshi Tomiie aka Def Mix
Robert Owens.
From the club came THE LABEL that mainly focused on American garage. The label attracted artists like Todd Terry, Benji Candelario, Roger Sanchez and MAW to name some. Hard Times followed Dave Lee's (Joey Negro) Republic label and exported the American garage Sound.
The label didn't release many records but each one is mega.                                 -->
A young South Dublin go-getter known for coining the phrase "Loser Plates", being the first guest at Ian Kinsella's new house and also selling wine outside Mcgowans.
Ian Kinsella, Alan Barnewell, Kevin Cunningham
Pivot Master DX,is the Most popular Pivot animator.he is a video comedian,and creator of DX Productions.He started a Stickman on Crack Series,videos about Stickmen being funny,having accidents etc.So far the series has only 3 videos,but he specified that more are on the way.Also,he made a few short videos about stickmen doing stunts.In his videos,he ussually shows the music he used,the animator and creator(Stickmen are animated,created and directed by himself).He doesn't show his real name in any video.
Sorforsa is a small village in Halsingland and it is a part of Hudiksvalls kommun. The village is situated here because of the big linen factory built here around 1900. The factory is still here but there is now only a few employees compared to several hundreds in the former days. There are still some buildings left from these days. You can also find a small Catholic chapel here. The workers were mostly from Ireland or Austria. They were catholics and the founder of the factory Axel Lehman decided to build this chapel for them. The architect was Cyrillus Johansson a at this time well known architect in Stockholm
Mom   s Healthy Secrets is a Canadian cereal company based in Oakville, Ontario.  The company produces a line of organic and all-natural cereals sold nationally in both large retail chains and independent health food stores.  The company is also a proud supporter of the Canadian Cancer Society, donating a portion of its profits to the organization.
Mom   s Healthy Secrets was founded in 2005 by Julie Arora, using cereal recipes created by her mom, Neera.  Neera   s intention was to develop healthier alternatives for her family than what was found on grocery shelves based on her philosophy    Your body is your vehicle and food is your fuel   . Experiencing the nutritious and energizing benefits of the cereal, Julie decided to share her mom   s secret with others.  After continuous and increasing demand from family and friends, Julie realized the cereal   s immense market potential.  She then went from eating her mom   s healthy recipes for breakfast to turning those recipes into the basis of an award-winning cereal company.  The company began with the launch of two all-natural cereals; Tropical Fruit and Raisin.  Mom   s Healthy Secrets has since added three new cereals to its line in 2008; VitalBerry, OmegaActive and FibreFit, adding function to Canadian breakfast.  Every product is created to be truly healthy, and provides many nutritious benefits that Mom believes are vital for your body   s well-being.  Each cereal is    Mom Approved   .
Cereal
Tropical Fruit (LINK: Tropical Fruit is an all-natural cereal with no sugar added and high in protein and fibre.  It can be served hot or cold, as a yogurt topping and even used as a baking ingredient.  Cereal ingredients include diced papaya, dates, and pineapple, pumpkin, flax, and sunflower seeds, rolled oats, wheat bran, and almonds)
Raisin (LINK: Raisin is an all-natural cereal with no sugar added and high in protein and fibre.  It can be served hot or cold, as a yogurt topping and even used as a baking ingredient.  Cereal ingredients include raisins, pumpkin, flax, and sunflower seeds, rolled oats, wheat bran, and almonds)
FibreFit (LINK: FibreFit is a certified organic cereal that contains 12g of whole grain fibre per serving, and is trans-fat and cholesterol free.  The cereal contains organic hull strands, organic raisins, organic rolled oats, organic corn flakes and organic bran flakes)
OmegaActive (LINK: OmegaActive is a certified organic cereal that contains 700mg of omegas per serving, is very high in fibre, and low in sugar.  The cereal contains organic pumpkin and flax seeds, organic banana, organic strawberries, and organic rolled oats)
VitalBerry (LINK: VitalBerry is a certified organic cereal and the only cereal to contain Goji berries.  The cereal contains powerful antioxidants including organic Goji berries, organic blueberries, and organic raisins, as well as organic rolled oats, organic multi-grain squares, and organic barley flakes)
Mom   s Healthy Secrets Peanut Butter Bars
Ingredients:
Directions:
1.	Empty peanut butter into a mixing bowl, stir to even out the texture
2.	Add honey to sweeten
3.	Beginning adding Mom's Healthy Secrets Raisin or Tropical Fruit to mixture and continue to stir
4.	Flatten mixture into a baking pan, and cut into bars or squares
5.	Leave in the refrigerator and grab and go in the morning or for a snack!
6.	Alternative: roll two tablespoons into a ball and flattening by hand into a cookie shape
7.	Store in cool place
Makes:
Mom   s Healthy Secrets Cookies
Ingredients:
1.	1 cup soft butter or olive oil margarine
2.	1 1/2 cup brown sugar
3.	2 eggs
4.	2 cups of Mom   s Healthy Secrets original cereals (Tropical Fruit or Raisin)
5.	2 cups Whole Wheat Flour
6.	1 tsp. Baking Powder
7.	1 tsp. Baking Soda
8.	1 cup Dried Raisins OR Cranberries
Directions:
Makes:
Canadian Cancer Society
Canadian Diabetes Association
DHR was formed in the 1960s, by its now honourary president Alex Smith.
When it was first formed, DHR was simply a record player on a trolley, which was trundled around the wards and requests were played at the listeners' bedsides; unfortunate for any near neighbours who disliked the choice of music!
The next step was to broadcast from a "cupboard" appropriated by Alex, but this was not really satisfactory. The old Porter's Lodge, at the entrance of the old Dryburn Hospital, was commandeered and converted into a broadcasting studio.
A four hour request programme was transmitted (close-circuit) to all wards every Wednesday evening and live commentary of football matches were broadcast every Saturday afternoon.
When more volunteers were recruited, transmissions (mainly request programes) became a daily feature of hospital life but were usually confined to evenings when people were available to present programmes.
The Lodge was extended to accommodate a second studio and "one man operation" was introduced to allow productions to become less labour intensive.
DHR moved to its new studios, in the Management Suite, when the new hospital building was completed, early in the 21st Century.
Durham Hospitals Radio is a registered charity and is entirely self-supporting. It is made up entirely of volunteers who produce and broadcast live programmes most weekday evenings; their work includes going onto the wards to collect requests from the patients.
The station broadcasts 24-hours a day to the University Hospital of North Durham, providing entertainment and information about the numerous services and facilities within the hospital "village".
Nebido is the new form of long-acting depo testosterone developed by Schering.
4ml injection is taken every 3 months. According to many physicians Nebido helps aging males
Nebido can help those men with Erectile dysfunction who don't respond to PDE5 treatment.
Jeff Krantz is a singer-songwriter, based in New York City. His style of music is acoustic/folk rock/pop.
Prior to his emergence into the music industry, Jeff worked a high paying job in real estate. Formerly riding the corporate path through most of his 20s, his passion for writing and singing was only thought to be a living room hobby. After very positive response from an impromptu performance in the UK (January 2007), Jeff realized his priorities and made the decision to pursue what mattered most to him...music. Within a couple weeks of his return to NYC, Jeff resigned from his successful job in real estate. Now investing all his time and efforts into his music career.
After trying to get some local gigs, someone suggested he look into Second Life. Jeff, who was not familiar with this virtual world beforehand, created his alter personality, Hep Shepherd. There he brought his music to an audience. Now, with over 200 online performances from his apartment, he has built a large fanbase and following.
The uniqueness as a breakthrough musician in Second Life, has garnered a lot of interest from the media and press. Since September 20007, Jeff has been featured in several mainstream media outlets, including: Billboard Magazine, Newsweek, CNN.com and most recently, The London Metro. He has been interviewed on numerous radio shows, podcasts, and blogs from all over the world, who are intrigued by the way he broke into the music industry in little over a year.
Becoming one of the most successful musicians in Second Life, has played a key role in Jeff's transition from virtual success to real life success. Second Life assisted his career by connecting him with tens of thousands of fans, through his online performances. His song, "Last Goodbye" was given away as a debut single to residents of SL.  Now, Jeff (aka Hep Sheperd,) has taken his virtual shows and brought them into the real world, where he has established quite a following and is growing popular rather quickly.
Jeff is currently in the studio, recording his debut full-length album, scheduled for release in Fall 2008. In addtion to his recording and regular NYC gigs, Jeff recently completed a European tour during summer 2008. Throughout this tour, he played to packed venues in England, Ireland, and Belgium. He also performed Live at The Bedford in London, with the performance being streamed online for the world to watch and listen. An interview and live performance on Radio 1 Brussels also took place before one of his shows in Belgium.
The music of Jeff Krantz, is filled with lyrical insight, memorable melodies, and delivered with heartfelt passion. With his honest and pure music style, he earned a nomination and a finalist spot for    Male Artist of the Year    from the International Acoustic Music Awards. One of Jeff's own musical influences, Cat Stevens, took the time to write Jeff and had this to say, ''"I listened to his music with great interest, his lyrics are memorable and clear."''
The Official Jeff Krantz Website, www.jeffkrantzmusic.com
Official Jeff Krantz Myspace, www.myspace.com/jeffkrantz
Billboard Magazine, The Indies by Corney Harding (cortney.harding@billboard.com), "Life and How To Live It: Virtual World Offers Career Boosts for Indie Acts", January 19, 2008
Newsweek/MSNBC.com, Getting A (Second) Life - My Virtual Life, http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/19854925/displaymode/1107/framenumber/6/s/2/
CNN.com, SLiReports: Your news of a virtual world, "Hep Shepherd gives away debut single to SL residents" December 18, 2007, http://secondlife.blogs.cnn.com/2007/12/18/
Radio 1 Brussels, July 10, 2008, http://www.radio1.be/programmas/mezz/1037737/
The London Metro/www.Metro.co.uk "Wannabe Pop Star is Second Life Hit", July 10, 2008, http://www.metro.co.uk/news/article.html?in_article_id=214419&in_page_id=34
Mario Tadic aka Antrax
Stefan Filipovic aka Magic
Danijel Viduljevic aka Gule
Alen Kozica aka Empty
Nikola Mijailovic aka Johny
Milan aka LiveRock
Nemanja Latincic
Viktor Filipovic
Darko Stankovic aka Dust
In addition to research, Flax Pond also serves as a recreational beach for Long Islanders, though its location prevents many from utilizing the facility, which has served as a point of contention.
In recent years, the management of Flax Pond has become a very important issue.  The environmentally conscious group Friends of Flax Pond has used the facility to educate those in the community through lectures, workshops, and science programs.  However, the NYSDEC has sought to make the Pond more accessible to residents, thus risking the environmentally pristine nature of the Pond. .
State Assemblyman Steven Englebright, who has roots in geology, has repeatedly stressed the importance of Flax Pond as a environmental sanctuary.  He has funded projects for Flax Pond, such as their summer learning institute  and has held lectures to promote these ideals.
DemonRaily
Born 1991-01-17 Lithuania, Alytus
Mitchell Gold is a well-known furniture designer and co-founder of Mitchell Gold + Bob Williams.  He has been recognized by the home furnishings industry as a leader in design and a savvy businessman.  He is also recognized as a philanthropist for social issues, particularly in the movement for equality for gays and lesbians.  He is also the author of a book on home furnishings.
Mitchell Gold co-founded the Mitchell Gold Company with Bob Williams in 1989. The name was later changed to Mitchell Gold + Bob Williams.  The company is known for being on the cutting edge of furniture design and for its edgy advertising campaigns.  While most of the furniture industry has seen declines in revenue, MG + BW has remained resilient under difficult times, continuing to post profits.  Gold continues to serve as Chairman of the Board of the company he co-founded.
For his professional work, Gold was recognized by Inc. Magazine's April 2006 '26 Entrepreneurs We Love' and an extensive profile in the August 9, 2007 edition of the New York Times.
Mitchell Gold + Bob Williams is not only known for comfortable furniture.  It is also known as a comfortable place to work.  MG + BW was one of the first companies in the furniture industry to build an air conditioned factory for its employees.  They also offer a full-service on site day care facility for the children of employees, a gourmet chef run diner, a concierge service for employees, and a college scholarship for children of employees.
Mitchell Gold is a former board member of the Human Rights Campaign, the nation's largest organization fighting for equality for the lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender community.  After leaving the board of the Human Rights Campaign, Gold founded Faith in America, an organization working to end the use of religion to justify discrimination against gay and lesbian Americans.
For his philanthropy, he has been recognized by organizations such as the Human Rights Campaign, Gay Men's Health Crisis, and the National Black Justice Coalition.  The Advocate Magazine recognized him in their 2006 Person of the Year issue, calling him a 'Bridge Builder' for his charitable work.  Out Magazine recognized him in their 2007 Out Power 50 issue, calling him one of the nation's most powerful gays.
Over the vast ... celebrities.