Just looking at the human body alone, how much of it has evolved and how much was designed?I'm assuming the more complex organs like the eye and the brain were designed, and simpler ones like finger nails and the nose evolved naturally.... but I just dont get how a simple life form can have coplex organs like the aforementioned eye before the foot has had the time to evolve, or is it a case that an organism evolves to a certain level and then carefully designed components are added at different stages... I'm probably missing something obvious but your help would be appriciated, :)  ( ) 06:49, 25 July 2008 (UTC)
Just greated an acount:) I was just using the foot as an example of something of a body part simple enough as to not necessatate design... I'll try to rephrase the question, basically I understand that parts of us evolve naturally but other parts are for to complex not to have had a designer, I'm just wondering at what stage the designed components were added? For example, back when we were just a basic blob of flesh eyes wouldn't have been much use without a brain to process the information, they would have been largely pointless  ( ) 08:45, 25 July 2008 (UTC)
As has been pointed out above, all parts of the human body, and every living organism, has evolved, and has not been "designed" in any way or part. A good introduction to this topic if you're happy to read a book is '''The Blind Watchmaker''' which explains how the eye may have piecemeal evolved. The book may be tainted in your eyes by the author "coming out" as an atheist and practically starting the neo-atheist movement, but long before all that happened, and still, this book was considered a great neo-darwinistic introduction to evolutionary thinking.      12:29, 26 July 2008 (UTC)
Since many dog owners prefer dogs that react to them, including when they talk to their pets, or dogs that are more intelligent than their peers, is it too crazy to suppose than someday dogs will evolve into speaking beings?    08:45, 25 July 2008 (UTC)
What about greyhounds? Since they're aggressively bred for speed is it reasonable to assume that on a long enough time line the would be able to travel at a rate approaching the speed of light?   ( ) 09:00, 25 July 2008 (UTC)
Captain Disdain said "nah. I really don't think so." I would have imagined that if the only criteria for selection is speed.... wouldn't it keep increasing incementaly... couldn't alot the constraints you've mentioned be eventually overcome if the fastest and fastest alone are always the most successful, could it really reach a point where the greyhound reaches its top average speed and cannot possibly improve? I mean there are many obvious restraints but hasn't nature come up with some pretty cool stuff in the past?   ( ) 14:21, 28 July 2008 (UTC)
Captain Disdain, aren't you assuming that as the dog evolves the basic blueprint remains the same, with the rate of motion of the paws increasing drastically up to achieve these high speeds- the rest of the dogs body being renforced so as to withstand the stresses involved.... obviously these constraints exist the way the dog is designed at the moment, but if it was to realistically move at supersonic speeds- a new method of propulsion is required, the way the dog produces energy needs to change drastically etc etc, over millions of years of selection for speed I assume the result would look absolutely nothing like a greyhound as we know it... I'll admit I'm far from an expert on evolution and the physics involved- but if its possible for a mass, e.g. a bullet, to travel at the speed of sound couldn't nature achieve the same thing with a living organism?    ( ) 08:44, 29 July 2008 (UTC)
I'm visiting my folks at their summer-place this week, and me and my dad (well, mostly him, I'm basically the muscle of this operation) are making a large table for the garden out of concrete. It's going to be a slab that's 220cm x 90cm big, resting on three pillars in an isoceles triangle, with two pillars at the corners on one of the 90cm side and the other about 120 cm's into the table (see diagram). The slab weighs about 182 kg. This design is for two reasons, the first being that it is going to make the slab very stable. If there was four pillars and one was slightly shorter, the table might wobble depending on where the weight is (the slab is just going to be laid on top of the pillars, not screwed to it or anything). Second, my father wants to acheieve an effect that makes it appear like the table is "floating". I had some doubts about this design, mostly because I figured that if you put enough weight on one of the corners, the hole thing would flip over and fall off. To back up my assertion, I wanted to calculate how much weight would make the table flip over. And that's where I need you guys' help :)
Here's a diagram of the table, on a coordinate system with (0,0) at the bottom left corner of the table. The green squares are the pillars (which are 10cm x 10cm).
So, here's the problem: how much weight can you put on the bottom right corner (at (220,0), in other words) before the whole table flips over? I'm not really very good at this, but I tried calculating it and I got about 35 kgs (which, if true, is far to little, and I'll have to dig up one of the pillars and move it :( ). I would really appriciate if I could get someone to verify that I'm using the right method and that my calculations are correct.
The way I did it was to figure the table as just one big lever, with the red line as the fulcrum. Then I used the   to figure out how much each part of the table pushes down, and how much force at the bottom right corner would make that side "heavier". The red line meets the edge of the table at approximately (0,0) and (220,65). I figured out the center of gravity for both parts of the table, which I got to be (89,58) and (149,22). To get the distance between the centers of gravity and the fulcrum-line, I used . The distances are about 30cm and 20cm respectively (30.16 and 20.36 to be specific). The product between the distance and the weight (in newtons) of the top part of the table is 34050.64 Nm and the bottom part is 12989.68 Nm, according to my calculations (this is where the lever principle comes in). That means that the top part is 21060.96 Nm "heavier" than the bottom part. Since the distance from the bottom right corner to the red line is 62.2cm (again, using the formula mentioned above), to flip the table over it, you would have to apply 21060.96/62.2 = 338.6 newtons of force, or about 35 kilogram in earth gravity.
As I said, I really just want someone to tell me that this is the right way to do it. If someone could check on the actual calculations, I'd be hugely grateful, but that isn't necessary. Just a confirmation of the method would make me a very grateful man. Or not so much, if I have to spend most of the afternoon digging the damn thing up :)   ( ) 11:28, 25 July 2008 (UTC)
Had you condsidered casting 'dumbell' shaped legs for a more organic feel:Organic architecture
I have been reading quite a few health articles about the ill affects of high fructose corn syrup (or corn syrup) and the bodies inability to process it. High Fructose Corn Syrup is an extremely sweet and cheap sugar altenative but it has very bad effects on the human body. It has been looked at quite a few times but always from the perspective of a user. Is there any other studies that have fully looked at the ill affects caused by corn syrup.
P.S   It is used in almost everything we eat since the 1980s and the obesity rate has risen 37% since.
Rocco F Gervasi
If you are looking for academic studies rather than general health articles you could also try a search at . "High fructose corn syrup" gave 97 hits, including  which might be a good place to start. best luck,   ( ) 20:09, 25 July 2008 (UTC)
Why isn't there a perfect symmetry between antimatter and matter in the universe if they were formed from energy? Particles and antiparticles are produced in pairs, aren't they?     Preceding   comment added by   ( ) 15:18, 25 July 2008 (UTC) 
To examplify, let us take the example of Proton and antiproton. Proton disintegrated to form electron and antineutrino during bigbang. But there can never be the breakdown of Antiproton to Positon and neutrino. Hence, there is no perfect symmetry between antimatter and matter. You may read the Book 'A brief History of Time by Stephen W. Hawking' as it provides a vivid description of answer of your questions.  ( ) 19:42, 25 July 2008 (UTC)
Hi! When I was learning atomic structure, the diagrams of orbitals had '+' or '-' signs marked on it(For eg., each lobe of a p-orbital had '+' on one lobe and '-' on the other). My teacher mentioned something about it relating to the wavefunction and addition/ subtraction interference or something like that, but I didn't get the point completely(I'm only in high school) I believe the wavefunction is a complex no., the square of whose magnitude gave the probability density. I don't understand what the sign means. Does it imply that the value of the wavefunction in one region is the conjugate of another?? Can anyone explain to me??   ( ) 15:29, 25 July 2008 (UTC) A 15-year-old.
But what does the sign physically mean??   ( ) 07:52, 27 July 2008 (UTC) A 15-year-old.
Does neonatal circumcision help prevent the possibility of contracting HIV? Unfortunetly much of the research on the subject is highly biased either in favor for or against circumcision. I understand there is much debate on the subject and a list of medical journals or articles explaining the medical aspect of the procedure as a preventative measure without bias would be greatly appreciated.   ( ) 17:46, 25 July 2008 (UTC)
In the reaction '2SO2+O2=2SO3', the required conditions are 1:Presence of 450oC temperature and 2:A catalyst
Now this catalyst can be either Vanadium Pentoxide or Platinum in general. But among these two, which catalyst pprovides a better speed of reaction?  ( ) 19:33, 25 July 2008 (UTC)
I don't really expect this to be answered here, but I figure it's worth a shot. The RD has surprised me before!
I'm interested in the C3&Pi;u state of the N2 molecule, and the B2&Sigma;u+ state of the N2+ molecular ion. I need to know the reaction rate constants for the collisional quenching reactions of these species when they collide with ground-state helium atoms. If experimental data are not available, I need some theory that will allow me to estimate these rate constants to at least order-of-magnitude accuracy. All responses appreciated.      20:07, 25 July 2008 (UTC)
How long can insects survive in a vacuum? Does their exoskeleton help protect them? Just curious.   ( ) 22:03, 25 July 2008 (UTC)
In a confrontation between both.   ( ) 22:04, 25 July 2008 (UTC)
Hello. Does leaving on your "portable electronic devices" prior to take off/landing on an airplane really have any interfering effect in the cockpit? It just seems to me that even if everyone on a plane had a CD player with headsets on, there could not possibly be enough interference to inhibit cockpit communication with the airport, or to distort the autopilot. Also, would cell phones in operation during flight cause a technical problem either? I've seen a stewardess use a credit-card scanner during flight that sends a signal to accept the charge, which to me would seem to have the same interfering effect as a cell phone, yet the scanner is allowed to be used. It makes me think that cell phones are prohibited just for the sake of passenger comfort (no one wants to sit next to someone who yells on their cell phone the whole flight). Comments? Answers? Thanks!--  ( ) 22:05, 25 July 2008 (UTC)
If an E-bomb or EMP weapon was used against soldiers armed with guns, would it ignite the smokeless powder, and cause the guns to explode?   ( ) 22:23, 25 July 2008 (UTC)
Why exactly is it that some bird species have evolved long tails whilst other species in the same family with broadly similar behaviour have not?
Compare the European Magpie and the Carrion Crow, or the Peach-faced Lovebird and the Budgerigar, for example. What exactly are the benefits to a bird of having a long tail anyway? --  ( ) 23:30, 25 July 2008 (UTC)