Why would I want to merge my accounts?
Can I merge an account that has a different name on a different language Wikipedia?
Can I still change my username after merging accounts?
Thanks.
Can anyone start a new wikiproject? If so, I may be interested in creating one for Berks County, Pennsylvania. I've created a lot of articles about unincorporated communities in the county, and I'd like to have a place to work with other editors on the topic.   ( ) 14:13, 26 July 2008 (UTC)
In the article Santarak   ita the reference for the sentence 
Not sure what to do about this. I'm inclined to delete the whole sentence reference and all since the statement is not all that important and the referenced site seems a fairly poor quality source. I'd appreciate some advice about this. I've also added a note on the discussion page of the article.   ( ) 14:19, 26 July 2008 (UTC)
I'm wondering about the advisability of creating templates for some prominent families.  This came up when I realized that the family of Mario Andretti and his twin brother Aldo Andretti had maybe 8 or 9 notable race car drivers, and the family runs several racing and non-racing enterprises, some of which are notable.  This particular family is probably notable in its own right but it would be a lot of work to create an article.  In any event most of the family members have an "Andretti Family" subsection to help people keep things straight.  I looked in the relevant project space,  , and there's nothing for or against creating templates for racing families.  For comparison I see some families have their own article (e.g. Rockefeller family), some have a category (e.g.  ), some have templates (e.g.   - which is in a category of  ), and a few have family trees using some software (e.g. Obama family).  I was going to just get started, but thought I should doublecheck to see if there's any rule on this or if it's really a good idea.  Also, is this the right forum?  It didn't quite seem to fit village pump.  Thanks,   ( ) 16:27, 26 July 2008 (UTC)
I wish to print off information relating to the Eniskillen Bombing + history of how troubles impacted on Enniskillen.
Can you advise me how to do this as I do not appear to see it on my Computer which is Vista.  Thank you.
Contact email address is      Preceding   comment added by   ( ) 17:49, 26 July 2008 (UTC) 
I've logged in but my username won't come up as a page and is highlighted in red. How can I fix this?     Preceding   comment added by   (       ) 18:21, 26 July 2008 (UTC) 
Hi. I'm trying my hand at uploading an image, but it says that "The action you have requested is limited to Autoconfirmed users, Administrators." I thought that I was an autoconfirmed user. Any chance in getting this fixed? Thanks.   ( ) 18:23, 26 July 2008 (UTC)
I'm trying to work on my userpage, but it dosen't do what i want.  
1. How do i center my barnstars?
2. Why does "userboxes" look squished?
I have an account in spanish language. Do I neen to have another account fon English?
I canot login in English section...
Thank you!
Thank you very much!!!     Preceding   comment added by   (       ) 00:47, 27 July 2008 (UTC) 