The band was formed in December 1995 in the K-Town studios of Kaiserslautern. The members were the rapper Joe Thompson, who served in the US Army during Operation Desert Storm and had a friendship with Rod. D from Fun Factory, as well as the singer Darren Tucker. The first single "Don't Look Any Further", a Hip Hop version of the song of the same name of the M People received still no attention, the second song "Vision of Life" however became a hit in several European countries in the middle of 1996.
Shortly after the publication of "Vision of Life", Darren Tucker had to leave the group due to disputes with his manager. He was replaced by Mike Dalien. The album ''Visions'' and the singles "Murder" over the case of O. J. Simpson, "Potion" and "Lovething/We Do It Like That" followed soon. Together with Flip Da Scrip Down Low produced the song "Nothing Like Viva" as a hymn on the German music TV-channel VIVA under the project name ''Hip Hop Alliance''.
At the end of 1997 followed the second album ''It Ain't Over''. The song "Johnny B.", a cover version of The Hooters became the largest hit from Down Low and climbed up to No.  4 in the German single charts. Radio NRJ distinguished Down Low as the best rap act in 1997.
In the spring of 1998 Down Low created ''Rapper Against Racism'' in order to promote talented new singers and rappers (La Mazz, Trooper Da Don, Jay Supreme and others) and point a spot on racism still present in Germany at that time.
In the autumn of 1998 Down Low published the album ''Third Dimension''. The single "Once Upon A Time" could tie to past successes; the probably saddest song of the group contained elements from the film music to Once Upon a Time in the West of Ennio Morricone. With the song "H.I.V." one drew the attention of the dangers of the AIDS virus.
After the publication a greatest hit album Down Low took a break for 11/2 years. In 2001 the fourth album ''The 4th Level'', which was clearly an R&B-album, was published. Mike Dalien left the band due to musical differences in 2001 at the beginning of the work on ''The 4th level''. His successor became Erick    Rick    Lamont Smith, which had already co-operated in the past with Down Low and had published some singles under the name La Mazz and Dressman. Since the German public had lost the interest in European Rap in the meantime, Down Low could celebrate no further successes in Germany. In 2002 the record company published a remix of ''Murder'' with samples of the rapper Warren G.
2003 appeared a DVD under the title ''Visions     The Singles 1997   2003''. In the autumn of 2003 the single "Living In The Ghetto" appeared. The publication was however a single-handed attempt of the record company; the artists experienced only later of it, and for the lack of promotion the song found no commercial attention, but nevertheless became a club hit. Joe Thompson accused SHIFT Music later to cannibalize Down Low from money scarcities.
For 2004 an album named ''Down Low V / Adrenaline'' was announced. But since the new style of the group did not please the record company, the album was not published. For a while it looked like as if the artists would possibly close a contract with a new label in the United States, for legal reasons probably under a new project name, but in April 2005 Joe announced Down Low had settled the controversy with SHIFT and would work on new material again. The first song "Every Day (MMMM)" of the album ''Return of The Trendsetter'' was published on the 27th of October 2006.
2010 is the come back of Mike Dalien in the Group Down Low.
Down Low plan a new album in the end of 2010.