What is M.I.T.T. (Mastery in Transitional Training?)?  A friend is trying to get my brother to take the class/course/whatever it is, and he has no information on it. I can't find anything online.
Thanks   ( ) 03:17, 10 August 2008 (UTC) Joanne
Why not Google Transitional Training (as I just did) ?  All the answers are there.  ( ) 10:25, 10 August 2008 (UTC)DT
Still looking for info.  This is a self help type program - like The FORUM, I think, and it's offered in Los Angeles.  When I Google any combination, I get all sorts of other courses (flying, equine, etc.) but not this one. - Joanne     Preceding   comment added by   ( ) 17:26, 10 August 2008 (UTC) 
Finally found it - it's www.mittraining.com.  Strange I couldn't find it Googling.  My brother was finally told what the site was.  Thanks for the suggestions.     Preceding   comment added by   ( ) 21:27, 10 August 2008 (UTC) 
We had a minor earthquake here a couple summers ago (big enough to shake everyone a bit around but small enough that no one was hurt)... They're pretty common for us, but this one was very odd. Right before it happened, our backyard starting glowing green. And I don't mean that it was especially bright out and the sunlight was reflecting the foliage or anything like that: anything and everything was tinted green. I actually did a double-take while walking through our kitchen and had to stop and stare. You know those sunglasses Dorthy wore in The Wizard of Oz when visiting the Emerald City? Yeah... I think I know what that must have looked like now. The bark on the tree, the trampoline, the lawnmower... It was like someone had dressed everything up for Saint Patrick's day. I was afraid to step out for a while for fear of what horrid things might have fallen from the sky and caused it. (I actually wondered for a split second if it was fallout or something to that effect). 
As soon as the quake was over, everything was normal. I spoke to some people afterword and asked them if they had noticed anything strange before the actual earthquake (before telling them about what I saw, mind you), and every one of them made mention of changing colors before anything else. There was talk of bright yellow, deep blue, and I don't even remember what else... Anyway, my question is this: has anyone else heard about this? And is there a term for this phenomenon? I know that it's been seen before (I had a weather book at some point with a picture of a farmhouse in Japan minutes before a quake where everything looked dark blue), but all that I can find on the subject is . It's similar, but not what I'm looking for... These colors weren't in the sky (they were ''everywhere''), and every news site related to the video labels it as nature's warning for "severe" earthquakes, whereas ours was pretty mild. You'd think after hundreds of years of this happening there'd be more research on the subject, but so far as I can tell no one sans myself considers it even remotely interesting. --  ( ) 03:52, 10 August 2008 (UTC)
The Unrepresented Nations and Peoples Organization is described as an "international organization" for peoples who "lack representation internationally". The existence of the organization, however, gives these peoples international representation. Is there a name for this phenomena, other than, say "self-defeating" or "self-contradictory"?       (               ) 07:08, 10 August 2008 (UTC)
Why does it seem that every abandoned vehicle on the side of the freeway has a t-shirt hanging from one of the side windows?  We can't come to any logical conclusion as to why anyone would do that after their car breaks down, but maybe we don't know something that everyone with an unreliable car does.     Preceding   comment added by   ( ) 15:39, 10 August 2008 (UTC) 
Hi, I've looked over the username policy, and fully understand it. But I just can't think, so I'd like some suggestions on a good username. Thanks.   ( ) 16:39, 10 August 2008 (UTC)
Hmmm...WhaleOilBeefHooked?   ( ) 12:29, 12 August 2008 (UTC)
When did the Asymmetric Bars in gymnastics become the Uneven Bars? The latter just sounds child-like to me. They were called Asymmetric bars when I used to watch the Olympics as a kid.   ( ) 17:16, 10 August 2008 (UTC)
This is something that happened to me recently and I know it will happen in the future because I will continue traveling so it will happen again.  But I want to do better.
I arrived in Maputo the capital of Mozambique by bus.  At the bus station a man dressed in plain clothes climbed into the bus and flashed his badge.  He demanded I show my passport.  I turned to the man sittng next to me for the last 40 hours, a guy who said he was an instructor at the police academy.  He verified that they were police officers.  He said they were in plain clothes.  He suggested they might be trying to find Chinese illegally entering to visit their families (I'm ethnic Chinese).  
The man with a badge went on to find three Kenyan nationals of Somali ancestry (Somalis are highly reviled immigrants in Southern Africa) and asked them for their passports too.  He then told us all that we would have to go to the police station with him.  There were four other men with this guy with a badge.  I went to get the police instructor to ask what was going on.  He talked with them but they still persisted.  I asked the instructor to go along with us but he didn't want to.  
So with the Kenyans were marched to a police station (a real police station to my initial relief).  But in the back, we were all searched and taunted for being Somali and Chinese (a uniformed officer even went up to us while we were back and did a "ching-chong-chong" dance. The Kenyans did not have the protection of American citizenship and were strip searched and had all their USD taken.  I was just hand searched and had some money taken.  I forked it over, hoping to get the hell out as quickly as possible.  We were released then.  
It has always been standard advice to defuse corrupt police by going to the station. Apparently in Mozambique that's how you really screw yourself.  So what could I have done differently?  Demanded on the spot that the embassy be called and accompany me?  Bluffed somehow?  What would have been likely responses by the thugs and how would I have handled it best?  Help me think this over guys!  
Lotsofissues,
Finally in Cape Town, 
18:46, 10 August 2008 (UTC)
I am thinking of getting a new cell/mobile phone that offers web access.  I particularly want to be able to use this phone while traveling outside of the United States, so I'd like to be able to replace the SIM card with a local prepaid SIM card to avoid the astronomical "roaming" fees that US cell-phone providers charge for network access outside the United States.  The iPhone seems to be the premier web-accessible phone, but it does not seem to have a replaceable SIM card.  Are there other phones, available in the United States, that feature replaceable SIM cards?  Also, one of the main reasons I want web access for mapping sites like Google Maps. Are Google Maps (or, say  Multimap) files large enough to strain the bandwidth of most cell phones?  Thank you!    ( ) 19:40, 10 August 2008 (UTC)
I wuz watchin the Olympics and somebody on the telly said it's because his grandparents are German or something.... but what are the requirements, exactly?  Don't you have to be a citizen?--  ( ) 20:10, 10 August 2008 (UTC)
Rule 42 of the  sets out the nationality requirements for the Olympic Games (it's on page 81 of the Charter). If he is a dual citizen, then bye-law 1 would apply: "A competitor who is a national of two or more countries at the same time may represent either one of them, as he may elect. However, after having represented one country in the Olympic Games, in continental or regional games or in world or regional championships recognised by the relevant IF, he may not represent another country unless he meets the conditions set forth in paragraph 2 below." 
So, as long as he has never played for the US team, he can choose to play for Germany. (If he wants to play for the US in future, there is a three-year waiting period after the last time he plays for Germany, unless the German Olympic Committee agrees to waive it.) -    21:01, 10 August 2008 (UTC)
On Google there are a few paid reviews by Jone International University (JIU), and a few other add on college searching engines. The school is accredited, it belongs to the Better Business Bureau, but why can't i find reviews on discussion forums by students or alumni's else where? I am very interested in their curriculum but would like more reassurance from the community other than provided by JIU ? Thanks! Priscila   ( ) 21:16, 10 August 2008 (UTC)
Almost every government in the world is having negative budget year after year. there is this money coming from?     Preceding   comment added by   ( ) 22:20, 10 August 2008 (UTC) 
What's the name of the painting on the cover of this book?     Preceding   comment added by   ( ) 23:17, 10 August 2008 (UTC) 