Rick Decker met Susan Stewart while at a medical conference in Florida, he followed her back to Oakdale and soon gained a job at Oakdale Memorial. Not long after arriving several patients connected to Bob Hughes started dying, blamed on incompetence on Bob's behalf, he stepped down and sought out Rick's treatment for memory lapses, however the deaths continued and it was soon suspected of foul play, Bob brought in a forensic expert to seek out the truth, while the Oakdale Police Department soon got involved with the case. Two suspects where named a young intern named Dr. Gordon and Rick Decker. The forensic expert suspected Rick of being a serial killer, but Bob refused to believe it. Bob was attacked and left in a coma for weeks, soon after Rick was attacked but quickly recovered. Rick's attack shifted the focus over to Dr. Gordon, who was soon found dead from a suicide attempt. Throughout the whole ordeal, Susan stood by and defended Rick, the two married. On the day of the wedding a reporter named Jeffrey Starr showed up, who was writing about Rick's time in San Francisco. Realizing he could be caught, Rick murdered the reporter and drugged Susan to make it seem the reporter left that night. However Alison growing suspicious of Rick, told her mother that she went to their house that night and Rick was nowhere to be seen, Rick covered and soon targeted Alison, threatening her to keep quiet.  
Oakdale Police learned of Rick's suspension from medical school, and fearing Bob could awaken and point him out as his attacker, Rick spun Susan a tail on anxiety attacks and asked if they could temporarily leave town. When he learned Alison had his safety deposit key, he kidnapped her to a remote cabin and injected her with what he believed to be potassium chloride. The next day Susan read an article on Alison's death and the last person seen was Rick, she quickly returned to Oakdale. Susan got him to confess, then it was revealed that Alison had swapped the syringe and faked her death to get him caught. He was whisked away to await trial for the San Francisco murders, then Oakdale murders.