Allsport GPS is a part of the Trimble Outdoors product family. It is owned by Trimble Navigation which was founded in 1978. The Allsport GPS application was bought by Trimble in April 2006.  The software continues to be updated periodically. Allsport GPS started out as only available on limited phone models and carriers, but this list has steadily been expanding since then. In 2007 Allsport GPS was released on Blackberry phones. Allsport GPS was released on AT&T phones in 2008.
The purpose of Allsport GPS is to support people who have an active lifestyle with their fitness and performance tracking. It is part of a trio of cell phone applications called Trimble Outdoors. It can be used for any type of workout, including running, jogging, mountain biking, road biking, and walking. The application is downloaded onto a GPS cell phone. The user then straps the phone onto themselves or onto their bike, or holds the phone for the duration of their workout. During the workout Allsport GPS supplies real time statistics such as calories burned, time, speed and distance. These statistics are updated every ten seconds.  After the workout finishes, the data is automatically uploaded wirelessly to the website. The totals of the data can then be viewed, as well as a trip calendar showing all workouts over time, and elevation and speed profiles. Allsport GPS also has a map function. The workout can be viewed on a map both on the phone and on the website. The route can also be made public and shared with others. The user can do a trip search on the website and view other user   s shared workouts as well as workouts from ''Bicycling Magazine''. These routes can be downloaded from the website and used. The phone application also has a race-against-yourself feature. This enables the user to compare their times and distances multiple times over the same track.
One criticism of this type of product is that carrying a mobile phone can be somewhat unwieldy for workout purposes. This can be solved by purchasing a carrier that can attach to a bike, or purchasing an armband, although some still do not fasten the phone very securely. Additionally, depending on what phone model is used, it can be heavier than other fitness devices such as Garmin Forerunner.  Also with a clamshell phone design, the display data during the workout is quite small and can be hard to read. The interface on the phone can seem a bit rough as well.http://www.laptopmag.com/review/software/trimble-outdoors-allsportgps.aspx  The application can also drain the battery quickly, depending on what phone model is used. This can be tempered by    turning off the application   s need to ping the network   .   The phone application does experience some software bugs, but Allsport GPS says these are in the process of being fixed.
Allsport GPS has been received well in a variety of print and internet publications such as ''Men   s Health Magazine'' and ''The New York Times Online''.  In 2007 it was named GPS Gadget of the Week by GeoCarta.  Both  Fred Zahradnik from  and ''Laptop Magazine'' gave Allsport GPS 4/5 stars in 2007.