In March 2001, three non-English editions of Wikipedia were created, namely, the  , the  , and the   Wikipedias.  The original site address of the Japanese Wikipedia was  and all pages were written in the Latin alphabet or romaji, as the software did not work with Japanese characters at the time. Curiously, the home page also showed an early attempt at creating a vertical text.
The first article was named "Nihongo no Funimekusu" (though incorrect, it was probably intended to mean ''onso taikei'' (            , phonemics) and was written entirely in romaji.  Until late December in that year, there were only two articles.
On September 1, 2002, the software hosting Wikipedia was upgraded to the so-called "Phase III" version, and the articles were moved from the old version to the new. It is currently possible to trace edits made to the articles since that time. As the history of old articles show, some articles were posted by several non-native Japanese speakers. Major topics covered then include Japanese culture, language, geography, and programming.
In the same month, translation of the Wikipedia interface into Japanese began. By the end of the year, pages describing the editing process and the GNU Free Documentation License had been translated.  In mid-December, there were around 10 registered users; the number of articles also stood at around 10.
On January 31, 2003, a Japanese online magazine, ''Wired News'' Japanese edition, covered Wikipedia. After that, the number of participants started to increase considerably and many pages about the Wikipedia project were translated or created.
On February 12, 2003, the Japanese edition of Wikipedia reached the 1000-page milestone, two years after the English edition.  Given that accomplishment, Slashdot Japan posted a story about the Japanese Wikipedia. Several days after that, the number of participants doubled, attesting to the power of the Slashdot effect.  Because of this exposure, a variety of articles started to appear, among them physics, biology, information technology, literature, music, games, manga, and celebrities.
On July 15, 2003 the Japanese Wikipedia reached 10,000 articles, four months and three days after the 1000-article milestone, beating the time it took the English Wikipedia to achieve the same feat. By early 2004 the Japanese Wikipedia contained 30,000 articles. The increase in both articles and contributors was steady after that, and by late September it had reached 75,000 articles.
The major force behind the expansion appeared to be a number of links at Yahoo! Japan News. It is unknown exactly when Yahoo! started to put links to the edition in their articles, but , dozens of news articles posted on Yahoo! Japan contained links to the edition to explain terms in the articles. Lately, the developers of Wikipedia have noticed that certain spikes in server usage correspond to the publishing of Yahoo! Japan news articles containing links to Wikipedia.
In September 2004, the Japanese Wikipedia was awarded the "2004 Web Creation Award Web-Person Special Prize" from the Japan Advertisers Association. This award, normally given to individuals for great contributions to the Web in Japanese, was accepted by a long-standing contributor on behalf of the project.
The Japanese Wikipedia is different from this English Wikipedia in a number of ways.
Jimmy Wales has pointed out on a conference that Japanese Wikipedia is significantly more dominated by articles about pop culture than other Wikipedia projects, and according to one of his slides, as a ''New York Times'' journalist saw it, "barely 20 percent" of the articles on Japanese Wikipedia were about anything else. In relation to this, Japanese Wikipedia is known to have a poor number of moderators as of early March 2010.
Nobuo Ikeda, a known public policy academic and media critic in Japan, has suggested an ongoing 2channel-ization phenomenon on the Japanese Wikipedia. Ikeda argues that by allowing anonymous IP users, the community spawns a type of culture seen in the likes of anonymous message boards such as 2channel, where hate speech, personal attacks and derogatory expressions are common, and also the source of entertainment. He also remarks on the "emotional-outlet"/"get rid of stress" aspect of Japanese internet culture where 90% of blogs are anonymous, compared to the U.S. where 80% of blogs are expressed under one's own name. Ikeda's arguments are not the only sources hinting cultural correlation, influence, overlapping users from 2channel.