A ''Democratic National Convention Interfaith Gathering'' was held at "2:00 pm MT, at the Wells Fargo Theater, inside the Colorado Convention Center." It was the first time the DNC has hosted such an event and was "the first official event for the 2008 Convention  The event  free and open to the public, but tickets  required." 
The event was led by:
Additional clergy included: 
Local clergy included:
The Secular Coalition for America has argued that while the event was "designed to showcase the 'diversity' and 'shared values' of the party and achieve a 'spirit of unity,' it would, in fact, marginalize those Democrats who do not practice religion." The Coalition wrote to Chief executive officer of the Democratic National Convention Committee, the Rev. Leah Daughtry, stating that it "expressed the Coalition's willingness to discuss ways to make the convention more inclusive." 
The theme for the day was "One Nation", with Michelle Obama as the "headline prime-time speaker."  She was introduced by her brother, Craig Robinson. '' '', directed and produced by Mark Herzog and Chris Cowen in association with Ken Burns, was introduced by Kennedy's niece, Caroline Kennedy. Senator Kennedy was not expected to attend the convention due to his illness, but nevertheless made a surprise appearance and speech in the evening. A video about former President Jimmy Carter's humanitarian work was also shown, followed by a brief appearance by the president and former President himself, accompanied by former First Lady Rosalynn Carter.
The Platform was adopted by voice vote with no real debate.
The speakers were scheduled to include:
The theme for the day was "Renewing America's Promise."  Senator Hillary Clinton was the headline prime-time speaker and former Virginia Governor Mark Warner delivered the keynote address on Tuesday night.
The speakers included:
The theme for the day was "Securing America's Future" and featured a speech by Joe Biden, the Vice Presidential candidate. Iraq War veterans Representative Patrick Murphy (D-PA) and Illinois Veterans' Affairs Department Director Tammy Duckworth offered a tribute to war veterans.
Obama and Biden were both formally chosen to be the Democratic nominees for President and Vice President by acclamation, put forward by former rival Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton. 
Barack Obama himself made a surprise appearance after Biden's acceptance speech and praised the performances of his colleagues and his wife Michelle. Obama also reminded delegates to attend his acceptance speech the following day.
Sister Catherine Pinkerton delivered the benediction for the night.
The speakers included:
Along with presumptive presidential nominee Barack Obama, former opponent Hillary Clinton's name was also placed in nomination for president.
Obama was formally selected as the Democratic nominee through acclamation, put forward by formal rival Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton of New York, offering her own delegates to Obama and motioning to suspend the rules of the roll call.
Joe Biden was nominated by acclamation on a voice vote.
The theme for the day was "Change You Can Believe In."
Barack Obama accepted the nomination in a speech at INVESCO Field at Mile High 
Rabbi David Saperstein gave an invocation prior to Obama's speech.  Progressive pastor Joel Hunter offered the benediction after Obama's speech. Speaker Pelosi adjourned the convention after the benediction.