She was born in Hammonton, New Jersey and grew up in Willow Grove, Pennsylvania. She married Joe Biden in 1977 and became stepmother to his two young sons from his first marriage, Beau and Hunter, whose mother and baby sister died in a car accident. Joe and Jill Biden have a daughter, Ashley, born in 1981.
Jill Biden has a bachelor's degree from the University of Delaware, master's degrees from West Chester University and Villanova University and a doctoral degree from the University of Delaware. She taught English and reading in high schools for 13 years, and also taught adolescents with emotional disabilities at a psychiatric hospital.  From 1993 to 2008, she was an English and writing instructor at Delaware Technical & Community College.  Since 2009, she has been an adjunct professor of English at Northern Virginia Community College and is thought to be the first Second Lady to hold a paying job while her husband is Vice President.
She is the founder of the Biden Breast Health Initiative non-profit organization, co-founded the Book Buddies program, and is active in Delaware Boots on the Ground.  She participated in her husband's presidential and vice presidential campaigns while continuing her teaching responsibilities.
 Her father, Donald C. Jacobs (1927   1999), was a bank teller who became head of a savings and loan in Chestnut Hill, Pennsylvania.  His family name had originally been Giacoppa before her Italian grandfather anglicized it.  Her mother, Bonny Jean Jacobs (1930   2008), was a homemaker.
The family was not particularly religious, but in ninth grade, Jacobs independently took classes in order to join the Presbyterian church.
  She attended Upper Moreland High School, where she was somewhat rebellious and enjoyed her social life, but always liked English class. She graduated in 1969.
Jacobs enrolled in a junior college in Pennsylvania to study fashion merchandising, but soon found it unsatisfying.  She married Bill Stevenson, a former college football player, in February 1970.  Within a couple of years he opened the Stone Balloon in Newark, Delaware, near the University of Delaware. It became one of the most successful college bars in the nation.  
She enrolled at the University of Delaware, where she declared English as her major.    She then took a year off from college and did some modelling work for a local agency in Wilmington.  She and Stevenson drifted apart.  
 She began her career teaching high school English.  Meanwhile, she was going through turbulent divorce proceedings with Stevenson; the court case ended in 1976, with her not getting the half-share in the Stone Balloon she had wanted.
She and Joe Biden were married on June 17, 1977 at the Chapel at the United Nations in New York City by Melvin Hawthorne, Chaplain of the Church Center of the United Nations, about five years after Joe Biden's first wife and infant daughter died in a car accident. Joe had proposed several times before she accepted, hesitant to take on the commitment of raising his two young sons who survived the accident.  She continued to teach and then, while pregnant, received a Master of Education with a specialty in Reading from West Chester University in 1981. The Bidens' daughter Ashley Blazer was born on June 8, 1981, and Jill stopped working for two years while raising the three children.
She then returned to work, teaching English, acting as a reading specialist, and teaching history to emotionally disturbed students. She taught in the adolescent program at the Rockford Center psychiatric hospital for five years in the 1980s. In 1987, Biden received a second Master of Arts degree, this one in English from Villanova University.   During her husband's 1988 bid for the Presidency, she said she would continue her job of teaching emotionally disturbed children even if she became First Lady.  In all, she spent 13 years teaching in public high school, including 3 years at Claymont High School.
From 1993 through 2008, Biden was an instructor at the Stanton/Wilmington campus of Delaware Technical & Community College, where she taught English composition and remedial writing, with an emphasis on instilling confidence in students. She has said of teaching at a community college, "I feel like I can make a greater difference in their lives. I just love that population. It just feels really comfortable to me. I love the women who are coming back to school and getting their degrees, because they're so focused."
Biden is president of the '''Biden Breast Health Initiative''', a nonprofit organization begun in 1993 that provides educational breast health awareness programs free of charge to schools and other groups in the state of Delaware.  In the following 15 years, the organization informed more than 7,000 high school girls about proper breast health.  In 2007, Biden helped found Book Buddies, which provides books for low-income children, and has been very active in Delaware Boots on the Ground, an organization that supports military families.  She runs five miles, five times a week, and she has run in the Marine Corps Marathon.
Biden later returned to school for her doctoral degree, studying under her birth name, Jill Jacobs. In January 2007, at age 55, she received a Doctor of Education in educational leadership from the University of Delaware.  Her dissertation, ''Student Retention at the Community College: Meeting Students' Needs'', was published under the name Jill Jacobs-Biden.
Following her strong dismay at George W. Bush's reelection in 2004, she urged her husband to run again for President. During Joe Biden's 2008 campaign to be the Democratic nominee, she continued to teach during the week and would join him for campaigning on weekends. She said that she would have taken an activist role in addressing education as her chief focus of concern as a potential First Lady. She also said that she was basically apolitical and would not seek inclusion in Cabinet meetings.
Once her husband was selected as the Democratic presidential nominee Barack Obama's running mate, she began campaigning again.
  Throughout the time her husband was running for vice president, Jill Biden continued to teach four days a week at Delaware Technical & Community College during the fall 2008 semester, and then campaigned over the long weekend, while grading class papers on the campaign bus.
  In January 2009, she began teaching two English courses as an adjunct professor at the Alexandria campus of Northern Virginia Community College (NOVA), the second largest community college in the nation.  It has been rare for Second Ladies to work while their spouses serve as Vice President, and Biden is thought to be the first Second Lady to hold a paying job while her husband is Vice President.  Biden planned to be a public advocate for the importance of community colleges and to advise the Obama administration on issues related to them.  In White House announcements and by her preference, she is referred to as "Dr. Jill Biden".
Catherine Russell, a former adviser to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, was named Biden's chief of staff for her Second Lady role. Courtney O   Donnell, a former spokesperson for Howard Dean and Elizabeth Edwards, was named her communications director and Kirsten White, a lawyer at Morgan, Lewis & Bockius, her policy director. As Second Lady, Biden has a staff of eight overall and occupies a corner suite in the Eisenhower Executive Office Building.
 However, Joe Biden's spokesperson stated that Biden had only been offered one job by Obama.  In May 2009, Obama announced that Biden would be in charge of an initiative to raise awareness about the value of community colleges.
In June 2009, Biden gave the commencement address at Kingsborough Community College in Brooklyn, New York, and received an honorary Doctor of Humane Letters degree from the City University of New York.  Biden continued teaching two English reading and writing classes at NOVA in fall 2009.  In January 2010, she gave the commencement speech at the University of Delaware's winter commencement, the first such address by her at a major university.  In August 2010, Biden appeared as herself in an episode of Lifetime's ''Army Wives'', making it part of her campaign to raise awareness of military families.  In April 2011, she and Michelle Obama joined to start a national initiative to showcase the needs of U.S. military families, while she continued to teach at NOVA.