Mitchell, nicknamed "Little Big Man", is a native of Takoma Park, Maryland, but a resident of Washington, D.C..
Mitchell began his professional boxing career on September 23, 1988, knocking out Eddie Colon in three rounds at Atlantic City, New Jersey. 
He had a mark of 14 wins and no losses with seven knockouts - including victories over former Olympic Games bronze medalist Aristides Acevedo and over Dana Roston - when he met a former or future world champion for the first time inside a ring. On March 8, 1990, he beat the famed former world champion Rafael Limon in Atlantic City by an eight-round unanimous decision, but he endured what was probably an embarrassing moment for him when Limon stripped Mitchell of his trunks during round seven. The fight was televised in the United States, and the pants-pulling moment made it into a number of blooper videos.
Mitchell kept on winning, running his record up to 27-0 with sixteen knockouts, including a victory against former world title challenger Miguel Santana. He then fought former world champion Rocky Lockridge on April 22, 1992, winning a ten-round unanimous decision.
Mitchell lost two fights in a row to begin 1994: one against future world champion Leavander Johnson in eight rounds, then to future two-time world lightweight champion Stevie Johnston in nine rounds. He did not lose another fight in the next seven years.
After six more wins in a row, including one over future world champion Terron Millett, Mitchell fought for the WBC continental Americas Jr. Welterweight title in Dallas, Texas on April 11, 1996. He won the title by knocking out Gilberto Floes in the second round.
On May 10, 1997, Mitchell defeated Jose Rafael Barboza by a twelve-round decision in Miami, Florida to win the WBA's Fedelatin belt in the same weight division. After two more victories, he got his first chance at winning a world title.
On October 10, 1998, he beat Moroccan Khalid Rahilou by a twelve-round unanimous decision in Paris, France, becoming the WBA's world junior welterweight champion.
Mitchell retained his world title four times, his last successful defense being against Puerto Rican Felix Flores on September 16, 2000, at Las Vegas. Mitchell was dropped in the first round, but he recovered and edged the challenger by two scores of 116-111 and one of 116-113.
After that fight, demand rose for a unification title bout between Mitchell and Kostya Tszyu of Russia, the WBC's world Jr. Welterweight champion.
The highly anticipated match took place in Las Vegas on February 3, 2002. The outcome was controversial, as Mitchell broke his knee early in the fight and he could not continue after round seven. Although Mitchell was not knocked out in a conventional way, this nevertheless counted as a knockout loss in his record. 
Mitchell then fought eight bouts, winning each of them, including victories over former world champion Vince Phillips and top contenders Lovemore N'Dou and Ben Tackie.
Negotiations for a rematch with Tszyu had been taking place long before the fights with the aforementioned rivals. Tszyu, however, had his own health problems, and the fight kept being cancelled. First scheduled for Australia and then for Moscow, the rematch finally took place on November 6, 2004, in Phoenix, Arizona. Mitchell was floored four times in the second bout with Tszyu before being stopped in round three, losing by knockout. 
On November 19, 2005, Mitchell was defeated by Floyd Mayweather Jr. in their 147-lbs. non-title bout in Portland, Oregon. Mayweather dropped Mitchell in the third round with a straight right hand to the head, and again dropped him in the sixth with a hook to the body, ending the fight. During his most recent bout - against Paul Williams in Reno, Nevada, on August 19, 2006 - Mitchell was knocked down in the third round, and three times in the fourth round. Referee Vic Drakulich stopped the bout at 2:57 when Mitchell arose wobbly from the final knockdown. 
Mitchell has a professional boxing record of 57 wins and 6 losses, with 30 knockout wins.