A '''pocketknife''' is a folding knife with one or more blades that fit inside the handle that can still fit in a pocket.  It is also known as a jackknife or jack-knife. Blades can range from 1&nbsp;cm (1/2&nbsp;inch) to as much as 30&nbsp;cm (12&nbsp;inches) in length, but a more typical blade length is 5 to 15&nbsp;cm (2 to 6&nbsp;inches.) Pocketknives are versatile tools, and may be used for anything from opening an envelope, to cutting twine, to slicing an apple or even for self-defense.
The earliest known pocket knives date to at least the early Iron Age. A pocketknife with bone handle was found at Hallstatt, dating to around 600-500 BC. They remained quite rare until modern times compared to fixed-blade knives. For most of history, knives were worn inside sheaths or scabbards attached to the belt. Pockets in clothing are a relatively modern invention. Before this, pockets or pouches were attached to belts, in which these early folding knives would have been carried. In recent times, it has become illegal to carry fixed-blade knives in certain jurisdictions, which has made pocket knives much more common.
Most pocket knives for light duty are slipjoints. This means that the blade does not lock, but, once opened, is held in place by a spring device that allows the blade to fold if a certain amount of pressure is applied.  Most locking knives have only one blade that is as large as can be fitted into the handle, because the locking mechanism relies on the spring along the back of the blade to lock it and it is difficult to build in multiple levers, one for each blade. Slipjoints tend to be smaller in size than most typical pocketknives.
Some popular styles of slipjoints are:
Multitool knives often have more than one blade, including an assortment of knife blade types (serrated, plain edged, saws) as well as a myriad of other tools such as bottle openers, corkscrews, and scissors. A large tool selection is the signature of the Swiss Army Knife. These knives are produced by Victorinox and Wenger and issued to the army and sold to the public.
The German Army knife is large but light, with two blades opening from each side.  It has hard plastic grips and aluminium liners.  The United States Army knife, made by the Camillus Cutlery Company and Imperial Schrade, used to have carbon steel blades and brass liners (both vulnerable to corrosion), but as of the Vietnam War became more durable with all-stainless steel construction.  It has four blades opening from the same side.  The Imperial model has a bottle opener with Standard screwdriver blade on the tip, a can opener with sharpened curved blade for piercing metal tins (and is so labelled to avoid confusion with the bottle opener), a sharpened knife blade, and an auger.  The unpainted stainless steel handle has "US" stamped in the center with metal hoop for attaching to a lanyard.  The handle, as manufactured, has rough edges but these can be rounded, yielding an excellent and versatile knife.
Another method of non-locking knife is the friction-folder. These use simple friction between the blade and scales to hold the blade in place once opened; an example is the Japanese higonokami.
An electrician's knife typically has a locking screwdriver blade but a non-locking knife blade.
The credit card knife is a very thin knife that is the shape and size of a credit card. It is designed to be carried in the wallet along with regular credit cards. Some of this shape of knife also contain other small tools, such as tweezers, or toothpicks.
Locking knives, such as the '''lockback knife''' or '''claspknife''' have locking mechanism such as a twisting ring or catch that must be released in a distinct action before the knife can be folded.  This lock improves safety by preventing accidental blade closure while cutting.  In contrast, '''slipjoint''' knives rely only on a small sliding spring to keep the blade open, and if enough force is applied to the back of the knife, the blade will close.
Locking knives have appeared as early as the 15th century, in Spain in a knife known as the navaja.  Opinel knives use a ring lock, where a ferrule rotates to lock the blade open.  In the late 20th century locking pocket knives were popularized and marketed on a wider scale. Companies such as Buck Knives, Camillus, Case, and Gerber, created a wide range of products with locks of various types. The most popular form, the lockback knife, was popularized by Buck Knives in the 1960s, so much that the eponymous term "buck knife" was used to refer to lockback knives that were not manufactured by Buck.
The lockback is a refinement of the slipjoint, where the spring along the back of the knife has a hook on it and the blade has a notch. When the blade is fully open the hook and notch align, locking the blade in place.  Closing the blade requires the user releasing the blade to apply pressure to the back of the blade and in addition press on a lever located on the back of the knife handle to disengage the hook from the notch and thus release the blade.
The Walker Linerlock and the framelock came to prominence in the 1980s.  In both designs the liner inside the knife is spring loaded to engage the rear of the blade when open and thus hold it in place.  In the case of the framelock, the liner is the handle, itself. The Swiss Army knife product range has adopted dual linerlocks on their 111&nbsp;mm models.
Buck's lockback knife was originally marketed as a "folding hunting knife" and while it became popular with sportsmen, it also saw use with military personnel as it could perform a variety of tasks.  Custom knife makers began making similar knives, in particular was Guatemalan-born knifemaker Bob Terzuola.  Terzuola is credited with coining the phrase "Tactical Folder".
In the 1990s in the United States, as a response to restrictive gun laws, tactical folding knives became popular.  The trend began with custom knifemakers such as Bob Terzuola, Michael Walker, Allen Elishewitz, Mel Pardue, Ernest Emerson, Ken Onion, Chris Reeve, Rick Hinderer, Warren Thomas, and Warren Osbourne.  These knives were most commonly built as linerlocks, although Osbourne introduced the Axis lock.  Blade lengths varied from 3&nbsp;inches to as long as 12&nbsp;inches, but the most typical models never exceeded 4&nbsp;inches in blade length for legal reasons in most US Jurisdictions.
In response to the demand for these knives, production companies offered mass-produced tactical folding knives.  Companies such as Benchmade, Kershaw Knives, Buck Knives, Gerber and Spyderco collaborated with tactical knifemakers; in some cases retaining them as full-time designers.  Tactical knifemakers such as Ernest Emerson and Chris Reeve went so far as to open their own mass-production factories.
There has been criticism against the notion of a "Tactical Folding Knife". Students of knife-fighting point out that any locking mechanism can fail and that a folding knife regardless of lock strength can never be as reliable as a fixed-blade combat knife. Lynn Thompson, martial artist and CEO of Cold Steel pointed out in an article in ''Black Belt'' magazine that most tactical folding knives are too short to be of use in a knife fight and that even though he manufactures, sells, and carries a tactical folder, it is not ideal for fighting.
Traditional folding knives are opened using nail-nicks, or slots where the user's fingernail would enter to pull the blade out of the handle. This became somewhat cumbersome and required use of two hands, so there were innovations to remedy that. The thumb-stud, a small stud on the blade that allows for one-handed opening, led the way for more innovations. One of these being the thumb hole: a Spyderco patent where the user presses the pad of his thumb against a hole and opens the blade by rotating his thumb similarly to using the thumb-stud.  Another innovation of Sal Glesser, Spyderco founder, was the clip system, which he named a "Clip-it". Clips are usually metal or plastic and similar to the clips found on pens except thicker. Clips allow the knife to be easily accessible, while keeping it lint-free and unscathed by pocket items such as coins.  Assisted opening systems have been pioneered by makers like Ken Onion with his "Speed-Safe" mechanism and Ernest Emerson's Wave system, where a hook catches the user's pocket upon removal and the blade is opened during a draw. One of the first one handed devices was the automatic spring release, also known as a switchblade. An innovation to pocket knives made possible by the thumb-stud is the replaceable blade insert developed in 1999 by Steven Overholt (U.S. Patent no. 6,574,868), originally marketed by TigerSharp Technologies and as of 2007 by Clauss.
Pocketknives are legal to own in most countries, but they face legal restrictions on their use. While pocketknives are almost always designed as tools, they do have the potential to become weapons. In some jurisdictions it is illegal to conceal knives larger than a certain size, or with certain locking or opening mechanisms. They are often banned or heavily restricted in secure areas, such as schools and airports. Switchblades and other "auto-openers" are banned from interstate shipment by the U.S. Government and prohibited entirely in some states, although certain statutes allow an exception permitting ownership by the handicapped, military, and police.
It is illegal to carry knives in public in the United Kingdom without "good reason". This term is not defined, but examples of "religious duty", "national dress" and "requirement of employment or hobby" are given. It is up to a police officer's individual discretion, and ultimately a magistrate to decide whether or not the requirements of "good reason" are met.  Folding knives with blades of 3&nbsp;inches or less may be carried without needing to provide "good reason" so long as the blade is not capable of being locked in the open position. However, it is illegal to have the intention of using any object in public as a weapon, meaning that even a knife that is legal to carry without needing "good reason" may still be found to be illegal if the police officer has grounds to suspect it will be used as a weapon. The onus lies on the officer to prove that intent.