Gardiner was born in Penola, South Australia. She attended primary school in Victoria.  Her secondary education was undertaken in Victoria and then in New South Wales.
After leaving school, she obtained a Bachelor of Business through the Mitchell College of Advanced Education in Bathurst, New South Wales, now part of Charles Sturt University.
Gardiner commenced her working life as a junior clerk working in a legal office in Tamworth
During her term as General Secretary of the NSW National Party, at the request of the National Party Federal Leader, Doug Anthony, Gardiner undertook an analysis of the implications of a Hawke Labor Government proposal in 1984 to increase the number of Members in the Australian House of Representatives. The Opposition Coalitiion was formally opposed to the proposal. Gardnier's analysis indicated that the National Party could benefit from an expanded House and National Party Senators crossed the floor to vote with Labor in support of the motion. Gardiner was also influential in persuading the Liberal Party to avoid three-cornered contests in country NSW seats.
During the failed 1987 Joh for Canberra campaign to install Sir Joh Bjelke-Petersen as Prime Minister, in a highly unusual move for a paid party official, Gardiner issued a media release critical of the Queensland National Party. Gardiner was General Secretary when the NSW National Party achieved its most successful post-WWII outcome at the NSW general elections held on 19 March 1988 when the party won 20 out of 26 seats contested in the Legislative Assembly
In an unpublished manuscript, Gardiner has written about the history of the NSW Young Nationals.
Gardiner was elected to the New South Wales Legislative Council on 25 May 1991 replacing the Honourable Judy Jakins, MLC. She was re-elected to the Council in both 1999
In Parliament, she currently serves on the following committees:
She has been nominated a Temporary Chair of Committees, along with Kayee Griffin, Sylvia Hale, Robyn Parker, Christine Robertson and Helen Westwood.
Previous Parliamentary position include:
Gardiner served on the Advisory Council for Charles Sturt University between 1991 and 1995.