Dana Brent Brown
Kelli Brown Leon
Four grandchildren
 In 1970, former LSU quarterback and future East Baton Rouge Parish Mayor-President Pat Screen joined Brown's firm.
Brown's most memorable court victory was in the 1970 trial of Sergeant Mitchell (born 1940) held at Fort Hood in central Texas. Mitchell was accused by the Army of having committed war crimes against the Vietnamese during the Vietnam War. Brown predicted that Mitchell's prosectors, who rested their arguments early, had not "proved their case beyond a reasonable doubt." The next day, Brown collapsed in his motel room and was later taken to a hospital in Temple in Bell County. The judge, Colonel George R. Robinson, adjourned the case until Brown's recovery."The My Lai Trials Begin", ''Time'', November 2, 1970: http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,909677-2,00.html
One of the witnesses against Mitchell was former radioman Charles Sledge (born 1947), an African American luggage-factory worker from Sardis in Panola County in northwestern Mississippi. Sledge said that he "positively" saw Mitchell shoot a group of Vietnamese women, children, and senior men who took cover in a ditch. Sledge also said that he saw Mitchell confer with Second Lieutenant William Calley Jr., at the edge of the trench before the two opened fire on the villagers from about five or six feet away. "They were falling and screaming," Sledge testified. Calley, meanwhile, was tried November 16, 1970, at Fort Benning, Georgia. Brown brought out several discrepancies between Sledge's courtroom statements and his earlier testimony before Army investigators; one was Sledge's earlier claim that he "believed" Mitchell had fired into the ditch and his claim at trial that he was "positive" that Mitchell had killed the civilians.
In 1973, Brown prevented Baton Rouge theaters from showing the X-rated film ''The Last Tango in Paris'' with Marlon Brando. So had the Rapides Parish District Attorney Edwin O. Ware, III, acted accordingly. In 1979, Brown blocked the showing of the comedy,    Monty Python   s Life of Brian   . Brown asked Baton Rouge magazine distributors not to offer the March 1977 issue of ''Hustler'', which a state court judge in Ohio ruled obscene.Steven Ward, "Former DA Ossie Brown dies at 82", ''Baton Rouge Morning Advocate'', August 29, 2008, p. 1: 
Administrators of Clarence Morrison, Jr., Plaintiffs-Appellants, v. CITY OF BATON ROUGE et al., Defendants-Appellees, including East Baton Rouge Parish District Attorney Ossie B. Brown, 1980:http://bulk.resource.org/courts.gov/c/F2/614/614.F2d.77.79-2532.html
During his time as district attorney, Brown was elected president of both the Louisiana State and the National District Attorney's associations. He was also instrumental in the establishment of the Baton Rouge Rape Crisis Center, the Pretrial Intervention Program, the Victim and Witness Assistance Program, and "I Care", a drug prevention program. Brown served too on the executive council of the Louisiana Commission on Law Enforcement. He was chairman of the first child abuse committee formed by the National District Attorney's Association. He wrote ''You and the Law'', a book used in civics classes in the East Baton Rouge Parish school system.
He was a member of the advisory board of the Salvation Army and the executive committee of the Boy Scouts of America Istrouma Council. He also worked in the annual Jerry Lewis MDA Telethon. He hosted the Lions Club Crippled Children's Telethon. He supported the Louisiana Baptist Children's Home orphanage in Monroe. Since 1964, Brown had been an active member of the Florida Boulevard Baptist Church, where he taught the Fellowship Bible class. Earlier, he had been music director of various churches.
After he left the office of district attorney, Brown resumed his law practice until he retired in the year 2000 from the still existing Law Offices of Ossie Brown at 123 St. Ferdinand Street in Baton Rouge. One of the partners is Brown's son, Dana Brent Brown.
Services were held on August 30, 2008, at the Florida Avenue Baptist Church. Entombment was in the Green Oaks Memorial Park Mausoleum. Brown was survived  by his wife of forty-eight years, the former Faye Underwood (born November 5, 1931); two sons, Dana Brown (born July 10, 1962) and wife Natalie (born November 29, 1970) and Kirk Brown of Napa, California; daughter, Kelli B. Leon (born December 24, 1968) of Baton Rouge; four grandchildren, Brycyn Brown, Max Brown, and Alexa and Amber Leon; and four great-grandchildren.
Current EBR District Attorney Hillar Moore, III, told the ''Baton Rouge Morning Advocate'' that Brown "stood for certain principles and took positions that were always firm. He was always for the victims of crime." Moore said that when he worked for Brown as an investigator while he was still in college and that the DA "adopted me as a son."Moore, who supported Brown in the 1984 election, remained an investigator under DA Bryan Bush despite their partisan difference.
Ossie B. Brown 