The Mulund-Airoli bridge has contributed to Airoli's rapid expansion in recent years, as Mulund is Mumbai's busiest suburb; this bridge and the recently started train service from Thane have made Airoli more accessible. The bridge also serves as a connection between Airoli and the Nahur station of the Central Railways.
Good educational institutions also have contributed for the progress of Airoli. With the launching of DAV school in 1998, New Horizon Public School in 2004 an affluent crowd floated to Airoli from Mulund, Bhandup, Thane, etc. Even today a number of parents are sending their children from Mulund and Bhandup to Airoli for education. With the establishment of many more good schools a very affluent crowd started settling down here.
Today Airoli has the best of the schools like New Horizon Scholars School and also Euro Kids. It has become the hub of good education institutions. Educationists like Dr. Nicholas Correa have contributed for the progress of quality education.
Airoli has two main residential areas, Airoli and Diva Village. The rest of the area was developed by CIDCO (City Industrial Development Corporation) and later on handed over to NMMC (Navi Mumbai Municipal Corporation) for administration. Airoli is divided into 28 sectors, out of which 20 sectors have been developed.
Airoli had a population of 83,756 in 1991 and 76,889 in 2001 amounting to 8% reduction in population.
Airoli is the First Railway Station 5.79&nbsp;Km away from Thane Railway Station on Thane - Turbhe - Nerul/Vashi/Panvel Line. The Railway Station is located in Sector - 3 of Airoli Node abutting the Thane-Belapur road. It is designed to cater to passenger traffic demand originating from Thane-Belapur industrial zone, on the east side and residential and commercial zone of Airoli on the west. Airoli Station is transition station between Mumbai and Navi Mumbai. There are 2 platforms (1st platform is for trains coming from  Thane to Vashi/Nerul/Belapur/Panvel and 2nd platform is for trains coming from Vashi/Nerul/Belapur/Panvel to Thane) with a length of 210 meters(the length is being extended). The platforms would be extended by 60&nbsp;meters in future. There are two commuter and one light motor vehicle subway. There is a train every 15&nbsp;minutes for Thane or Vashi from Airoli Station.The Thane-Belapur station has only two frequency (one in morning and one in evening).
BUSES : Airoli is well connected by BEST buses. One can reach Mulund / Nahur and Navi Mumbai using BEST bus service. Buses with AS prefixed to their route numbers are air-conditioned (AC) buses. NMMT plys buses between Thane and Airoli. It may be noted that NMMT bus frequency are low with the exception of AC Volvo bus number 123.
Commercial taxis with yellow number plates, ferry passengers on their way to Mumbai. They pick up passengers from Sector 5, 8 and 10 bus stops. It is advisable to negotiate the fare before boarding. It is not advisable to board such taxis early in the morning or late at night. Avoid boarding private cars (white number plates) and vehicles registered outside Mumbai (MH06 and above). Females are not advised to travel in such vehicles.
BEST Bus frequency: The frequency of BEST buses going towards Airoli from Powai / SEEPZ greatly reduces after 8:30PM. The only bus available would be 512 (BEST) and 123 (NMMT AC Volvo). BEST bus number 512 runs from Mulund to Nerul with intervals of 20 minutes. The NMMT AC Volvo 123 is the only bus you can get after 9PM from Powai / SEEPZ / Borivili. The best way to reach Airoli after 9PM is to take any bus going towards Mulund and get down at Bhandup Sonapur Junction (near Nirmal Lifestyle) and take bus 512 or private vehicles going towards Airoli. You can also reach Airloi toll bridge by Auto and change autos from here to your destination in Airoli or Navi Mumbai.
Auto and Taxi: Autos and taxis are available at Airoli toll bridge for Navi Mumbai and Mumbai. You may be at the mercy of the auto / taxi drivers if they refuse to ply to your preferred destination.
TRAINS: Local trains are available to Thane and Vashi / Nerul from Airoli railway station every 15&nbsp;minutes.
Courier service companies have small offices in Airoli. Professional Couriers, DTDC and First Flight are present along the main road bordering Sector 6.Travel agencies like '''J.T. travels''' which provides services like tours and travels for company,school,tourist,etc.around the state have been setup in Airoli.
Airoli Railway station as well as the Airoli Bus Depot are located at Sector 3. AIRAVALI is the name used by Indian Railways for Airoli. City buses of BEST and NMMT operate from this bus depot. Sector 7 and 8 are the commercial districts in Airoli with banks and businesses, and a mall being developed. A mall is coming up in Sector 7 near Shiv Shankar Plaza II called Ripplez. Some of the shops located in Sector 8 are Reebok, Belmonte, Mobile Store, Woodlands (Aero Club), H & A, Gini & Jony, and Domino's Pizza.Sector 19 and Sector 20 has all the facilties like shops,market,banks,hospitals being recently set up. In Sector 19 there is '''Mother Tersa orphanage''' which takes care only for women and children(including mentally disabled). 
An International Diplomatic Enclave project was conceived by CIDCO two years back. This project would come up near the Mulund     Airoli bridge on  of land. Two years since it was planned, the ambitious International Diplomatic Enclave (IDE) project in Airoli, Navi Mumbai, has found few takers from foreign embassies and consulates. City and Industrial Development Corporation (CIDCO) officials said the initial response had been good, but the project has been stuck since.
Mindspace, an IT SEZ (Information Technology - Special Economic Zone) is located close to Airoli railway station on the Thane-Belapur road. It is a well-planned IT SEZ of 4 million sq. ft. or close to 50&nbsp;acres is designed for IT / ITES / BPO companies. The ultramodern business park has aesthetically planned work areas and large and efficient floor plates. A central garden of 5&nbsp;acres, clubhouse and fitness center are proposed. The buildings are designed around a central arc and interconnected with 4 lane internal roads. According to the original plan, 10 buildings are proposed, out of which 4 are ready.
Patni Computer Systems Ltd has a    knowledge park    in Airoli. Its design combines the open ambiance of a academic campus with the professional efficiency of a technology / knowledge park.
Cooperative banks were the first to set up shop in Airoli. Only recently, major private and public sector banks have started opening their branches. The cooperative banks developed a large base of loyal customers mainly due to the higher interest rates offered by them on fixed deposit schemes.  
Apart from ATMs of the banks mentioned above, the following banks have their ATMs in Airoli. DCB (Visa), AXIS Bank (Master), IndusInd Bank (Visa), Kotak Mahindra Bank (Visa).
Nursing homes have mushroomed in Airoli due to its predominantly residential population. These nursing homes have less than 20 beds and have visiting consulting doctors and specialist on call. Most have a basic operating theater for general surgeries and consulting rooms. Some nursing homes may boost ICU / ICCUs (Intensive Critical Care Units). Pathology labs and CT scan centers are there in Airoli. For major surgeries, doctors refer patients to large hospitals in Mumbai. 