Howdy! Way back in November 2007, I found a  . Given   in identifying people last time, I figured I'd give it a go with another, smaller, batch from the American Music Awards of 2007. Images are courtesy of  . With no further ado:
Any help would be appreciated :)         &bull;&nbsp;22:56, 31 August 2008 (UTC)
Please don't cross post. This question is already on the Ref Desk Humanities.   ( ) 03:00, 1 September 2008 (UTC)
Since AFAIK these work by making a pledge and people send a cheque in later, is there generally a significant difference between the total pledged amount as compared to actual receipts (either people deciding to donate more, or not making their donation for whatever reason)? --  ( ) 03:44, 1 September 2008 (UTC)
How do i make an new entry, such as a Biography of my self and the Charity i have started, The Miracle health network?     Preceding   comment added by   (       ) 04:02, 1 September 2008 (UTC) 
If a person wants to become a Christian Universalist, or join a denomination of Christianity that is Christian Universalist, but lives in a place where there are no Christian Universalist churches or congregations nearby, what should he or she do?   ( ) 05:17, 1 September 2008 (UTC)
What are some songs that relate to Macbeth? --  ( ) 06:25, 1 September 2008 (UTC)
Thanks but I need modern day songs that can relate to Macbeth somehow, not necessarily written about it. --  ( ) 10:32, 3 September 2008 (UTC)
I seem to remember a while back reading a list of hilarious questions placed on the reference desk that had no business being there (like can you get me into college). Anyone know what I'm talking about? It might have been part of BJAODN.   ( ) 11:59, 1 September 2008 (UTC)
Hi everybody,
Somebody has got into my yahoo e-mail,and i can"t sign in. I have tried to contact yahoo security,have had no reply to numerous e-mails.
What can I do??   Cna anybody give me a yahoo security contact e-mail?
Hi
Yes! I have done that you mention,and just need yahoo security to reset my password somehow.Then inform me of the new password at my alternate e-mail at hotmail.
Some how a person got in and changed the password,I have had e-mail scams sent to me,and did think that maybe one had a virus to do this. It has been a week,and every time I contact yahoo security,I have no reply. What can I do next! CAN anybody advise??     Preceding   comment added by   ( ) 14:56, 1 September 2008 (UTC) 
Hi everybody,
I still keep on trying to contact yahoo security,in the hope that they CAN re set the password,otherwise I will just have to let the account go with all that is in the account.
BE WARNED PEOPLE! Never keep too much important information in any E-mail account. IF hackers can get into PENTAGON computers,a simple e-mail account is not much to get into either.
ANY ADVICE! Would be appreciated how I can resolve my problem     Preceding   comment added by   ( ) 13:20, 3 September 2008 (UTC) 
Hi Everybody,
I am as you say reluctant to give this years old e-mail address,especially as it has so much of my published book in folders. BUT! if i have to I suppose I have to.
Thanks for al;l the advice,and I will take all of it for future ref.
One last note,IF I WROTE TO YAHOO
Thanks,
P     Preceding   comment added by   ( ) 14:33, 4 September 2008 (UTC) 
Why is Black Metal classified with metal such as death Metal or thrash? Many BM songs are far more Classical or Operetic in thier sound. Some dont even have drums such as Burzum. Do most Black metal fans listen to normal thrash or death metal too, or are they more inclined to listen to Classical or opera? Any related info would be appreciated.     Preceding   comment added by   ( ) 12:30, 1 September 2008 (UTC) 
I have recorded 30 or so songs, and chosen 10 or so and burned them onto CDs, I have had booklets printed with the album cover and lyrics, includeing copywrite violation warning ect, I have now 5000 CDs to distribute, how would I go about getting these into CD shops around the world or at least in Europe? Thanks     Preceding   comment added by   ( ) 12:33, 1 September 2008 (UTC) 
How do band s such as Dimmu Borgir and others manage to change thier line up and maintain the same sound? Many band have had numerous members, who contribute to the song writing process, yet they maintain thier individual sound over numerous albums and years? I play in a band and we recently got one new member, and although our old keyboard player now plays guitar, we have rehashed and old song from our previous band, same band, one new member, the song is completely different from how it used to be, even though most of us are playing the same chords, with the same beat, melody and tune. This is a good thing but I remain curious about other bands and how they retain thier sound?     Preceding   comment added by   ( ) 12:48, 1 September 2008 (UTC) 
In my spare time I enjoy answering questionnaires, such as Would you make a good neighbour, consisting of 30 multiple choice questions, and then have them analized at the end. such things used to be found in People magazine South Africa, where can I find such things online? And, why are these things usually orientated toward women? Thanks     Preceding   comment added by   ( ) 12:54, 1 September 2008 (UTC) 
Hi could you tell me if it is breaking the law to text on a mobile phone whilst driving in the UK? thanks     Preceding   comment added by   ( ) 19:01, 1 September 2008 (UTC) 
Any use of a mobile phone whilst driving is an offence (across most if not all of Europe). Punishable by fine and points.  ( ) 15:49, 3 September 2008 (UTC)DT
Why is it, that in futuristic fiction, when a character recounts history of earth and humans they often refer to the human race having fought three world wars? This is seen time and time again.  What is it that causes so many authors to believe that at some point in the future we will again be plunged into war? The causes of world war 2 can be seen in the aftermath of WWI with the treaty of versai, (spelling)and other mitigating factors. It could be said that before WWII it could be predicted that it would occur by analizing the feeling of unfair treatment within the German poplus. What then could be the causes of a future world war, and what can b analized today to predict when, where, and why. And how can it be avoided, if it can attall.     Preceding   comment added by   ( ) 20:52, 1 September 2008 (UTC) 
Talking about WWIII is a handy narrative device; it conveniently establishes that we are in the future, and in a future that is still recognisably the same world that we live in today (ie, not some far-flung fantasy world where the 20th century and its wars have been forgotten).   ( ) 22:28, 2 September 2008 (UTC)
Hello, I'm an web user who's trying to get a blogg around, called ''(removed to prevent spam)'', and am looking to optimize it or something so people can become more aware of what I had to say.  It's not a business, just a message I was trying to gain exposure; so my question is: are there any reputable and free optimization systems that I could try?     Preceding   comment added by   ( ) 22:12, 1 September 2008 (UTC) 