Opened in January 2011, the '''Irving Convention Center''' is a  facility located on a  tract in Las Colinas Urban Center in Irving, Texas. The convention center and the adjoining mixed use entertainment district are bordered on the west by Highway 114, on the east by Las Colinas Boulevard, on the north by Spur 348/Northwest Highway, and to the south by Fuller Drive.  The address is 500 West Las Colinas Blvd. Irving, TX   75039.
The facility is designed to serve exhibition, conventions, meetings and a variety of other events with the focus being primarily on groups of 800 to 1,200 people with a capacity of 4,000 for a general session.  The building consists of several levels with an adjacent parking garage.  The first floor contains the  column-free exhibition hall that spans approximately two and half stories in height and includes the main lobby.  The second level contains 20 breakout rooms totaling  as well as the atrium cafe which extends to an outdoor, shaded terrace.  The third level consists of the  ballroom with pre-function and breakout areas.
In an effort to avoid the traditional convention center appearance and also utilize natural light as much as possible, the Irving Convention Center is designed as two boxes, stacked and rotated to create cantilevered corners that provide several shaded outdoor areas for visitors to use.  The majority of the building will be surrounded in glass for natural light and curtained with a perforated copper facade that will age to a natural copper patina for both a unique appearance and to reduce the consumption of energy.  The facility will be designed and constructed to pursue LEED certification.
A DART (Dallas Area Rapid Transit) Light Rail Station  will be located in close proximity to the site to service both the Convention Center and the surrounding Las Colinas area. The Irving Convention Center station is scheduled to open in December 2011 with connections to DFW Airport in December 2013 and also the Dallas Love Field Airport . There will also be the elevated Las Colinas APT System servicing the Las Colinas area.  The multi-level parking garage will provide parking for 800 cars.
3,500 seat concert venue,  of restaurants, retail, cinema and a convention center hotel.
Image:Irving Convention Center Lobby.jpg|Irving Convention Center Lobby
Image:Irving Convention Center Night shot.jpg|Irving Convention Center at Night
Image:Irving Convention Center Cafe .jpg|Irving Convention Center Cafe