The '''Volvo V70''' is a mid-size five-door estate car / station wagon manufactured by Volvo Cars since 1996. It is closely related to the S70, S60 and S80 saloons, as well as the four-wheel drive '''Cross Country (XC)''' and '''XC70'''.
Since its inception, the V70 has evolved through three generations, with the second generation  designed by Peter Horbury.
The original V70 was a development of the Volvo 850 estate car (station wagon) and saloon (sedan) range.  The new name reflected Volvo's new strategy of naming vehicles depending on size and body style.  Thus, the 850 was deemed to be a relative size 70.  The name is then appended with the type of vehicle.  So the station wagon adopted V (for Versatility), S (for Saloon), and C (for the new Coupe); these cars are respectively known as V70, S70 and C70. There were 1,800 improved and new parts in the design from the original 850, including upgraded passive and active safety, better handling and new engines.  Gone were the 850's square edges and replaced by rounded corners to suit the late 1990s style trend.  Other changes included a new 'family face' for the V/S/C70 models, colour-coded bumpers, clear indicator lenses, and a new dashboard.  However, on the whole, one could say the car was similar to its predecessor, but nevertheless, a successful facelift.
Volvo offered a trim level option for the V70 called the ''Torslanda'' &mdash; named after its assembly plant, Torslandaverken.  Other trim level packages included:
Option packages included:
Latest generation of Road Traffic Information Satellite Navigation used on the Phase III's, this is the same CD based system used by Volvo up until 2003 and on the C70 until 2005.
Roof rails were changed now the same as V70XC.
Altogether, Volvo sold 74 Phase III   s in the UK, split by colour:
Black stone                      5,
Nautic Blue Pearl              10,
Dark Olive Pearl                3,
Silver Metallic                   17,
Laser Blue Metallic            33,
Venetian Red Pearl           6
Trim and specification levels remained virtually unchanged throughout the 3 phases.  Trim was Leather and Alcantara in either Beige or Grey/Black with aluminium trim on the dash and console (dark wood was an option on P1 and P2 cars).  On P1 cars, the steering wheel was also leather/alcantara, but phase 2 and 3 had a thicker rimmed leather only wheel.  Phase II and III had blue engine covers.  Phase 3 cars had the option of contrasting grey/beige trim.  These cars were virtually "fully-loaded" with very few options available (mainly pro-logic (  600), 6 CD boot mounted changer (  600), RTI-Satellite Navigation (  2500)) as they cost   37,000 when new.
All phases were available with either 16" or 17" roadwheels in either silver or anthracite with a temporary spare wheel.  The 17" wheels were   100 more expensive.
Colour options were available as follows:
The S70 scored four of five stars for front impact protection for driver and front passenger in the U.S. National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) safety testing, and five out of five stars for driver and rear passenger side impact protection.
The Insurance Institute for Highway Safety (IIHS) granted the 850/S70 their highest rating of "good" for front crash protection.  Rear crash protection was rated as "good". 1999 and newer, prevents whiplash by a seatback hinge mechanism that is standard equipment.  There were no side impact tests conducted on behalf of the IIHS for the Volvo V70.
At the end of 1999 (2001 in North America), Volvo released a redesigned V70 based on the-then new P2 platform which itself was first used for the entirely Swedish-designed Volvo S80 saloon/sedan in 1997.  This new car dispensed with the boxy shape of Volvos before it to take on a curvy profile much like the S40/S60 series, and added a new more aggressively designed front end.  Where the first generation V70 had a saloon variant (S70), the second generation lost the S70 as the new S80 was now seen to be the 'S70 for the new millennium'.  The second generation of the V70 finished production for model year 2007.
The V70 shares the same sheet metal ahead of the B-pillar with the Volvo S60, although the grilles are different, and the front bumpers are mildly different.  The dashboard and the majority of the interior of both cars are the same.
The V70 XC received a major upgrade on its suspension and equipped with  minimum ground clearance.
As was the case with all P2 platform Volvos, a minor refresh of the V70 occurred across all markets for the 2005 model year, which brought minor styling changes to the front fascia, tail lamps, along with several improvements and changes to the interior fittings.
In the US market the V70 is available as front or all-wheel drive (AWD) with a Geartronic five-speed automatic transmission.  A five-speed manual transmission was offered on the base 2.4 version, but few dealers stocked it.  As before, there is an AWD-only off-road version with raised suspension, plastic body cladding and an interior grab handle.  This version previously known as the V70 XC (Cross Country) was renamed to XC70 for this new model line.
Also following on from the previous generation was the use of five-cylinder, 20 valve inline transverse-mounted engines.  All but the bottom range 2.4 employ turbochargers with either low- or high-pressure, depending on the model.  The V70 five cylinder turbo engines in the US market are the base V70 2.5&nbsp;litre light-pressure turbo straight-five engine with  at 5,000 rpm; and torque of  at 1,500   4,500 rpm, and the V70 T5 2.4&nbsp;litre high-pressure turbo straight-five with  at 5,500 rpm; torque  at 2,100   5,000 rpm.  For the US market, both of these engines are exclusively mated to a five-speed Geartronic automatic transmission.
This 2.4&nbsp;litre high-pressure turbo straight-5 "T5" engine is used in a variety of Volvos, and as with most stock performance turbo engines the power output is quite limited by the stock Volvo engine tuning.  The ultra high performance all-wheel drive V70R, using a 2.5L Turbocharged I5&nbsp;litre engine in ultra high performance tune produces  and .  The V70R is equipped with Volvo's 4C multi-mode suspension developed in conjunction with suspension experts Ohlins   allowing the driver to vary the cars handling depending on driving style and conditions.  The V70R AWD has also larger Brembo brakes to provide high performance braking capabilities in line with its high performance characteristics.
The Insurance Institute for Highway Safety (IIHS) evaluated the Volvo S60 (sedan variant).  The S60 was granted the IIHS's highest rating of "good" in front and rear tests.  The S60 was awarded the Institute's second highest rating of "acceptable" in the side test.  However, an improvement in the driver dummy's pelvis/leg rating from "marginal" to "acceptable" would yield an overall "good" rating in the side test.
The third generation V70 was officially unveiled by Volvo on 2 February 2007.  The new car was aimed and equipped to be slightly more up-market than the previous model, albeit being of the similar size externally.  The car was also shyly moved to be the lineup companion wagon to the S80 sedan, with previous generation model being considered companion wagon to S60 (even though, this was never openly marketed and is open to dispute). The Ford EUCD platform is used underneath the new V70, and much of the interior (other than the rear seats and loadbay) are shared with the second generation S80. The rear-seat legroom was increased by two centimetres and a revised tailgate design increased the load area volume by 55&nbsp;L.  The tailgate had also had optional motorized lift and closing action.
Since the new V70 is only available as a front-wheel drive platform based on the new S80 platform, the US market V70/XC70 AWD are only available with the S80 FWD drivetrain, a 3.2&nbsp;litre straight-six engine producing  at 6,200 rpm; torque of  at 3,200 rpm - mated to a six-speed Geartronic automatic transmission.  The S80 AWD engine choices, a 3.0&nbsp;litre turbo-six with  at 5,600 rpm, torque  at 1,500   4,800 rpm, and a 4.4&nbsp;litre V8 engine with  at 5,950 rpm, torque  at 3,950 rpm are currently not available in the V70 since they require the S80 AWD platform. In some other markets D5 and/or T6 AWD models of XC70 are available. 
There are no known  plans for a high performance AWD V70. The high performance V70R AWD, as well as the five-cylinder turbo engine range mated to a five-speed Geartronic automatic transmissions of the previous V70 generation were all discontinued as the car departed from being the station wagon companion to P2 S60(R), and moved up to being the same for EUCD S80. Old R versions of S60/V70 were later replaced with R-design editions of EUCD S60(second gen.)/V60 -- meaning, essentially, that only visual design features of old R "performance" cars will be available.
For the 2011 model year, Volvo will no longer sell the V70 in North America.  In its place, a front-wheel drive version of the XC70 will be made available, which was already sold in the European market.
The front seats and the rear bench are of orthopedic design. Dolby Pro-Logic systems and sub-woofers are also available as upgrades to the standard audio system.
Options include DVD navigation with map data and remote control, a rear seat DVD entertainment system with two headrest monitors, headlamp washers, integrated child booster seats, an integrated home link remote control garage door opener, rear-door child-safety locks, rear park assist, power-adjustable passenger seats with 3-position memory and lumbar support, heated front seats, an integrated grocery bag holder, a rear view mirror compass, an integrated sunglass holder, an auto-dimming rearview mirror, a power glass moonroof, 12 volt power outlets, leather seats, rear tinted windows, and a rain sensor.
Anti-submarining seats and overhead-mounted seat belt reminder lights come standard.  Other standard features for 2007 include Volvo on call roadside assistance for four years, rear window deactivation, safe approach and home safe lighting.
As standard, the vehicle is equipped with driver, passenger, side and curtain airbags.  Also featured is the WHIPS whiplash prevention system on the front seats.
Third generation V70s are available with the BLIS blind-spot sensor system, that can detect vehicles otherwise hidden from view of the driver due to being just off to one side of the car.
As is typical for Volvos, all models feature daytime running lights to improve driver visibility and safety throughout the day.  If an XC70 owner desires to have their daytime running lights turned off, they may do so at any authorized Volvo dealership.
The latest revision of the XC70 includes DSTC (standard on all models) - Dynamic Stability and Traction control, that combines the functions otherwise known as Electronic Stability Programme and traction control.
The Insurance Institute for Highway Safety (IIHS) awarded the Volvo S80 (sedan varriant) their Top Safety Pick award.  The S80 was granted the IIHS's highest rating of "good" in front, side, rear and roof strength tests and has Electronic Stability Control as standard equipment to receive the award.
As part of a joint venture with Vattenfall, a Swedish energy company, Volvo converted two Volvo V70 to diesel-electric plug-in hybrid demonstrators that have been in field testing in Goteborg, Sweden since December 2009. pp. 3-4 Vattenfall offered customers participating in this trial the supply of renewable electricity generated from wind power or hydropower. Among other challenges, this test has allowed to experience the all-electric range at low temperatures, which has been a disadvantage of plug-in vehicles.
The V70 PHEV test car uses a 11.3 kWh lithium ion battery pack. As reported by the test drivers, the V70 Plug-in Hybrid demonstrators have an all-electric range between  to  . The demonstrators were built with a button to allow test drivers to manually choose between electricity or diesel engine power at any time. The first phase of the field trial ended in June 2010 and included 16 families, all employees of Volvo or Vattenfall, who had the car for 1.5 weeks to one month. A second phase of the test goes from July to December 2010 with Vattenfall employees in Goteborg and Stockholm.
Among the key findings of the first phase are:
Volvo announced in 2009 and confirmed in 2010 the launching of series production diesel-electric plug-in hybrids as early as 2012. Volvo claimed that its plug-in hybrid could achieve , based on the European test cycle.