Stahlberg vehicles were not kits, but pre-assembled promotional models.  Available mainly through dealers in Europe and the U.S., models were produced from about 1965 to about 1990.  Usually Stahlbergs were packaged in a clear plastic bag (poly-bagged), though later models did come in blue and white boxes. 
Some standard Swedish models produced by Stahlberg were the Volvo 142 series, 164 series, 200 series, 700 series, and 66 / 300 series (DAFs).  Saabs produced were 99s, 900 series, and 9000 series. Models were produced in 2 door, 4 door, and station wagon versions.     
The most common scale of models was 1:22 (about 9&nbsp;inches long), however 1:32 (about 5&nbsp;inches long), 1:25, 1:18, and a larger 1:12 scale (about 18&nbsp;inches long) were also produced.  
Though Volvo and Saab were the most common Stahlberg clients, a perusal of eBay and other websites shows a few other vehicles were also contracted (Fintoys website).  One example was the 1979 Mercedes-Benz 300 Touring (station wagon).  Others were a Saab Lancia Delta in rally and non-rally form, and a 1978 DAF Volvo 66 (DAF was a Dutch truck and car maker purchased by Volvo).
While other European car makers preferred the manufacturing of promotional models made out of diecast zamac in 1:43 OR 1:35 scale, it seems Finnish companies were unique in Europe by producing models - often promotional models - in larger scales ''and'' in ''plastic''.  Both of these traits were similar to American promotional model companies like AMT, PMC, MPC, or Johan. Stahlberg was the most well known of these Scandinavian large scale promotional model producers through the 1980s, whereas Finnish Emek Muovi was known for its trucks.  Nyrhinen Ky was another similar Finnish producer that made VWs and Toyotas, though it is uncertain if these were made specifically as promotionals.  
Still, Stahlbergs were produced in a softer, somewhat more flexible, polyurethane plastic than the harder styrene of traditional American promotional models.  Thus, Stahlbergs are prone to fewer cracks and breaks, yet are easier to scratch - similar to other toy vehicles molded in softer plastics.  Models are molded in various colors and not painted.  Streaks of darker or lighter color are commonly found through the plastic.
Models include precise replication of proportions and detail of actual vehicles, including accurate moldings, logos, and name scripts.  Tires are not rubber, but are made of the same type of plastic as body and chassis, though black.  Models often have movable mud flaps behind rear wheels (which often are lost with play).  Rather odd, and rarely seen on other miniatures of any type, are headlights often molded in white plastic as opposed to clear lenses.  This may be the single most recognizable trait of the brand.      
Interior and chassis detail is often simpler than seen in American promotionals.  Chassis usually have no detail, are plain, and simply say "Made in Finland", but some carry promotional advertising statements relating to the real car, like "Exceptional roadholding", "High standard of safety", or "Swedish quality".
Models can frequently be found on eBay and are popular sellers, commanding anywhere from $30 to $100 U.S.  Around 1987, in honor of Volvo's 50th Anniversary, Stahlberg produced a 1927 Volvo Jakob plastic model for dealers produced in 1:20 scale.
Around this time Stahlberg was apparently taken over by Emek Muovi, another Finnish plastic model maker, known for its trucks in 1:20 scale.  Emek had either previously also made Volvo models similar to Stahlberg or, more likely, took over Stahlberg's dies and continued production.  Emek, however, post 1990, is more well-known for its plastic trucks in 1:25 scale (Bickford Diecast Center).  Some Stahlberg models also were produced in the 1990s by a company in Estonia.  Models are distinguished by "Made in Estonia" on their bases (Fintoys website).
The Bickford Diecast Research Center.  Diecast Oddities.  Website dedicated to rare diecast toys.  
Fintoys.  Website page dedicated to older Swedish promotional models made in Finland. 