Semcon head quarters in Goteborg, Sweden.
Semcon helps companies develop products that boost sales and competitive strength. This occurs in both single assignments and projects where specific teams are formed to develop innovative solutions for the entire product development chain from requirement studies to finished product.
The business area   s 1,500 or so employees provide services to customers in the global automotive industry. Its offer includes focusing on concepts, design, calculation, construction, prototyping, testing, simulations and production. Semcon   s services complement the automotive manufacturers    own resources. Implementation and delivery are adapted according to customers    requirements, from participation in customers    teams to in-house development projects.
Its services concentrate on design, construction, testing and simulations. Semcon is a complete supplier and the services supplied by the business area complement vehicle manufacturers' own resources. The forms for design and delivery are adapted according to customers' requirements, from taking part in customers' teams to in-house development projects. The business areas' businesses are run from Sweden, Germany, the UK, Brazil, India, Spain and Russia.
The Automotive R&D business area provides services to customers in the global automotive industry such as Audi, BMW, Ford, GM, Mercedes Benz, Porsche, Scania, Saab, Volkswagen and Volvo AB. It is Semcon's single biggest business area.
The business area has around 800 employees working with industrial design, product development, plant design, production development and training. The business area provides expertise and experience to achieve quicker, improved product development. The services include requirement and concept studies, design, construction, embedded systems, testing, prototyping, verification, project management, quality assurance, production development and lean production expertise. This encompasses varied sectors of activity like:
The business area has projects throughout the world with offices in Sweden, Germany and Malaysia. Activities are mainly focused on sectors such as industry, energy, telecoms, and life science. Customers include ABB, AB Volvo, Alstom, Astra Zeneca, Bombardier, Fortum, General Electric, Husqvarna, Pfizer, Saab AB and companies in the telecoms industry
Semcon Informatic offers complete information solutions within customer service and interactive marketing, targeted for professional as well as consumer end-users.  It offers support to customers    products throughout the product life cycle; from marketing and sales to installation, maintenance and repair. Its customers can primarily be found within industries having complex products, e.g. the automotive, telecom and manufacturing industries.
Informatic currently has offices in Sweden, the UK, Hungary and China. Customers are mainly found in the automotive, telecoms and manufacturing industries. Customers include ABB, AB Volvo, Bombardier, Jaguar Land Rover, Saab Automobile, Volvo Cars.
Zooma offers online marketing and communication strategies, concepts, productions and solutions.
Semcon   s best contribution to social and financial development is by running the company professionally and profitably in terms of our code of conduct, making it possible to create jobs by providing value-adding expertise as a close technical partner to industry.
We regularly donate to charities such as BRIS (Children   s rights in society), Medecins Sans Frontier and the Swedish Cancer Society. Semcon   s commitment to the STCC (Swedish Touring Car Cham- pionship) helps the Min Stora Dag (My Big Day) foundation fulfil the dreams of sick children to travel in a racing car.
Our code of conduct involves all employees acting with social responsi- bility and within the framework of international law in all countries where the Group is represented.
Focusing on our customers Semcon continuously develops its internal quality initiative in order to achieve the highest degree of efficiency. We have close relationships with our customers and close dialogue. To ensure the highest quality and minimize risks in projects Semcon has developed XLPM project methodology, based on the renowned PROPS methodology for managing and controlling projects. The process development is continuously ongoing and the framework currently improved. Semcon is ISO 9001 certified.
As a service company Semcon   s largest contribution reducing climate impact is by being environmentally aware in all customer projects. By providing customers with energy-efficient solutions and services that have little environmental impact Semcon can help towards reducing the carbon footprint by developing wind power, process methods, hybrid and electric car development, fuel consumption etc. To cut the company   s own carbon footprint Semcon is cutting back on the number of journeys our employees make and by using eco-neutral company cars. The Group is ISO 14001 certified.
As the company has activities in many countries around the world diversity occurs naturally, which creates a solid foundation from which to form teams that meet customers    expectations.
The engineering industry is still male- dominated, which is also reflected at Semcon. According to STD Swedish industry consists of 28% women and the corresponding figure at Semcon is 24%.