Orange County   s Credit Union was ranked by The Orange County Register as one of the Top 10 mid-size workplaces in Orange County for 2010 .The award recognizes companies whose employees find their workplace both professionally and personally rewarding and fulfilling. 
The Top Workplaces rankings are based solely on employees    responses to an opinion survey administered by Workplace Dynamics, in conjunction with The Orange County Register   s Top Places to Work Program. 866 companies participated in the program. Employees are invited to answer questions about how they feel about their workplace. 
Orange County   s Credit Union donated over 5,000 individual school supplies to the school districts where their branches are located in Orange and Riverside Counties and Long Beach. Each district received all these items and more: 50 packages of paper/notebooks, 40 boxes of crayons, 30 packages of colored pencils/markers, 30 dozen #2 pencils, 6 packages of colored-construction paper, and 48 glue sticks/bottles.
Donations were made to the following school districts: Santa Ana Unified School District, Saddleback
Valley Unified School District, Corona-Norco School District, Long Beach Unified School District, Irvine
Unified School District, Fullerton School District, Fountain Valley School District, Placentia Yorba Linda
School District, Capistrano Unified School District, and Orange Unified School District.
In August 2008, Orange County   s Credit Union and its Membership donated over $13,500 to sponsor the new Endangered-Species Carrousel at the Santa Ana Zoo in Prentice Park. The Santa Ana Zoo   s new Endangered-Species Carrousel is designed to educate the community about the value of environmental conservation through the preservation of endangered animals. The donation covered the sponsorship of two endangered species featured on the carrousel - Sea otter and the Hawaiian monk seal.   
Orange County   s Credit Union received the 2008 Award for Workplace Excellence from Peter Barron Stark Companies. Recipients of the Award for Workplace Excellence scored a favorable response of at least 80% on their Employee Opinion Survey (EOS). The Award for Workplace Excellence is based solely on the opinions of the employees unlike many other workplace awards which are based on administrators    opinions. Orange County   s Credit Union scored in the top tier of the    Best    receiving an overall 90.8% favorable rating by its Associates. "We   ve received many awards over our 70-year history, but this Award is especially meaningful for the Credit Union because it recognizes our Associates    extreme satisfaction with our culture and organization," commented Shruti Miyashiro, President and CEO of Orange County   s Credit Union.
The Credit Union offers: