Hai Every one, 
This is Ganesh, i faced one interview question on Testing.Tell me one bug u found  which is high severity,low priority and low  severity,high priority?please send me solution     Preceding   comment added by   (       ) 06:46, 13 September 2008 (UTC) 
Is there a pluggin like NoScript for IE7?  If so where can I get it?     Preceding   comment added by   ( ) 06:53, 13 September 2008 (UTC) 
When I go to some sites, I see a message saying something like, "upgrade your browser to ie7 or firefox," then it has a like to where I can download them. I use Minefield, the pre-beta version of Firefox, so I am actually ahead of them in technology. I am assuming that they are reading my browser version using some html script/code/thingy. I found where to change the version name in about:config, but what should I change it to (so I can get sites to thing I am using "firefox")?     12:55, 13 September 2008 (UTC)
I bought Microsoft office 2003 bundled with my computer, and as far as I can remember I did not receive any office disks with it, however I would like to use the foreign language spell checker, which is apparently not installed, and when I try to install the programme just requests the original disks to be inserted. Is there another way to get the foreign language data, or should I have been provided with the disks?   ( ) 14:39, 13 September 2008 (UTC)
The recently released Google Chrome (Chromium) source code was recently released and i was shocked at how much space it took up - 1.5GB, that's enormous! I can understand things like webkit are extremely complex but how can a web browser source code take up so much space? It must be mostly text with very little in the way of images, so why so massive? Thanks - a confused amateur programmer -  ( ) 16:47, 13 September 2008 (UTC)
Hi y'all. I'm trying to use PHP to create a command line program to run in Terminal on my OSX MacBook. I need it to batch process a bunch of images, and when I've run the code in a browser it works perfectly. But trying to adapt it to run in PHP CLI (command line) has driven me bonkers. In particular, it doesn't seem like any of the GD (Image) functions are supported! I tried looking at the PHP CLI phpinfo information and it doesn't include any image functions there, and even simple things like var_dump(gd_info()); fail ("Call to undefined function: gd_info() in .../crop.php on line 4"). The GD library is not included the "PHP modules" listed when I run php -m from the command line.
So yeah. What do I need to do so that PHP CLI can use the GD library? I haven't really used it as a command line program before. And I really need those image functions (they're the heart of this piece of code). I could re-write it so that it all runs from a browser but this seems like a defeatist approach to it. Anybody have any advice? I haven't been able to find a Google search that enlightened me, and looking over the PHP manual pages relating to both GD and CLI haven't really helped... thanks! --  ( ) 17:00, 13 September 2008 (UTC)
What free OS alternative do I have to a package like Mathematica?--    17:47, 13 September 2008 (UTC)
I have a hp psc 1315 all-in-one little printer attached to my home desktop. It can print, scan and copy. It can also FAX, but I understand that pages to be FAXed have to be in a certain format. On my "printers and FAXs" page I have a picture of a FAX machine which is ready, and the properties device name is evidently my modem. I believe it has a driver that works, but I can't send or receive. The device tab page says "send yes, receive auto". Upon trying to learn about this I saw something that said the format of a FAXed page has to be something like *.CO??? but when I try to "save as" a page I only get the options *.htm, *.html, *.mht or *.txt, no *.CO something. I can get a page of a letter I've written to go to the FAX on "printers and FAXs" but I can't get it to go to another FAX machine which I know to be available. My connection to the internet is fast cable DSL which includes my telephone, so phone and desktop computer can both be used at the same time. Please help.  ( ) 18:18, 13 September 2008 (UTC)
Thanks for replying so quickly Finlay. I can generate a cover page with the special dialog, I had made my FAX "printer" the default, and hit send. I know the FAX machine I am sending to is OK but I get the error message "Phone in use or not connected". It keeps trying every 5 minutes until I delete the message in the FAX console outgoing folder.  ( ) 12:22, 14 September 2008 (UTC)
HI Finlay I'm back.
I think you are right. I created a cover letter and sent it. I got a small pop up window labeled FAX Monitor which said "Ready to send FAXes" I clicked "send now". It says "Keep this dialog visable at all times check box, Hide, Answer, More/Less; I got:
8:37 Dialing (number)
8:37 No dial tone The phone is in use or not connected.
My cell phone is sitting on my desk right next to me and turned on and working and not in use.It's not ringing.
Since it gave me the option to answer an incomming FAX I tried "Answer now" just to see what would happen.
I got:
8:37 The call was answered
8:37 An error occurred while receiving the FAX
I know nobody was sending me a FAX.
Since I only have one line from my computer to the modem now and that must be going to the broadband port, how can I make a new line and have only FAXes go to that line? I have a landline phone connected to the modem and I could pull that plug out and plug something else into that receiving hole in the modem but where would the other end of that line go? and what's a DSL microfilter?     Preceding   comment added by   (       ) 13:01, 14 September 2008 (UTC) 
I found the DSL filter little white box. It has two holes on end A and one on end B. On end A, one line goes to the phone outlet on the wall and the other goes to the phone. On end B the only wire goes to the modem. There is another line from the modem to the PC and another line which goes from the PC to the hp printer. It appears that having the "FAX printer", which has as it's device name the modem, and also having a "printer" which has as it's device name the hp 1315 means that FAXing doesn't actually use the hp at all, so how can it be a FAX machine? I think if the FAXing were working I would hear a dial tone and the other phone ringing, which I don't, so maybe it has something to do with the driver? I think I read somewhere that the incoming and outgoing "letters" are stored in a regular folder, but the FAX console looks just like Outlook Express format. So far I'm just trying to send a cover letter, sending a message and receiving comes next.
The hp printer only has two openings, one goes to and from the PC and the other suplies power from the wall. Also, people who have FAXes have a seperate phone number just for their FAX. I use the same line for both the landline telephone and the PC? If I bought another machine just to do FAXing how would it get messages to and from the PC? I think I could us my PC to send and receive FAX messages just like e-mail.  ( ) 19:07, 15 September 2008 (UTC)
Dear Antilived - THAT DID IT!!! I pluged the regular landline telephone line into the back of the computer and sent a cover letter and it said that it was sent. Unfortunately the recepient was not in his office at the time so he couldn't confirm, but, using a different phone on the same line I was able to call him and he said he would be back in his office in about an hour and would both confirm receipt of first FAX and also try to send me a FAX so I can test receipt on this end. WOW!! THANK YOU!! This is fun! There's nothing like getting information from someone who actually knows what they are talking about.  ( ) 16:14, 16 September 2008 (UTC)
I'm back. Both sending and receiving worked but I can't see the incomming letter in the fax console because I get the error message: "The fax document cannot be displayed because your operating system does not have a default viewer for fax documents (.tif files)" I do have 'Windows Picture and Fax Viewer', and I can view the incomming letter in the archived file. So why can't I use my 'Fax Viewer' to view incomming or sent faxed files? Also, up above Finlay McWalter said "Optionally lets you send a cover page." When I send, with the fax "printer" as the default, the dialog pops up and lets me enter the phone number of the fax machine to send to and then I have to create a cover page. I can't find any way to just send the letter without a cover page.  ( ) 20:16, 16 September 2008 (UTC)