While the neighbors are watching the Academy Awards at the Griffins' house, Mort needs to use the bathroom so desperately that he runs into what he thinks is a portable toilet in Stewie's room. The "toilet" turns out to be a time machine, and Mort is sent to the past. Realizing that Mort does not have a return pad that would be able to bring him back to the present, Stewie and Brian take one of the return pads and go back in time to save Mort. They end up in Warsaw, Poland and find Mort in a synagogue. It does not take long for them to realize that the date is September 1, 1939, the day of the Nazi invasion of Poland and when the Second World War started.
The three cannot return to the present right away since the return pad gets broken, so they decide to go to England where they will be safe to fix it. They are chased by the Nazis, forcing them to make a getaway on a motorbike, followed by an elaborate undersea pursuit in a hijacked U-boat. The three make it to England safely, where Stewie finds that the return pad is out of uranium fuel, and Brian states that the only place they can find more uranium in this time is at a "secret" nuclear testing facility back in Berlin, Nazi Germany. The three join the Royal Air Force and fly a Lancaster bomber as they participate in a dogfight against the Luftwaffe, eventually reaching Berlin. After finding a research lab, Stewie disguises himself as Hitler and obtains the needed uranium. They then run into the real Hitler, who orders their execution, but they escape on the return pad back to their time (Hitler offered to spare them if they performed a musical number, but Mort cuts Stewie and Brian off at the first line).
The group arrives back in Stewie's room 30 seconds before Mort originally entered the time machine. To keep these events from repeating themselves, Stewie kills the Mort that traveled with them by shoving him into the time machine and then blowing it up. The original Mort then enters the room and, now lacking the time machine "toilet," and seeing Stewie and Brian in Nazi uniform, soils himself instead.
 Also, the entrance into Warsaw mirrors Marty's arrival in 1955 Hill Valley. When Stewie picks up a Nazi uniform there is a McCain-Palin button attached.Haque, Ahsan. , During one of the battles against the Nazis, Stewie  IGN. October 20, 2008. Accessed October 20, 2008.Chuck Raasch, "Landslide would challenge Obama" ''Sunday Free Press'' (Detroit) Sunday, October 26, 2008, page 13A.  "The same day that Powell hit on his own party, the pro-Obama producer of the TV cartoon, ''Family Guy'', depicted Nazis wearing McCain-Palin campaign buttons."Nicholas Graham, "" ''The Huffington Post'', 19 October 2008; acc. 30 October 2008 Stewie and Hitler re-enact the famous "mirror" scene from the Marx Brothers film ''Duck Soup''. The scene where the Hawk Men defeat Nazi air force is a parody of the film ''Flash Gordon'', with its original soundtrack by Queen. Stewie, Brian and Mort's escape from their crashing plane is a recreation of the raft scene from Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom. The Hebrew wedding scene plays a song titled "Through Poland To A Jewish Village".
Reception of the episode was mixed. Ahsan Haque of IGN rated the episode 9.6 saying, "Featuring gorgeous CGI animation, a genuinely exciting storyline, and some hilariously offensive humor, this Stewie and Brian centric episode of Family Guy easily stands out as one of the best episodes of the show in years." Alex Rocha of ''TV Guide'' was much more critical stating, "it seemed that the show has taken a slight fall back. After having great episodes the past few weeks to get this current season started on a roll, we have witnessed another average, even sub-par episode." In his review of ''Family Guy'', volume 7, Francis Rizzo III of DVD Talk called the episode "hugely memorable", and stated that it "features some of the finest animation the series has ever produced".
According to Seth MacFarlane, ''Road to Germany'' was one of three episodes (Along with ''I Dream of Jesus'' and ''Family Gay'') submitted for consideration for "Outstanding Comedy Series" in the 61st Primetime Emmy Awards in 2009.  "We picked three of our edgier shows as a choice," he explained,  "Ya know, we figured if we are going to be damned, let's be damned for what we really are."  The series was ultimately nominated for the award, the first time in 48 years an animated series was nominated for the same category.