The members of the council were appointed directly by the President; the President also chose the chairperson of the Council (last appointed Chair was Edmund D. Pellegrino). Council members, totaling no more than 18, were appointed for a two-year term, after which time they could be reappointed by the President. Individuals appointed could not be officers or employees of the federal government. Executive Order 13237 was renewed in 2003, 2005 and again in 2007.
In June 2009, President Barack Obama's administration informed members of the Council that their services were no longer needed.Wade, Nicholas.  Obama Plans to Replace Bush   s Bioethics Panel.  ''The New York Times'' June 17, 2009  Through a spokeperson, Obama made clear that he intended to replace the committee with a body that "offers practical policy options" rather than philosophical guidance.
 On Wednesday, Nov. 25, 2009, Obama named Amy Gutmann, the president of the University of Pennsylvania, to chair his new advisory panel on bioethics.  James W. Wagner, the president of Emory University, was appointed vice chairperson.
Free Text
Bioethicist Leslie A. Meltzer accused the Commission of wrapping "political and religious agendas in the guise of dignity," and described them as largely Christian-affiliated neoconservatives; philosophers and political scientists rather than bench scientists. Meltzer said that Council members mischaracterized the positions of their opponents and used invective rather than addressing the merits of the arguments.
The response to President Obama's decision to disband the Council drew both criticism and praise.  Colleen Carroll Campbell of the Ethics and Public Policy Center - an organization founded to "clarify and reinforce the bond between the Judeo-Christian moral tradition and the public debate over domestic and foreign policy issues" - predicted that "Obama's desire to see his policies backed by expert 'consensus' more likely will be realized with a new commission composed of like-minded political liberals steeped in utilitarianism than with the brainy, diverse and unpredictable crew that populated the now-defunct council."  In contrast, Jacob M. Appel of New York's Mount Sinai Hospital wrote that "the panel itself, far from being an incubator of intellectual ferment, had evolved into a publicly funded right-wing think tank with a handful of token moderates for window dressing" and argued that "Obama was wise to scrap the entire panel and to start over."