Oerlikon Solar is one of the world   s leading technology providers with 12 factories in production in seven countries, almost 3 million modules produced and 450 MW of installed capacity worldwide on the fast-growing thin film silicon PV market. Oerlikon Solar provides its customers with both a competitive product technology (high efficiency Micromorph  ) and a complete end-to-end manufacturing solution that enables customers to mitigate technology risk and accelerate their time to market.  Oerlikon Solar supports its customers with an ongoing commitment to improve the performance and reliability of its thin film silicon technology, while also driving continual improvements in the integrated manufacturing processes to drive down the cost of ownership.  
Oerlikon Solar has Micromorph   patents dating back to 1993, was the first to integrate the high-efficiency Transparent Conductive Oxide (TCO) layer, and the first to commercialize the high-efficiency Micromorph   process and support the majority of its customers in migrating to it. To date it is the only proven end-to-end Micromorph   solution available on the market, offering lowest cost of electricity $/kWh, and proving highest future cost reduction potential. 
Oerlikon Solar is headquartered in Switzerland, has about 700 employees in 13 locations worldwide, a number of factories in production around the globe and maintains sales and service centers in the USA, Europe, China, Taiwan, Korea, Singapore and Japan.
In the well developed PV supply chain - from material makers, to equipment suppliers, to manufacturers, to installers - Oerlikon provides thin film silicon PV module production equipment, end-to-end fabrication lines, process technology and services. Their products enable automated mass production of large-area, thin-film silicon solar modules.
Oerlikon Solar   s mission is to make solar energy economically viable. Oerlikon Solar is committed to continually improving its technology and driving down the production cost for PV panels, increasing panel efficiency. Oerlikon Solar is currently offering equipment that produce PV panels that are 1.4 square meters in size, have a module efficiency of more than 8.7%, and an expected module production cost of approximately $1/Watt (based on European model). It is notable that Oerlikon Solar has already doubled the annual output of its standard manufacturing line and reduced the expected cost of ownership by over 30% over the past two years. By the end of 2010, Oerlikon Solar expects that further process improvements for this standard line will result in an expected cost of ownership of just     0.50/Watt (based on European model). These improvements will put Oerlikon Solar customers in a position to offer panels at a price that will enable solar energy to be sold at prices that are comparable with retail electricity rates in regions like Southern Europe or California by 2012.
Government programs to encourage increased use of renewable energy are growing around the world, due to the increasing importance of environmental protection, climate change and resource conservation as well as the corresponding global change in public perception. Solar radiation is by far the world   s most abundant renewable energy resource, but up to now solar energy has provided a very small portion of the world   s electricity production, due to the relatively higher cost of solar energy. However, this situation is changing rapidly, due to the fact that the cost of solar PV technology is dropping rapidly, while the cost for conventional energy is expected to rise continually in the years ahead as we approach the sunset of the fossil fuel era.
The world market for solar photovoltaics (PV) was over 7 billion gigawatts (GW) in 2010 and is supposed to rise to 24 GW in 2020. The mid- to long-term outlook remains very promising reflected by the strong underlying fundamental growth drivers. The global PV market is expected to grow at a 5 year CAGR of 36% and a 20 year CAGR of up to 12%. By 2013, China is expected to account for close to 8% of installations and the US and Germany for roughly 20% and 27% respectively. The share of German market may decline further due to digression in Feed-in-Tariff (the incentivized price of the solar electricity) structure. This is due in part to the rapid growth of PV markets in other countries (e.g. Italy, Spain, France, Japan and India), driven in the near term by favorable feed-in-tariff incentive policies, and in the longer term by the convergence of PV energy prices with conventional energy prices. These 8 countries are projected to account for 80% of worldwide installations in 2013.
There are two different processes for producing PV cells: traditional wafer-based silicon technologies and next-generation thin-film technologies. '''Wafer technology''' requires a significant supply of silicon. '''Thin-film technology''' does not. It is a newer, more innovative technology, which employs silicon and other thin films on supporting substrates such as glass, polymer, aluminum, stainless steel, or metallurgical-grade silicon. They typically use amorphous, nanocrystalline, fine-grained polycrystalline, or epitaxial silicon layers that are only a few micrometers thick, a fraction of the thickness of silicon wafers.
Companies like Oerlikon, Ulvac, Anwell Technologies or Applied Materials integrate the production technologies and processes necessary for all critical mass production steps, enabling it to provide complete, end-to-end solar factories. Oerlikon Solar claims being the world   s only supplier of proven, fully automated, end-to-end solutions encompassing metrology and the entire production process     from glass cleaning to testing of the finished modules.
Oerlikon Solars fully automated FAB 1200 is the latest generation in thin-film solar module manufacturing lines, and includes three key components:
In addition, Oerlikon Solar says it is the only supplier of transparent conductive oxide (TCO) technology with haze on demand. This proprietary effect enables the trapping of light in the photovoltaic thin-film, maximizing conversion efficiency. These unique capabilities enhance the performance of the solar modules and directly reduce the cost-per-watt peak.
The company   s 1.4 m2 substrates are currently the leading format for equipping silicon thin-film solar-module production facilities, and have become the industry standard through numerous installations. Not only are they the only substrates available for wide-scale implementation today, but also this format has other advantages over larger substrates including higher efficiency, lower cost of ownership per watt, lower shipment costs, and ease of installation.
This innovative amorphous/microcrystalline design enables superior module performance by capturing up to 50% more sunlight than conventional thin film silicon PV modules. The micromorph stacked-cell concept was pioneered and patented at the Institute Microtechnique (IMT) of the Neuchatel University in Switzerland, and later then licensed to Oerlikon Solar since 2003.
Oerlikon Solar offers its customers a complete manufacturing solution for thin film silicon, including not only the PECVD equipment for depositing the silicon layers, but also the LPCVD equipment to deposit thin film zinc oxide on the front and back of the silicon layers, and advanced laser systems to scribe cell lines.
The main a-Si competitor is First Solar.