In 1946, the National Order of the Arrow Lodge Meeting was held at Chanute Field.
The 1963 and 1971 National Order of the Arrow Conferences were held at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.
There are thirteen Boy Scouts of America local councils based in Illinois. Additionally six councils is neighboring states also serve portions of Illinois.
The three districts in the council are:
The U.S. Scouting Service Project has created a link to all known websites (districts, troops, packs, Venturing Crews, O.A. Lodge & Chapter, etc. websites) located within the Abraham Lincoln Council which can be found at .
The U.S. Scouting Service Project also maintaines the  website which provides general information and a place for leader comments on the two camps operated by the Abraham Lincoln Council at  and 
Serving the youth of the 54 communities comprising the south suburbs of Chicago and Northwest Indiana since 1917, the Calumet Council is the local entity of the Boy Scouts of America and Learning for Life Programs.
Calumet Council was formed in 1966, and was the result of a merger of the Pokagon Trails Council in Hammond, Indiana and the Sauk Trails Council in Gary, Indiana. In 1971 the Twin City Council in East Chicago, Indiana joined to make up the current structure. Camp Frank H. Betz, located in Berrien Springs, MI (USA) is operated by the Calumet Council. 'Betz' has served Scouts in the South Suburbs of Chicago and Northwest Indiana since 1922.
In 2008, over 13,000 young men and women were active members of the Scouting program in the Calumet Council. Over 4,100 adult volunteers, supported by a small staff, provide a top quality "values based" program, with an emphasis on outdoor programs and life skills.
Due to the unique demographics of the Calumet Council, a special program designed to serve the hardest to reach "at risk" youth, called Scoutreach, is used in lower income communities. In 2008, sixty six Scoutreach Cub Scout packs, Boy Scout troops and Venture Crews were active in nine different communities with over 1,400 members.
The Eagle Scout Award, the highest award a boy can earn in Scouting, was presented to 74 young men in 2006. These newest Eagles totaled over 3,200 combined service hours in the 74 different community service projects which they carried out as part of the Eagle Scout requirement.
The Council operates four districts: Crossroads, Nishnabec, Prairie Dunes, and Thunderbird. These service areas were formed in 2005 as a result of a restructuring to utilize volunteer resources better.
The Order of the Arrow is Scouting   s National Honor Society. The council's chapter is Michigamea Order of the Arrow Lodge number 110. It is youth-run and advised by adult volunteers. Michigamea lodge has over 600 active members. In 2008, the Lodge received The National Service Award for their work on the new Frank H. Betz firebowl. This annual award is only presented to eight lodges nationally.
The Council Executive board is made up of 44 local business and community leaders who guide to the year-round operation of the Council. The Council Key III is made up of President James K. Larson, Council Commissioner Albin Sporny III and Scout Executive James Lakeman.
The Bass Lake lone troop Scout camp was part of the Owasippe Scout Reservation operated by the Chicago Area Council of the Boy Scouts of America. The Bass Lake camp was a single camp on a small (approximately 600 feet wide) lake in the Owasippe reservation. A single troop would take over the entire camp, usually for a two week period, preparing all their own food and overseeing all aspects of the camp life.  Active in the 1950s and 1960s, Bass Lake camp is no longer in use.
The '''Greater Saint Louis Area Council''' is based in Saint Louis, Missouri, and serves Scouts in the Saint Louis Metro area, southeast Missouri, and southern Illinois.
In 2007, Lincoln Trails Council ran a Scoutreach program in inner city areas. Boys are offered constructive, fun activities and learn about Scouting. This can keep the boys from wandering the streets unsupervised and getting into trouble.
The Lewis & Clark Council  was formed from the 2009 merger of Okaw Valley Council and Trails West Council.
The Lewis & Clark council has its headquarters in Belleville, Illinois. The Lewis and Clark owns four camps: Camp Joy in Carlyle, Illinois,  and Camp Sunnen in Potosi, Missouri, Camp Warren Levis in Godfrey, Illinois, Camp Vandeventer in Waterloo, Illinois. There are six districts in the Lewis & Clark Council which are the Illini District, Black Gold District, Kaskaskia District, Cahokia Mounds District, Piasa Bird District, and St. Clair District. Okaw Valley Council and the Trails  West Council merged to help curb operating costs and increase efficiency on January 6, 2009 to create the Lewis & Clark Council. The council can be found online at http://Lewisandclarkbsa.org.
Trails West Council was founded in 1991 when the Piasa Bird Council and the Cahokia Mounds Council joined together.
The Order of the Arrow is represented by the Nisha Kittan Lodge, replacing  Kishkakon Lodge #112 and Taleka Lodge 81.
Ma-Ka-Ja-Wan Scout Reservation is a Boy Scouts of America property located in Northern Wisconsin and serves the Scouts of the Northeast Illinois Council based in Highland Park, Illinois. Originally a logging camp, the Scouts purchased the land and first had campers in 1929. The camp is  in size.
North East Illinois Council is composed of three districts:
Current Camp Information 
Historical information on Ma-Ka-Ja-Wan Scout Reservation 
Ma-Ka-Ja-Wan Lodge 40s Website is 
The Key Three for 2010 is composed of Council President Marie Diffley along with Council Commissioner Rick Romani, and Scout Executive Stephen J. Taylor, CFRE.
The Northwest Suburban National Scout Shop is located within the NWSC Volunteer Service Center located at 600 N. Wheeling Road in Mount Prospect, IL.
In 2009, the Northwest Suburban Council earned the National Centennial Quality Council Award, four of its six districts earned the National Quality District Award, the Council was recognized as a National Learning for Life Council of Distinction, earned the Central Region Scoutreach Award, and earned the National Major Gifts Award.  It led the Central Region in youth membership retention.
The Northwest Suburban Council has an ongoing Capital and Endowment Development Campaign.  So far over $2.2 Million has been pledged to the effort by nearly 300 donors.  New rowboats, shooting sports equipment, and lighting at Camp Napowan have already been acquired as a result of the campaign.  Major building refurbishments have also been accomplished  at Camp Lakota. Funding has also been provided for expanded program support of Scoutreach and Learning for Life.  The new pool and the new Don Yacktman's Eagle Lodge at Camp Lakota have recently been constructed.  A new poolhouse for Lakota is almost complete and the new Jerry and Adele Epstein Dining Pavilion at Napowan was dedicated in May 2009 and has been in usage since then.
In 2006, the Northwest Suburban Council served as host to the BSA National Endowment Art Tour, the Biennial Meeting of the National Catholic Committee on Scouting, and the Annual Meeting of the National Jewish Committee on Scouting.
Lakota Lodge #175 is the local Order of the Arrow Lodge of the Northwest Suburban Council with Robert Gale being the current Lodge Chief. Lakota Lodge's website is  operated by Joey Bracco, Vigil Honor Member and Eagle Scout which is updated to keep members up to date with everything going on in the lodge.
Past Lakota Lodge Chief Don Hough was elected as Order of the Arrow Section Chief and also 2008 Central Region Chief.  Also Richie Ferolo was elected as Order of the Arrow 2010 Central Region Chief.
The council's service area includes 34 communities in the northwest suburbs of Chicago with Skokie as the eastern border, Barrington on the west, Lake Zurich on the north, and O'Hare International Airport on the south with the council territory remaining unchanged since its founding in 1926.  The population served by Northwest Suburban Council is quite diverse, as it is composed of 15% Latino/Hispanic, 8% Asian, 3% Eastern European, 1% African-American, and 73% Caucasian.
The council newsletter recently changed its name to "The Drum Beat" when it went electronic and is now available on-line.  The council's website is located at www.nwsc.org.
The council's annual operating budget is just under $2.5 Million annually with $485,000 being raised through its Friends of Scouting Annual Giving Campaign.  Popcorn sales net income for the council account for approximately $400,000 in annual income.  Camping/activity revenue account for another $650,000 in income.  Scout Shop sales are approximately $50,000 net annually.  Special events such as the Golf Outing, Distinguished Citizen Banquet, and Sports Events account for another $125,000.  United Way income totals approximately $40,000 annually.  Project Sales total $20,000.  Interest Income from the Endowment is approximately $50,000.  The council conducts an independent annual audit through Robert Hofmeier, CPA of Gurnee, Illinois which is reviewed by a volunteer Council Audit Committee, and approved by the Council Executive Board.  For 2009, the council earned an "unqualified" or "clean" audit opinion.
Its local districts are:
Counselors at Napowan teach Merit Badges.  Over the course of the week, Scouts can have an opportunity to take as many badges as they would like. Staff also arrange "Special Program" which is an opportunity for the scouts to get to know the staff and engage in activities outside of the merit badge program.  Scouts usually arrive Sunday afternoon, and depart Saturday morning.  Some troops stay for two weeks, but the majority stay only for one.
The Sunday campers arrive, the staff treats the Scouts to a campfire, on Friday, the staff treats them to a closing campfire.
Within the past fifteen years, after the initial eight weeks of Scouts has ended, the camp is typically rented for one week.  Camp Gan Israel is not Scout related and caters to the those of Jewish faith in northern Chicago.  Typically fifty to sixty kids, ages ranging from eight to fourteen, come up for a week.  Their activities include swimming, canoeing, field sports.  The boys are organized into 'bunks.'  Throughout the week, the bunks compete for points.
Bryan Schroeder  District Director
Ryan M. Gust District Executive
Matt Skelly Field Director
John Blomquist District Executive
Formerly the ''Starved Rock Area Council'', '''Corn Belt Council''' and the ''Creve Coeur Council'', '''W.D. Boyce Council''' was created by merger and renamed in 1972 in honor of the founder of the BSA, whose grave lies within the grounds of the '''Ottawa Scouting Museum''' in Ottawa, Illinois.  Its headquarters is in Peoria, Illinois.  The council runs Ingersoll Scout Reservation west of Peoria and Cache Lake Scout Camp in Ontario, Canada.  W.D. Boyce Council is served by Wenasa Quenhotan Lodge #23.
The Boy Scouts sold the property to the Peoria Park District in the 1990s and built a new camp farther north of the city. The Park District rents out the main meeting house for parties and created a few new trails that cross from the Camp over to Robinson Park, which abuts the campgrounds.
There are 10 Girl Scout councils in Illinois but during the current realignment the numbers will drop.
Girl Scouts of Central Illinois serves 25,000 girls and has 6,000
It was formed by the merger of
Girl Scouts of Centrillio Council, Girl Scouts-Kickapoo Council,
Girl Scouts of Two Rivers Council, Shemamo Girl Scout Council of
Illinois, Girl Scouts, Land of Lincoln Council, and Girl Scouts of Green
Meadows Council.
Headquarters: Springfield, Illinois  
Website: http://www.girlscouts-gsci.org/
Regions:
Girl Scouts of Eastern Iowa and Western Illinois serves 20,000 girls
Rock Island, Mercer, Henderson, Warren, Knox, Henry, and Jo Daviess
Formed by the merger of Girl Scouts of Conestoga Council, Girl Scouts
Little Cloud Council, Girl Scouts of the Mississippi Valley, and Girl
Scouts of Shining Trail Council.
Headquarters: Rock Island, Illinois  
Website: http://www.gseiwi.org/
Serves more than 94,000 girls and is the largest Girl Scout council by membership in the United States.  It includes Cook, DuPage, Grundy, Kankakee, Lake and Will counties in Illinois and Jasper, Lake, Newton, and Porter counties in Indiana.
It was formed by the merger of Girl Scouts of the Calumet Council
Indiana, Girl Scouts of Chicago, Drifting Dunes Girl Scout Council,
Girl Scouts&nbsp;    Illinois Crossroads Council, Girl Scouts&nbsp;    Prairie
Winds, Girl Scouts of South Cook County, and Girl Scouts of Trailways
Council on July 1, 2008.
Headquarters: Chicago, Illinois
Website: http://www.girlscoutsgcnwi.org/
See Scouting in Indiana for full information.  Serves girls in White County, Illinois.
Headquarters: Evansville, Indiana
Website: http://www.girlscouts-raintree.org
Girl Scouts of Northern Illinois was formed on October 1, 2009 from a merger of Fox Valley, Rock River Valley, Green Hills, and Sybaquay councils. The council serves Kane, Kendall, McHenry, DeKalb, Boone, Winnebago, Ogle, Lee, Jo Davies, Carroll and Whiteside counties.
Website: http://www.girlscoutsni.org/
Thie council was formed in October 2009 from a merger of River Bluffs and Shagbark Councils.
Website: http://www.girlscoutsofsouthernillinois.org/
In addition, there were Belarusian Scouts in Exile in Chicago through the 1980s, and Lietuvos skautu sajunga still exists there. Kulfoldi Magyar Cserkeszszovetseg Hungarian Scouting also maintains a troop in Chicago, and there are large contingents of active Plast Ukrainian Scouts in Chicago.