Japan and the United States. European markets, with the exception of agriculture, were still national,
Fear of the consequences spurred a group of 17 businessmen to come together in Volvo   s boardroom,
Spearheading the initiative was Pehr Gyllenhammar, then chief executive of Volvo. His readiness to
Their support helped to secure the participation of other high-calibre, pro-European industrialists
In Brussels, the Pehr Gyllenhammar initiative was watched with some interest at the European
Commission, where the Commissioner for Industry and the Single Market, Etienne Davignon, had
I want to speak to European Industry?   
Etienne Davignon and his colleague Francois-Xavier Ortoli, Commissioner for Economic and Monetary
Affairs, attended the later stages of the April founding meeting in Paris. It was the occasion for a great deal of lively debate and the first airing of many of the ideas and concerns that were to preoccupy ERT for the coming 20 years: high costs and low profits, fragmentation of the European market, excessive interference by governments, and the fundamental need to maintain and rebuild an industrial base in Europe across a broad strategic front, from new technologies to telecommunications. The discussion was sufficiently fruitful to convince those present that the initiative was worthwhile pursuing, and also to attract the interest of the Financial Times.
The organisation, charter and financial arrangements for ERT were agreed at a second meeting of
Members (afterwards always referred to as    Plenary Sessions   ) on 1 June 1983 in Amsterdam. The
Volvo was charged with setting up a small Secretariat inside one of its Paris-based divisions. In 1985
ERT appointed its first full-time Secretary General, Peter Ekenger, and rented an office in Paris.
ERT today brings together around 50 chief executives and chairmen of major multinationalcompanies of European parentage, covering a wide range of industrial and technological sectors. Individuals join at the personal invitation of existing Members, which confers on ERT membership a personal rather than corporate character.
ERT Members meet twice a year, in person, at '''Plenary Sessions'''. At these Plenary Sessions,
Members determine ERT   s work programme, set priorities and establish specialised Working
Groups to work on them. Decisions are taken by consensus.
The ERT Chairman, two vice-Chairmen, the former ERT Chairman and five other elected Members
Each ERT Member nominates an '''Associate''' to act as a main point of liaison at working level and to
Much of the work is done by the '''Working Groups''' established by the Plenary Sessions. They are
The '''Secretary General''' is in charge of a small Secretariat based in Brussels, which coordinates
ERT identifies important issues related to European competitiveness, analyses critical factors and
ERT makes its views known to the political decision-makers at national and European level by means
At European level, ERT discusses its views with Members of the Commission, the European Council,
At national level, ERT Members communicate ERT   s views to their own national government and
ERT maintains close contacts with BUSINESSEUROPE (the Confederation of European Business),
ERT Members share at least two profound convictions about the benefits of the European Union and
European industry cannot flourish unless it is competitive with other businesses around the world,
Neither a business lobby group nor a think tank, ERT has consistently sought to wake up policy
This has enabled ERT to become a key interlocutor in the debate on European competitiveness by
ERT was an early entrant into the debate on how to tackle Europe   s problem of jobless growth in
ERT   s    core business    since the mid-1980s has been securing the development and implementation
Today, the organisation maintains a sharp vision of the Single Market structure needed to offer
Single Market. For example it has campaigned vigorously for a Community patent system and an end
ERT   s first competitive priority was '''infrastructure'''. Its 1984 report,    Missing Links   , proposed three major infrastructure projects: Euro-Route     a Channel link between England and France, Scanlink    
It would be exaggerated to claim sole credit for these projects, but the ERT report, presented first
The Treaty of Maastricht and its timetable for a '''European Economic and Monetary Union (EMU)''' was
ERT is widely credited with raising awareness amongst senior EU officials of the importance of
Throughout its existence, this Group had a significant influence on the development of the European
Employment issues have also been given continuous attention by ERT. Job creation goes
ERT Members contributed to the preparation of the '''Lisbon Agenda''', which sought to make Europe
European Council in March 2000. ERT Members constantly stressed the need for better performance
States, including on ways to foster innovation and achieve higher industry investment in Research
ERT Members have long appreciated the benefits of '''EU enlargement''' both for the accession
Members continue to support further accessions to the EU once candidate countries truly fulfil the
As leaders of multinational companies, ERT Members appreciate the benefits of '''global trade''' within
ERT Members were particularly aware of the dynamic developments in other economies around the
ERT sought to create a better understanding of how EU policy actions could ensure that Europe
Thus, ERT addressed the EU   s '''foreign economic relations''' with the United States, Russia and China
Union. ERT supported an ambitious '''European Neighbourhood Policy''' as a win-win approach to
Having contributed actively to the discussions on the future of Europe in the '''European Convention''',with a particular focus on the          governance of Europe         , in particular in view of ensuring fast and effective decision-making in all areas related to business, ERT Members were concerned at the rejection of the proposed Constitutional Treaty in May 2005 in referenda in France and the Netherlands. This rejection led to a greater focus on '''communications''' in ERT activities.
Important competitiveness issues were raised in the debate on the response to '''Climate Change'''. ERT
ERT Members also identified the negative competitiveness implications of a future skills gap in the
As the '''global economic crisis'''     the worst ERT Members had ever experienced     hit Europe in autumn
2008, ERT rapidly raised policy makers    awareness of the gravity of the situation. Governments took
The crisis exacerbated the EU   s existing competitiveness challenge, while temporarily disorientating
ERT developed a '''Vision for a competitive Europe in 2025''', for publication at the time a new European Commission entered into office (February 2010).