The casino and hotel are located in the Winnipeg neighborhood of Transcona on Regent Avenue, and is 15km (25 minute drive) from the Winnipeg International Airport. The casino contains a McDonald's restaurant, as well as a concert stage, on which regular comedy, and musical performances are scheduled. The casino claims its decorative style is Caribbean, but some of the interior decorations would be more accurately attributed to Aztec, Mayan, or other Mesoamerican locations. The exterior of the building is surrounded in artificial palm trees.   
The gaming area of the casino is divided into two main areas.  The first area (which is entered from the south or east entrance), contains a large amount of VLT machines, slot machines, a McDonald's restaurant, as well as a large stage for bingo (which also doubles as the concert stage). The first area of the casino is connected to the second area via an Aquarium tunnel, which contains many exotic salt-water fish.  
The second area of the casino contains another section of VLTs, slot machines, and a Table Game area.  The table games include Blackjack, Red Dog, Texas Hold'em Bonus Poker, Roulette, Baccarat, Pai gow poker, and Let it ride. Three card poker was offered until early 2009, when it was replaced with Red Dog. Next to the Table Game area is a large Poker area, which contains multiple 10-seat poker tables .
In this second area of the casino, there is a large bamboo-styled spiral staircase, which leads downstairs. Before 2007, the Poker area was located downstairs, before being moved upstairs next to the Table Games. This allowed for additional poker tables, and more room. While the poker area was downstairs, the Manitoba Gaming Control Commission only allowed the casino to run Fixed-Limit poker games. Shortly after this move, the Manitoba Gaming Control Commission approved the casino to run No-Limit poker games. Currently the poker area runs $1/$2 No limit Texas hold 'em games, but higher limits are available upon player request. Aside from the cash poker games facilitated, the casino also runs regular Poker Tournaments.  
The Club Regent Casino Hotel is owned an operated by Canad Inns, a Winnipeg hotel chain. The hotel contains 146 guest rooms, as well as an indoor pool.  The hotel has a 3-diamond rating from AAA/CAA, and a 4-star rating from Canada Select. The hotel also has a 3-Green Key rating from the Hotel Association of Canada's Green Key Eco-Rating Program .