In 1965 when the illustrator Dan Adkins began working at the Wood Studio, he showed Wood pages he had been creating for his planned comics-oriented publication, ''Outlet''. This inspired Wood to become an editor-publisher, and he began assembling art and stories for a magazine he titled ''et cetera''. A front cover paste-up with the ''et cetera'' logo was prepared, but when  Wood learned of another magazine with a similar title, there was a last-minute title change.
Wood launched ''witzend'' in the summer of 1966, with a statement of "no policy" and a desire to give his friends in the comics field a creative detour from the formulaic industry mainstream. During this same period, editor Bill Spicer and critic Richard Kyle began promoting and popularizing the terms "graphic novel" and "graphic story", and in 1967 Spicer changed the title of his ''Fantasy Illustrated'' to ''Graphic Story Magazine''. Kyle, Spicer, Wood and Pearson all envisioned an explosion of graphic narratives far afield of the commercial comic book industry.
The second issue displayed a front cover by Wood and a back cover by Reese. Gray Morrow's "Orion", which began in this issue of ''witzend'', was completed in ''Heavy Metal'' in 1979. Two pages of "Hey, Look!" by Harvey Kurtzman were followed by "a feeble fable" from Warren Sattler, "If You Can't Join 'em... Beat 'em" and more ERB illustrations by Crandall and Frazetta. The center spread presented poems by Wood, Reese and Pearson. Following a Bill Elder cartoon, "Midnight Special" by Ditko and "By the Fountain in the Park" by Don Martin, Wood offered another "Animan" installment.
In the third issue, between a Wood front cover and a Williamson back cover, were Ditko's first "Mr. A" by Ditko, "The Invaders" by Richard Bassford, Wood's "Pipsqueak Papers", more "Hey, Look!" pages and "Last Chance," a previously unpublished 1950s EC New Direction story, drawn by Frazetta and rewritten and edited by Bill Pearson. The issue also featured work by Roger Brand, Will Eisner, Richard "Grass" Green and Art Spiegelman.
With ''witzend'' number four, Wood began a serialization of his epic fantasy, "The World of the Wizard King." These installments of illustrated prose fiction were co-authored with Pearson. Shifting from illustrated text to a comics format, Wood continued the storyline in his later graphic novel, published in two editions (one b/w, one color) -- ''The Wizard King'' (1978) and ''The King of the World'' (Les Editions du Triton, 1978).
After the fourth issue, Wood sold ''witzend'' to Pearson "for the sum of $1.00," and the Pearson-edited issues continued to explore new avenues with contributions from Vaughn Bode, Eisner, Jeff Jones, Wood, Bernie Wrightson and others. Pearson also assembled theme issues -- ''Good Girls'' (diverse drawings of women in issue 13) and a non-comics issue profiling W.C. Fields (issue 9).
A critical survey of the magazine, "Wood at His witzend" by Rick Spanier, appears in Bhob Stewart's biographical anthology, ''Against the Grain: Mad Artist Wallace Wood'' (TwoMorrows, 2003). Designer-typographer Spanier once edited a similar graphic story publication, ''Picture Story Magazine'', requested by the Museum of Modern Art for its collection. After analyzing all 13 issues of ''witzend'' and fitting it into the context of alternative publishing of the period, Spanier concluded that ''witzend'''s "salient point, that comic artists were entitled to more control and ownership of their own work, would eventually be recognized by the publishers of comic books, but it is hard to argue that ''witzend'' itself was a key factor in that development. Like so many other visionary endeavors, it may simply have been ahead of its time." 