Mitchell sought in his work to counteract the implications of his own assertion that, "Most people ignore most poetry because most poetry ignores most people."
 In 2002 he was nominated, semi-seriously, Britain's ''Shadow Poet Laureate''. Mitchell was for some years poetry editor of the ''New Statesman'', and was the first to publish an interview with The Beatles. His work for the Royal Shakespeare Company included Peter Brook's ''US'' and the English version of Peter Weiss's ''Marat/Sade''.  
Ever inspired by the example of his own favourite poet and precursor William Blake, about whom he wrote the acclaimed ''Tyger'' for the National Theatre, his often angry output swirled from anarchistic anti-war satire, through love poetry to, increasingly, stories and poems for children. He also wrote librettos. The Poetry Archive identified his creative yield as hugely prolific.
Adrian Mitchell was born near Hampstead Heath, North London. His mother, Kathleen Fabian, was a Frobel-trained nursery school teacher and his father Jock Mitchell, a research chemist from Cupar in Fife. He was educated at Monkton Combe School, "a school full of bullies, whose playground he characterised as 'the killing ground'". He then went to Greenways at Ashton Gifford House in Wiltshire, run at the time by a friend of his mother. This, said Mitchell, was "a school in Heaven, where my first play, ''The Animals' Brains Trust'', was staged when I was nine to my great satisfaction."   
His schooling was completed as a boarder at Dauntsey's School, after which he did his National Service in the RAF. He commented that this "confirmed (his) natural pacificism". He went on to study English at Christ Church, Oxford, where he was taught by J.R.R. Tolkien   s son. He became chairman of the university's poetry society and the literary editor of ''Isis'' magazine. On graduating Mitchell got a job as a reporter on the ''Oxford Mail'' and, later, at the ''Evening Standard'' in London.
Mitchell gave frequent public readings, particularly for left-wing causes. Satire was his speciality. Commissioned to write a poem about Prince Charles and his special relationship (as Prince of Wales) with the people of Wales, his measured response was short and to the point: "Royalty is a neurosis. Get well soon."
In "Loose Leaf Poem", from Ride the Nightmare, he wrote:
Mitchell was in the habit of stipulating in any preface to his collections: "None of the work in this book is to be used in connection with any examination whatsoever." His best-known poem, "To Whom It May Concern", was his bitterly sarcastic reaction to the televised horrors of the Vietnam War. The poem begins,
He first read it to thousands of nuclear disarmament protesters who, having marched through central London on CND's first new format one-day Easter March, finally crammed into Trafalgar Square on the afternoon of Easter Day 1964. As Mitchell delivered his lines from the pavement above in front of the National Gallery, angry demonstrators in the square below scuffled with police.
He was later responsible for the well-respected stage adaptation of ''The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe'', a production of the Royal Shakespeare Company that premiered in November 1998.
Over the years he updated the poem to take into account recent events. 
One Remembrance Sunday he laid the Peace Pledge Union's White Poppy wreath on the Cenotaph in Whitehall. On one International Conscientious Objectors' Day he read a poem at the ceremony at the Conscientious Objectors' Commemorative Stone in Tavistock Square in London.
Mitchell died at the age of 76 in a North London hospital from a suspected heart attack. For two months he had been suffering from pneumonia. Two days earlier he had completed what turned out to be his last poem, "My Literary Career So Far". He intended it as a Christmas gift to "all the friends, family and animals he loved".
Mitchell is survived by his wife, the actress Celia Hewitt, whose bookshop, Ripping Yarns, is in Highgate, and their two daughters Sasha and Beattie. He also has two sons and a daughter from his previous marriage to Maureen Bush: Briony, Alistair and Danny&mdash;. There are nine grandchildren: Robin, Arthur, Charlotte, Natasha, Zoe, Caitlin, Annie, Lola and Lilly.