The '''Harlem Children's Zone''' (HCZ) is a non-profit organization
The ambitious Harlem Children's Zone Project
Harlem and aims to keep children on track through college and into the
Quoting from the HCZ Project web page: "The HCZ Project began as a one-block
The HCZ and its promotion as a model of education to aspire to, especially in the recent documentary ''Waiting for "Superman",'' have been criticized as an example of the privitization of education in the US. by Rick Ayers, ''The Huffington Post'', September 17, 2010 University of San Francisco Adjunct Professor in Education, Rick Ayers writes that ''Waiting for "Superman"'' "never mentions the tens of millions of dollars of private money that has poured into the Harlem Children's Zone, the model and superman we are relentlessly instructed to aspire to."
The Obama administration announced a ''20 Promise Neighborhoods'' program, which hopes to replicate the success  of the HCZ in poverty-stricken areas of other U.S. cities.
In the summer of 2010, the U.S. Department of Education's Promise Neighborhoods program accepted applications from over 300 communities for $10 million in federal grants for developing HCZ implementation plans, with grant awards to be announced in September 2010.
The HCZ designs, funds, and operates a holistic system of education, social-services and community-building programs within Harlem to counter the negative influences of crime, drugs and poverty and help children complete college and go on to the job market. Providing this "full network of services... to an entire neighborhood from birth to college" is a key element of the Obama administration's ''20 Promise Neighborhoods'' program modeled after the HCZ.
The two fundamental principles of The Zone Project are to help kids as early in their lives as possible and to create a critical mass of adults around them who understand what it takes to help children succeed.
Components of the HCZ programs include the following:
A number of large U.S. cities have initiated their own programs styled after the HCZ, in advance of any federally funded efforts stemming from the Obama administration's HCZ-inspired anti-poverty initiatives. Philadelphia,
Miami,
Chicago,
Cleveland,
Author Paul Tough has discussed the HCZ replication proposal.
The HCZ, in partnership with PolicyLink, has organized a two-day conference on November 9-10, 2009 in New York City with the aim of providing guidance to community leaders from around the U.S. in their efforts to launch similar, large-scale projects like the HCZ in their local areas.
In 2008 President Obama, inspired by The Harlem Children   s Zone immense progress toward breaking the generational cycle of poverty, proposed the creation of 20 Promise Neighborhoods. Obama   s commitment to alleviating poverty is put into place with this initiative which utilizes HCZ   s    cradle to college    approach.    The initiative seeks to help selected local communities dramatically improve outcomes and opportunities for children and families in defined neighborhoods. The initiative will be diverse in its application, reflecting local needs and context.    The initiative   s goal follows the HCZ   s paradigm to improve every aspect of life within impoverished communities, its purpose states:    all children growing up in Promise Neighborhoods have access to effective schools and strong systems of family and community support that will prepare them to attain an excellent education and successfully transition from college to career.    This purpose statement directly reflects the mission of HCZ. HCZ, in collaboration with the national action institute PolicyLink, assists in providing ongoing guidance for the Obama administration in the undertaking of this initiative.
In 2010, the Obama administration allocated $75 million in the federal budget for the program. More than 330 communities across the nation applied for Promise Neighborhood Planning grants. Twenty one communities were awarded one-year planning grants between $400,000 and $500,000. Planning Grantees are given a year to produce a strategic paradigm which will address the issues specific to their community in pursuit of an implementation grant. The grantees will submit their plans this summer, with the implementation phase for Promise Neighborhoods expected to begin in September 2011.
The ''60 Minutes'' television program profiled the HCZ, including an interview with founder Geoffrey Canada, on 14 May 2006 and a follow up program on December 6th, 2009.
The U.S. radio show ''This American Life'' produced an episode about the HCZ which aired on 26 September 2008, 11 October 2008, and 14 August 2009.
Barack Obama announced his plan in a 2008 presidential campaign speech in Washington, D.C. to replicate the HCZ in 20 cities across the United States. Federal government would provide half of the funding with the rest coming from philanthropy and businesses at a cost of a few billion per year.
Senator Obama also noted the HCZ in a 2007 campaign speech.
The ''Wall Street Journal'' featured the HCZ in an article about the financial troubles experienced by this and other charitable organizations in the wake of the recession.
The HCZ has initiated a 100-day public service campaign started on January 23, 2009 to help counteract the effects of the economic downturn.
An article in the January/February 2009 issue of ''Mother Jones'' showcases Geoffrey Canada, the HCZ, and its recognition by the Obama 2008 presidential campaign and administration.
The author of this article Paul Tough published a book in August 2008 about the HCZ titled, ''Whatever It Takes: Geoffrey Canada's Quest to Change Harlem and America.''
National Public Radio produced a 30-minute story on the HCZ on 28 July 2009 titled, "Harlem Children's Zone Breaks Poverty Pattern".
The Washington Post published a story about the HCZ on 2 August 2009, noting that the Obama administration has set aside $10 million in the 2010 budget for planning its ''20 Promise Neighborhoods'' program, which seeks to replicate the HCZ in 20 U.S. cities.
18th March 2010, the HCZ was covered in the BBC   s flagship ''Today'' programme with a view to possible recreation in Great Britain.