Is it possible to send sound waves or voice messages to the past? For example, sending sound through time  where the sound could be picked up by a local telephone. Can we build a technology to do this?   ( ) 00:19, 9 October 2008 (UTC)
So...In Stephenson's book (which, we must emphasise, is fiction) - he proposes that we look at the multiverse in "configuration space".  Imagine plotting a graph of (say) the cost of gasoline versus (say) the number of sunspots visibile on the sun...two totally unrelated things.  Each point on your graph paper represents one possible combination of price and sunspot count - and if you plot these two things over time - you get a curve that traces around in some bizarre shape - looping back on itself, etc.  Well, if you didn't limit yourself to 2D graph paper - you could plot more properties of more things - on 3D graph paper, you could plot price of gas against sunspots against the Dow Jones index.  With 4D graph paper, you could add the popularity of the current US president...and if you had a truly INSANE number of dimensions for your hypothetical graph "paper" - you could plot the position, mass, spin, momentum, etc for every single fundamental particle in the entire universe.  Since every possible configuration of the universe would be represented by a point somewhere in our bazillion-dimensional graph paper, we can draw a line on that graph that represents the progress of our universe through time...one of Stephensons' characters calls this a "Narrative".  We could also plot the narratives of other possible universes through configuration space.  OK - so that's Stephenson's idea of configuration space.
When you look at a classical (non-quantum) view of the universe - in which every event is entirely deterministic - the Narrative for our universe would be a L-O-N-G wiggly line snaking it's way through configuration space - looping around a region that's somewhat compact on the bazillion-dimensional graph because so much of the universe is relatively stable.  But in a quantum universe like ours where events that are truly random happen and weird superposition phenomena exist - that line branches...just as in the many-worlds interpretation of quantum theory.  But viewed in configuration space, it's also possible for two of these Narrative branches to merge back together - if two versions of the universe that differ only by the location of one fundamental particle happen to arrive at the same point in configuration space because that particle ended up in the same place in both of them - making the two universes identical in every respect.  This is rather nicer than the conventional "many worlds" picture where universe split into copies of themselves - but never come back together again.
So what we have in Stephenson's rather clever model is that every conceivable point in configuration space (even some crazy, impossible-seeming ones) "exist" in some sense - and each one changes over time by threading a line through that bazillion-dimensional graph - sometimes splitting into two because of quantum randomness - other times merging together because two universes that have (potentially) very different origins and history happen to wind up with identical configurations.  (One might argue that this would mess with the memories of living creatures in those universes - but if they have different memories to start with then the two universes can't merge because they are different.  Only if every record of past history is somehow erased could two universes join back together.  But because configuration space is 100% full of these snaking "narratives" - there are (paradoxically) exactly as many rejoinings as there are splits!
Now - what about time-travel?  Well, when a creature who is in a universe that's winding through its narrative line decides to jump "back in time" - they take themselves to a point in configuration space where the universe has a bunch of particles representing the time traveller.  That's close (in configuration space) to the narrative that the time traveller's universe passed along - but it's not the same.  If the time traveller is super-careful not to kill his grandfather or do anything else to "change the future" (a very tough proposition!) then when he finally leaves the past to return to the present, the universe with the narrative that contains his particles in the past will eventually merge with the narrative of the universe he came from - and he will truly have "done no damage" to the present.  If, however (much more likely!) he displaces an air molecule and that has a "butterfly" effect that causes greater and greater divergence of the narrative of this universe from the one he remembers - then perhaps the two narratives will never be able to rejoin.
It could also happen though that he could kill his own grandfather - thereby causing the "new" narrative to diverge still more from our own - but in a million years, the consequences of the time traveller never having lived might be utterly erased by the passage of time such that the original time-line and the new one would become identical in every respect - and rejoin.
But in this peculiar interpretation of the multiverse (which I find exceedingly compelling) - time travel not only might exist - but it definitely does exist - in the sense that somewhere in configuration space, there must be a universe where I suddenly pop into existance for no obvious reason with memories of being a time-traveller.  Since all possible configurations "exist" - then for all practical purposes, time travel can happen even if the laws of physics prohibit it.  Of course there are also versions of the universe where I pop back into a nearly identical narrative - but my ears have turned to lime jello...or the world of the "past" is entirely populated by giant intelligent pink rabbits.
This is a very weird view of the multiverse - but it's kinda compelling.
The present exists. The future and past are both ideas. You can't travel to an idea.   ( ) 20:30, 15 October 2008 (UTC)
If I were allergic to sterling silver jewelry, how long would I have to wear a ring around my finger to find out?   ( ) 02:32, 9 October 2008 (UTC)
I may have mentioned this before.  I have a friend who has a weird reaction to gold, but only when she drinks alcohol.  The skin around her wedding ring goes quite markedly blue.  The whole ring finger and that side of her hand is affected.  The skin touching her other jewellery or any other material does not do this.  To prove the gold is playing some part, she once held a gold chain in the palm of her other hand while she was drinking wine, and her palm also went blue.  She removed the chain, and the blue gradually receded, but the ring hand was still blue.  It never happens when she's not drinking.  I was spooked the first time I saw it.  --    ( ) 04:37, 10 October 2008 (UTC)
Are there any known ways I can perpetuate my genetic stock without myself reproducing? Any that won't contribute to overpopulation? Also, are there any known ways of determining whether my genetic stock is above-average and worth making an effort to perpetuate? I have Asperger Syndrome, if that makes any difference.    03:20, 9 October 2008 (UTC)
I can't for the life of me balance this equation:  
H2S + SO2 ---> S<sub>8</sub> + H<sub>2</sub>O . The S<sub>8</sub> in the product's side is throwing me off! I thought I knew how to do this, until I attempted this problem. Can someone explain to me how to do this? I've been at it for far too long!  <span style="font-size: smallest;" class="autosigned">   Preceding   comment added by   ( ) 05:16, 9 October 2008 (UTC)</span><!-- Template:UnsignedIP --> <!--Autosigned by SineBot-->
I still can't get it! Can you just tell me what it is?     Preceding   comment added by   ( ) 11:15, 9 October 2008 (UTC) 
I think I got it! Is it 16-8-3-16? If so, thanks for all your help! If not, then I give up.     Preceding   comment added by   ( ) 15:50, 12 October 2008 (UTC) 
Why does the human body temperature increase whilst ovulating?  ( ) 08:20, 9 October 2008 (UTC)
There is this story about a scientist who found a man eating catfish. As reported in the Newspaper.
Is this story scientifically true?   ( ) 10:50, 9 October 2008 (UTC)
Snopes has a  of  about huge catfish that may be of interest.   ( ) 00:28, 10 October 2008 (UTC)
I think there should be no difference between the entangled states and separable states (entangled states are just quantum states with special "pattern" and nothing else), so I speculate: if we measure one of the two entangled particle, the other will collapse instantly (just like this experiment), then how about measuring one of the two separated (non-entangled) particle? If we measure one of the two particle in separable state, does the other separated particle also collapse instantly? do whole of the other separated particles in our unverse collapse together with it (as the distance doesn't matter) simutaniously simultaneously and instantly? Can I say that all the other separated particles in our universe will actually collapse but just our sensor/device can't distinguish wheather whether they have collasped or not since they are in separable state? -   ( ) 12:07, 9 October 2008 (UTC)
I have to present a case study to a large, mixed group of medical and allied-medical professionals. I have chosen my subject (the patient) and would like opinions on how best to structure and present the information and how to encourage discussion.  ( ) 13:21, 9 October 2008 (UTC)
Hi,
When you install a solar panel on your roof, and then have to replace the roof shingles for routine maintenance, how do the solar panels get in the way? Do you have to take the solar panels off, replace the shingles, and then reinstall the solar panels?  What's the deal?
I feel irritated that all the solar roof websites I've read don't discuss this issue. 
Thanks
Ask your self something. How do they shingle around the various ventilation pipes protruding from the roof? The answer is you use flashing/and shingle around. So likewise, the supporting columns (for lack of a better word) for the solar panel would be shingled around.  ( ) 19:59, 14 October 2008 (UTC)
Yes, and that's one disadvantage of a roof mounted photovoltaic solution.  In lieu of the roof you could mount them on the side of the house or erect a pole in the yard and build a solar tracker.  The roof mounted solutions block the sun so the roof will have less wear and tear.
When was the  function invented for clocks and watches? I imagine it must be quite old (  a watch from the 1890s with the ability), but was curious. --  ( ) 20:10, 9 October 2008 (UTC)
Would UOM KOhm be the same as kOhm     Preceding   comment added by   (       ) 20:27, 9 October 2008 (UTC) 
Which one is right? Is Venus upside-down tilt axis of 177 degs, or normal upright of 2.6 degs. Old books say 2.6 degs axial tilt, but ewer study say Venus is upside down of 177 degs.--    22:28, 9 October 2008 (UTC)
Since quantum mechanics can't provide deterministic predictions, is it really falsifiable? And if it's not falsifiable, is it really a true science?   ( ) 19:02, 9 October 2008 (UTC)