On 15 March 2010, London Wasps announced that Mitchell had been released early from his contract in order to return to Australia, to sign to the Melbourne Rebels in the Super Rugby competition, along with Wasps' team-mate Danny Cipriani.
Mitchell played in the Rebels's pre-season game against Fiji, and scored an opportunist try early in the game.
Mitchell joined Wasps in 2008, from Sydney University. He made 31 appearances as a regular support player for the 1XV and strong figure in the A League side. Mitchell was signed for Wasps on a two-year deal from the New South Wales Waratahs' academy. He joined Wasps on the recommendation of former England prop Trevor Woodman who coached him at Sydney University.
Upon the announcement of Mitchell's signing, Wasps' Director of Rugby Ian McGeechan said, "Lachlan is a player who we feel will both benefit from and add to the Wasps environment. We have been impressed with the footage we have seen of him."
As well as the playing side of Wasps, Mitchell also went out in the community. In December 2008 he took part in a visit to children at the Wexham Park Hospital giving out Christmas cards and presents.
In April 2009, Mitchell and the London Wasps team took part in The Rugby Club's 'Crossbar Challenge' on Sky Sports. Mitchell was the only player to successfully throw the rugby ball through the posts. He therefore went through to the head-to-head stage against Wales legend Scott Quinnell to see who could throw the ball the furthest. Quinnell scored 41 metres and Mitchell scored 41.2 metres, therefore meaning that he won the challenge.
Mitchell tore the anterior ligament in his right ankle whilst playing for the Western Sydney Rams in a match against Sydney Fleet.
On 4 October 2009, Mitchell was injured making a try-saving tackle in the Premiership match against Northampton Saints. Mitchell was knocked out cold before he landed on the ground and remained motionless as he was treated on the pitch for 10 minutes. Mitchell was stretchered off to hospital and was given the all clear - easing fears that he had sustained a broken neck.
Wasps director of rugby Tony Hanks commented after the game, "There aren't too many braver than Lachie," he said. "And that tackle he made at the end was a try-saving tackle and a big moment for us. It personifies what this team is about. Lachie's gone to hospital but he was awake when he left. We are hoping for the moment it's all precautionary but obviously, after a collision like that, you don't want to take any chances".
Team-mate Rob Webber commented,    Lachlan put his body on the line for his team with a fantastic tackle. It was a try-saver and probably a match-winner.   