The '''Obama logo''' was the flagship symbol of Barack Obama's presidential campaign.  The design became one of the most recognized political brand logos during the 2008 U.S. Presidential election, and is being used again for Obama's re-election campaign.
The logo was designed by Chicago-based Sender LLC (a brand development and design company) on assignment from Chicago-based mo/de (a motion design studio). The latter had been brought on board early on by David Axelrod, Obama   s chief campaign strategist, although it had never done a political identity before. Creative director Sol Sender, now an associate partner at VSA Partners, led the design team of three which included Amanda Gentry and Andy Keene. Project managers at mo/de were Colin Carter and Steve Juras. 
The final design was decided among  in the first round. "In terms of our internal process, though, I believe the logo     as we now know it     came out of a second round of design explorations. At any rate, it happened quite quickly, all things considered. The entire undertaking took less than two weeks."
The design began late in 2006 and the finished logo made its debut when Obama officially announced his candidacy for president February 10, 2007 in Springfield, Illinois.
John Slabyk and Scott Thomas, designers with the Obama campaign oversaw the customization of the logo for 12 different identity groups as well as for each state with 50 additional versions. There was also identity for Republicans and Independents supporting Barack Obama.
The reception of Obama's logo was generally positive, and in some circles, highly praised. The Boston Globe beamed that "the ever-present rising sun logo has the feeling of a hot new Internet company."
David Morrison, president of Philadelphia-based market research firm Twentysomething Inc., said the logo has "a nice, contemporary, dynamic, youthful vibe about it."  Designer Michael Bierut called Obama's branding "just as good or better"  as the best commercial brand designs. "Every time you look, all those signs are perfect," Beirut said. "Graphic designers like me don't understand how it's happening. It's unprecedented and inconceivable to us. The people in the know are flabbergasted."
On the other hand, cartoonist Ward Sutton asked, "is it a zero and a sunset over a deserted highway?" "Too many type styles and colors. The look is left undefined. The designer may have been too inexperienced," he added.
Some have noted the similarity of Obama's campaign logo to others, namely those of the City of Chandler, Arizona, the Taiwan Solidarity Union, and the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation.