Keller went to Carlingford High School, and then went on to study media and communications at Charles Sturt University (then called Mitchell College of Advanced Education) as a contemporary of Andrew Denton (among others). During her studies she was a broadcaster with on-campus community radio station 2MCE-FM.
Her first professional media job was in 1983 as a researcher for the popular children's television show, ''Simon Townsend's Wonder World!''  She later was a researcher and producer for ''Good Morning Australia'' when Gordon Elliott and Kerri-Anne Kennerly were hosts. By 1985 she was a researcher and producer for Ray Martin's ''Midday'' show where she first began to appear regularly on camera.
In 1987, she left ''Midday'' to appear in the pilot for Richard Neville's counter-culture programme ''Extra Dimensions'', which was produced by the same team that made ''Beyond 2000''. ''Extra Dimensions'' folded after the first season.  Keller's luck changed when she was signed to ''Beyond 2000'', the internationally popular science programme, where she won numerous media awards including the United Nations Media Peace Award in 1989, and the Michael Daley Award for Science Journalism.
In 1994, she joined her college friend Andrew Denton as a regular guest on his show ''Denton'', where she combined her scientific knowledge with her love of popular culture and kitsch - subsequently publishing a book, ''Amanda's Handy Home Hints''. When the series finished in 1995, she joined Denton at Sydney radio station Triple M where they co-presented the premier breakfast show. At the same time, she hosted her own contemporary culture show on cable television called ''The Hub''.
She is currently presenting morning radio on WSFM 101.7, with Brendan "Jonesy" Jones. As an established media personality, Keller has also made numerous appearances on various popular culture shows such as ''Good News Week'', ''Rove Live'', ''The Glasshouse'', ''20 to 1'', and ''Spicks and Specks''. She hosted her own kitsch and pop culture-centric program ''Mondo Thingo'' in 2004. In 2006, Keller appeared in Series Five of ''Dancing with the Stars'' where she progressed to the 5th round before being eliminated. In 2008 she starred in the SBS TV series ''Swift and Shift Couriers'' as Amanda Doyle, the Regional Manager. 
She is the current Baby Boomers team leader on Network Ten's quiz show ''Talkin' 'Bout Your Generation''.
She is the patron of  - a volunteer organisation which raises funds for The Sydney Children's Hospital, Randwick.
She is also a self-confessed passionate supporter of the Sydney Roosters rugby league team in the Australian National Rugby League.
She holds the world record for the longest underwater radio broadcast which took place on 28th of October 2010 when she and fellow WSFM breakfast show host Brendon 'Jonesy' Jones spent over 3 hours underwater at Sydney Aquarium.
Keller has a 9 year old son, Liam, who appeared on Talkin' 'Bout Your Generation in 2010.