There is a classical Chinese legend called    He Bo Xian Tu    about the ancient map.  It is said that in the time of    Dayu   s Taming of the Floods    (roughly during the Xia Dynasty), a river god gave Dayu a stone with a flood map etched upon its surface. Dayu used this map to hold back the flooding that threatened to devastate the rural agriculture.  Another account attributes Dayu's deeds as a marvelous feat of engineering.
In general, the development of early Chinese cartography experienced three phrases: primitive map, classical map, and survey map.  The primitive maps were simple maps, still steeped in myth and legend. It wasn't until the Han Dynasty that classical maps began to emerge.
The earliest reference of a map in China history can be found in Shiji, Volume 86,    Jingke Biography   . This was the event of 227 BC where Crown Prince Dan of Yan had his assassin Jing Ke visit the court of the ruler of the State of Qin, who would become Qin Shi Huang (r. 221   210 BC). Jing Ke was to present the ruler of Qin with a district map painted on a silk scroll, rolled up and held in a case where he hid his assassin's dagger.Needham, Volume 3, 534. Handing to him the map of the designated territory was the first diplomatic act of submitting that district to Qin rule. Instead he attempted to kill Qin, an assassination plot that failed. From then on maps are frequently mentioned in Chinese sources.Needham, Volume 3, 535.
The '''Han Dynasty''' (; 206 BC   220 AD) followed the Qin Dynasty and preceded the Three Kingdoms in China. The Han Dynasty was ruled by the prominent family known as the Liu clan. The reign of the Han Dynasty, lasting over 401 years, is commonly considered within China to be one of the greatest periods in the history of China. To this day, the ethnic majority of China still refer to themselves as the "Han people".
So far, the exact evidence of map is dated back from Han Dynasty, that is 168 BC ago. And from that time, there already had very exquisite map in ancient China. The three maps on the silk found at Mawangdui tumulus dated to the 2nd century BC in the Han Dynasty. These three maps are a topography map of Changsha region, a military map of southern Changsha and a prefecture map. 
The research of three maps indicate that China already had a very exact cartography skills in Han Dynasty. Although there have not map name, legend, scale and any other explanation, in the military map there already displayed the Hunan, Guangdong and Guangxi region and depict the political boundary between the Han Dynasty and Nanyue, where the region covered from 111  E to 112  30   E, and from 23  N to 26  N. And the map scale is about 1:180000. 
At the time of its discovery, they were the oldest maps discovered in China until 1986, when Qin Dynasty maps dating to the 4th century BC were found.
The '''Ming Dynasty''' (), or '''Empire of the Great Ming''' (), was the ruling dynasty of China from 1368 to 1644, following the collapse of the Mongol-led Yuan Dynasty.  The Ming was the last dynasty in China ruled by ethnic Hans (the main Chinese ethnic group), before falling to the rebellion led in part by Li Zicheng (         ) and soon after replaced by the Manchu-led Qing Dynasty. Although the Ming capital Beijing fell in 1644, remnants of the Ming throne and power (collectively called the '''Southern Ming''') survived until 1662.
The period from Yuan Dynasty to Ming Dynasty, which have more than 300 years, was a long time of feudal dynasty period in China history. During this period, Chinese cartography did not have too much important development, but became much more mature in traditional cartography skills and there had more types of map. Such as , national map of mountains and cities, military defense map, coast defense, river defense map for flood control and nautical chart for marine navigation. And the characters of these map are: Based on China district area, mathematical basis using traditional methods, concentrating on accuracy of rivers and hills.
In 1579, Luo Hongxian published the Guang Yutu atlas, including more than 40 maps, a grid system, and a systematic way of representing major landmarks such as mountains, rivers, roads and borders. The Guang Yutu incorporates the discoveries of naval explorer Zheng He's 15th century voyages along the coasts of China, Southeast Asia, India and Africa.
Among maps in Ming Dynasty, Zhenghe map chart was the most influenced nautical chart. Between 1405 and 1433, the Ming government sponsored Zhenghe a series of seven naval expeditions to visit countries in Asia, Africa, and beyond. Thus, the Zhenghe map was the important one in Chinese cartography history and a specific map for marine navigation. And it had some special characteristics in presentation content and method:
Ming Dynasty had a developed map making method. Especially in the late Ming Dynasty, when the western rising natural scientific technology was gradually spread to China by some western Boanerges, the cartography skill had much more development. And at that time, the world map drawing by western was firstly imported to China and add material and area of China in it, which have a great influence in Chinese traditional cartography.
It is one of the oldest surviving world maps from East Asia although the exact date of creation remains unknown. It depicts the general form of the Old World, placing China in the center and stretching northward to Mongolia, southward to Java, eastward to central Japan, and westward to Africa and Europe.
The Earth's curvature affects even the scale of the Chinese section of the map. Horizontally, it works out at about 1:820,000; but vertically it is around 1:1,060,000. The use of colour is particularly effective within China itself, including elegant touches like the ochre tint of the Huang He (Yellow River).
When the time of Emperor Kangxi   s reign in Qing Dynasty and because of import of western cartography skills, he realized Chinese map were not accurate enough and needed scientific methods to mapping. Thus he sponsored a national wide geodesy and mapping based on astronomical observation and triangulation measurement. It took ten years to complete the map named Huang Yu Quan Lan Tu from 1708 AD, which was the first on-the-spot survey map. It had 41 framings based on province boundary and have following characteristics:
Besides cartography, the unification of scale measurement and the field measurement of meridian of earth are both contributed to the development of cartography in Qing Dynasty and help to improve quality of maps in a great deal.