A personal aide to the U.S. Ambassador in France, James Reese (Jonathan Rhys Meyers) has an enviable life in Paris and a beautiful French girlfriend, but his real passion is his side job as a low-level operative for the CIA.  Reese wants to become a higher level agent with more responsibilities.  As the result of a shortage of agents in France, he is assigned as a partner to special agent Charlie Wax (John Travolta).
Reese's first test is to have Wax released from airport detention by the French Customs when Wax does not want to surrender the cans of his favorite energy drink.  Despite the apparent triviality of an energy drink that Wax could probably purchase in Paris, Wax continues to verbally abuse French Customs until Reese places a Diplomatic Mail sticker on Wax's luggage containing the energy drink, which makes them immune from Customs and Quarantine requirements.
Once in the car, Wax apologizes for his behavior while opening the tins and revealing the concealed pieces of his personal SIG Sauer, which he refers to as "Mrs. Jones".  Wax explains that he has been sent to Paris to investigate a drug ring at least indirectly responsible for the death of a woman happening to be a niece of the Secretary of Defense.  
During the investigation, Wax reveals that there was no overdose   their goal is to trace the money back to a circle of Pakistani terrorists.  Evidence leads them to the terrorists, resulting in an armed confrontation in which most of the terrorists are neutralized. Wax and Reese learn that the terrorists plan to infiltrate the U.S. Embassy with explosives hidden beneath their burkas. As they collect evidence, they find photographs of Agent Reese pinned to a wall. 
Ultimately, Reese learns that the terrorists are targeting a summit meeting. He discovers that his fiancee Caroline (Kasia Smutniak) is a "sleeper" agent assigned to live with him.  When Caroline is confronted she shoots Reese, hitting him in the shoulder, and escapes through a window. A green Volvo picks her up on the street below.
Caroline attempts to detonate an explosive vest while the last remaining terrorist attacks a US motorcade traveling to the summit by speeding toward them in that same green Volvo wired with explosives. Wax destroys the vehicle with an AT4 rocket launcher just in the nick of time.  Reese finds Caroline at the summit and attempts to dissuade her from carrying out her mission by professing his love. She attempts to detonate her vest anyway and forces Reese to shoot her through the forehead.  
As Wax leaves Paris, Reese escorts him to his plane.  Wax offers a full-time partnership. The two play a game of chess on the tarmac, placing their handguns on a utility cart, Reese revealing that he is now carrying a Desert Eagle pistol and earning another modicum of admiration from his new partner.
In the film, Charlie Wax (John Travolta) asks for a "Royal with Cheese;" clearly paying homage to Quentin Tarantino's film "Pulp Fiction" during which Travolta's character "Vincent Vega" declares that in France a Quarter-Pounder with cheese is known as "Royal with Cheese." This occurs at the 8 minute mark of "Pulp Fiction."
The film has received mixed reviews from different critics. The film holds a 'Rotten' rating of 37% on Rotten Tomatoes with the consensus being 'Though not without its charms   chief among them John Travolta's endearingly over-the-top performance   From Paris with Love is too muddled and disjointed to satisfy.' Rolling Stone gave one star out of four, stating, 'From Paris With Love has no vital signs at all, just crushing dull repetition that makes one noisy, violent scene play exactly like the last one.'
The film opened in the US on February 5, 2010 and took $8,158,860 on its opening weekend, ranked #3 in the charts in 2,722 theaters. The movie was open in the US from February 5, 2010 until March 11, 2010, a total of 5 weeks. Its final US domestic gross was $24,077,427. It also took just over $28m internationally for a worldwide total of $52,365,407- just grossing back its $52m budget. In July 2010 ''Parade Magazine'' listed the film as the #4 on its list of "Biggest Box Office Flops of 2010 (So Far)."
The movie was released on DVD in the US on 8 June 2010 and has so far sold 624,791 units for a gross of $11,085,323
In an interview with Celebrity Examiner, Luc Besson commented that he would love to see From Paris With Love turn into a franchise with sequels.
Travolta said in an interview with The Star Ledger: