Froman received a bachelor's degree in Public and International Affairs from the Woodrow Wilson School of Princeton University in 1985, a doctorate in International Relations from Oxford University and a law degree from Harvard Law School where he was a classmate of Barack Obama, and also an associate of Obama's on the ''Harvard Law Review''. by Jodi Kantor, ''The New York Times'', Nov. 19, 2008. Retrieved 2-18-09./
Prior to joining the Obama Administration, Froman was Managing Director at Citigroup, where he managed infrastructure and sustainable development investments. He also served as President and Chief Executive Officer of CitiInsurance, head of Emerging Markets Strategy at Citigroup and a Fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations. A UNDP initiative. He also spent much of his career within the United States Department of the Treasury, where he served as Chief of Staff between January 1997 and July 1999, having previously held the role of Treasury Deputy Assistant Secretary for Eurasia and the Middle East. As Deputy Assistant Secretary his work related to economic policy towards the former Soviet Union and Central and Eastern Europe, as well as economic components of the Dayton Accords. Between January 1993 and December 1995, Froman was director for International Economic Affairs on the National Economic Council and the National Security Council.
Froman and Obama were not in touch after their time at Harvard until Obama's Senate run when Froman volunteered to advise Obama on policy and introduced Obama to Robert Rubin, whom Froman had followed from the Treasury Department to Citigroup after the Clinton administration. He also served on 12-member advisory board of the Obama campaign   s transition team.
Prior to his work in the Federal government Froman served as liaison of the American Bar Association's Central and East European Law Initiative (CEELI) legal assistance program in Albania. He was also a member of the Forward Studies Unit of the European Commission in Brussels. He lived in NYC with his wife, Nancy Goodman.
He has one son, Benjamin Froman and a daughter, Sarah Froman.  His older son, Jacob Froman, died in 2009 at age 10 from medulloblastoma, a rare form of pediatric brain cancer.