Genachowski grew up in Great Neck, New York.  He attended yeshiva and studied in Israel.  He entered Columbia College of Columbia University as a pre-med student, but earned a Bachelor of Arts in History (1985) ''magna cum laude''. He was an Editor of the ''Columbia Daily Spectator''. After a working in Washington, D.C. for then New York Congressman Chuck Schumer, he entered  Harvard Law School and earned a Juris Doctor (1991), also ''magna cum laude''.  He was a Notes Editor at the ''Harvard Law Review'' when his classmate Barack Obama was its president.  Genachowski clerked for The Honorable Abner J. Mikva on the U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit and then for Justices William J. Brennan and David Souter at the U.S. Supreme Court.
Genachowski was on the staffs of the Select Committee investigating the Iran-Contra Affair and  then U.S. Representative Chuck Schumer. In 1994 FCC Chairman Reed Hundt hired him as a senior legal advisor; he was chief counsel 1996-1997.
He was Chief of Business Operations and a member of Barry Diller's Office of the Chairperson at IAC/InterActiveCorp and executive responsible for the creation of Fox Broadcasting Company and USA Broadcasting. He earned at least $USD2.5 million when Vivendi acquired Universal assets in 2003.  He had previously served on the Boards of Directors of Expedia, Hotels.com, and Ticketmaster.
Genachowski is a co-founder of LaunchBox Digital and Rock Creek Ventures;
He serves on the Board of Common Sense Media, a leading organization seeking to improve the media lives of children and families and the Advisory Board of Environmental Entrepreneurs (E2).  He also recently helped found the New Resource Bank, the country   s first commercial green bank.
For Senator Barack Obama's 2008 Presidential Campaign, Genachowski was Chairperson of the Technology, Media and Telecommunications Policy Working Group, which created the Obama Technology and Innovation Plan.
After the November election, he co-led the Technology, Innovation, and Government Reform Group for President-Elect Obama's Transition Team.
Initially, Chairman Genachowski promised to rein in companies restricting what people can do on their Internet lines, setting a new tone for the agency.
Genachowski's departure from the FCC seemed a possibility in early 2011, possibly to some other federal post.
His parents are Eastern European Jews who survived the Holocaust.