During the 109th Congress, then-Senator Obama voted against both of President George W. Bush's nominees to the Supreme Court.  In a speech announcing his opposition to John Roberts, Obama stated:
In explaining his opposition to Samuel Alito, Obama further evaluated the qualities he found important in a Supreme Court justice:
In a speech on July 17, 2007, before the Planned Parenthood Action Fund, he elaborated even more:
In November 2007, Obama was asked about the kind of justices he would appoint to the Supreme Court. He responded:
Later in March 2008, while on the campaign trail in Ohio, Obama again addressed the traits he would look for in a Supreme Court justice, suggesting he might leaven legal scholarship with practical political experience. He held up Earl Warren, a former governor of California who later became Chief Justice, as an example. Mr. Warren, he said, had had the wisdom to recognize that segregation was wrong less because of precise sociological effects and more so because it was immoral and stigmatized blacks:
Later, however, Obama seemed to step away from the example of Warren. In an interview with the editorial board of the ''Detroit Free Press'' on October 2, 2008, Obama said:
Instead, Obama mentioned then current justices David Souter and Stephen Breyer as examples of people he would like to nominate to the Supreme Court in the future:
I think that Justice Souter, who was a Republican appointee, Justice Breyer, a Democratic appointee, are very sensible judges. They take a look at the facts and they try to figure out: How does the Constitution apply to these facts? They believe in fidelity to the text of the Constitution, but they also think you have to look at what is going on around you and not just ignore real life.
That, I think is the kind of justice that I   m looking for     somebody who respects the law, doesn   t think that they should be making law ... but also has a sense of what   s happening in the real world and recognizes that one of the roles of the courts is to protect people who don   t have a voice.}}
In the third and final presidential debate with Republican nominee John McCain on October 15, 2008, Obama also implied that he would look for a Supreme Court nominee with previous judicial experience:
Demographic considerations have played into the appointment of Supreme Court justices since the institution was established. Starting in the twentieth century, these concerns shifted from geographic representation to issues of gender and ethnicity.Jeffrey Toobin, , ''The New Yorker'', (June 8, 2009).
Prior to the 2008 presidential election, many court watchers suggested that the next president would be under significant pressure to appoint another woman or ethnic minority to the court.Greg Stohr, , ''Bloomberg'' (July 15, 2008).Jeffrey Rosen, , ''The New Republic'' (March 12, 2008). The case for naming more women was particularly widespread given the recent retirement of Sandra Day O'Connor and the rapidly changing demographics of the legal community, with women now accounting for about a fifth of all law partners and law school deans, a quarter of the federal bench, and nearly half of all law school graduates.Charlie Savage, , ''The New York Times'' (May 1, 2009). Shortly before the election, for example, NPR reported, "Most observers of the Supreme Court agree about one thing: The next nominee is likely to be a woman".Nina Totenberg, , ''National Public Radio'' (November 2, 2008). Furthermore, after Obama's presidential election victory, Hispanic legal interests groups such as the Hispanic National Bar Association began urging Obama to nominate a Hispanic justice.Tony Mauro, , ''Legal Times'' (December 1, 2008).
Given the relative youth of the most recent Republican appointments, it was also noted that Democrats had, "a strong incentive to pick younger justices this time around". Age proved to be an important consideration for Obama, who was "looking for a justice who will be an intellectual force on the court for many years to come".Bill Mears, , ''CNN'' (May 13, 2009). As a result, Obama did not seriously consider candidates such as Jose Cabranes, Amalya Kearse, Diana Gribbon Motz, David Tatel, and Laurence Tribe, all of whom he respected but were older than 65 when Obama was looking to replace David Souter.
With the retirement announcement by Justice Stevens, some commentators directed focus on the religious make-up of the court.  Upon Justice Stevens' retirement, the Court would lack a Protestant member, marking the first time in its history that it will be exclusively composed of Jewish and Catholic Justices.Nina Totenberg, "Supreme Court May Soon Lack Protestant Justices," NPR, ''Heard on Morning Edition'', April 7, 2010, found at  and transcript found at . Cited by Sarah Pulliam Bailey, "The Post-Protestant Supreme Court: Christians weigh in on whether it matters that the high court will likely lack Protestant representation," ''Christianity Today'', April 10, 2010, found at . Also cited by "Does the U.S. Supreme Court need another Protestant?" ''USA Today'', April 9, 2010, found at . All accessed April 10, 2010.
On May 26, 2009, Obama announced Second Circuit appeals court judge Sonia Sotomayor as his choice to replace retiring Associate Justice David H. Souter. Sotomayor's nomination was formally submitted to the United States Senate on June 1, 2009, when the 111th Congress reconvened after its Memorial Day recess. Sotomayor was confirmed by the Senate on August 6, 2009, by a vote of 68-31,Charlie Savage, , ''The New York Times'' (August 6, 2009). and was sworn in as an Associate Justice on August 8, 2009.Greg Storh, , ''Bloomberg'' (August 8, 2009).
Long before the election of President Obama, Associate Justice David H. Souter had expressed a desire to leave Washington, D.C., and return to his native New Hampshire.Robert Barnes, , ''Washington Post'' (May 1, 2009).  The election of a Democratic president in 2008 made Souter more inclined to retire, but he did not want to create a situation in which there would be multiple vacancies at once. Souter apparently became satisfied that no other justices planned to retire at the end of the Supreme Court's term in June 2009. As a result, in mid-April 2009 he privately notified the White House of his intent to retire from the Supreme Court at the conclusion of its business for that term. Souter formally submitted a resignation letter to Obama on May 1, who later that day made an unscheduled appearance during the daily White House press briefing to publicly announce Souter's retirement.
Obama began the process of identifying potential Supreme Court nominees shortly after his election in 2008, before a Supreme Court vacancy was actually known. White House Counsel Greg Craig helped assemble an early list of possible names. Once the White House had learned of Souter's plans to retire, two members of the Vice President's staff, Chief of Staff Ron Klain and Counsel Cynthia Hogan, ran the daily operations of the selection process.
Within a week of Souter's announcement the White House had formalized its short list of candidates to replace Souter, with Judge Sonia Sotomayor of the Second Circuit, Judge Diane Pamela Wood of the Seventh Circuit, and Solicitor General Elena Kagan reportedly leading contenders for the nomination.Jan Crawford Greenburg, , ''ABC News'' (May 7, 2009). Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano, California Supreme Court Justice Carlos Moreno, and Michigan Governor Jennifer Granholm were also reportedly on the short list of candidates under serious consideration by the White House.Ben Feller, , ''Associated Press'' (May 15, 2009). Chief Justice Leah Ward Sears of the Georgia Supreme Court, Judge Merrick B. Garland of the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit, and Judge Ruben Castillo of the Federal District Court for the Northern District in Illinois were also on the final list of nine candidates.
Obama had not interviewed any of the candidates before May 18,Associated Press,  (May 19, 2009). but that week saw a flurry of activity and speculation surrounding possible interviews of candidates. Jennifer Granholm attended a CAFE standards meeting at the White House on May 19 and spoke with Obama, but officials would not comment on whether the two discussed a potential court appointment. On May 20, Diane Wood and Elena Kagan attended a conference on judicial independence at Georgetown University hosted by retired Associate Justice Sandra Day O'Connor.Edwin Chen and Greg Stohr, , ''Bloomberg'' (May 20, 2009). Ultimately, Obama winnowed his list to four individuals, all of them women: Sotomayor, Wood, Kagan, and Napolitano.Peter Baker, , ''The New York Times'' (May 25, 2009). Obama conducted hour-long one-on-one interviews with the four finalists, meeting with Wood and Kagan on May 19, and Sotomayor and Napolitano on May 21.Peter Baker and Jeff Zeleny, , ''The New York Times'' (May 26, 2009). Vice President Joe Biden also interviewed the four finalists.
Obama telephoned Judge Sotomayor at 9 p.m. EST on May 25 to alert her that she was his choice. Later that night, he called the other three finalists and informed them of his decision. Obama announced the nomination the next morning in the East Room of the White House in a press conference alongside Sotomayor and Joe Biden.
On May 10, 2010, Obama nominated Elena Kagan, the Solicitor General of the United States, to replace retiring Associate Justice John Paul Stevens.
Before the announcement, the White House had been preparing for another possible Supreme Court vacancy, with White House Press Secretary Robert Gibbs responding to speculation about a possible Stevens retirement by saying "We'll be ready."Associated Press, , (April 5, 2010).  After Stevens announced his retirement, an anonymous White House official said that about ten people were under consideration. The leading contenders to replace Stevens were said to include Seventh Circuit Judge Diane Pamela Wood and Solicitor General Elena Kagan, both of whom were interviewed for the David Souter vacancy, and D.C. Circuit Judge Merrick B. Garland, who was also considered for the Souter vacancy.  Others mentioned include Ninth Circuit Judge Sidney Runyan Thomas, former Georgia Chief Justice Leah Ward Sears, Michigan Governor Jennifer Granholm and Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano.Ben Feller, , ''Associated Press'' (April 12, 2010).
Early in April 2010, Obama conducted a White House interview with Merrick Garland. On April 29, 2010, Obama and Vice President Joe Biden each met separately with Sidney Thomas at the White House to discuss the vacancy.Ben Feller, , ''Associated Press'' (April 30, 2010). Elena Kagan was interviewed the following day,, ''Fox News'' (May 1, 2010). and Diane Wood the following week on May 4.Ben Feller, , ''Associated Press'' (May 4, 2010).
Following is a list of individuals who have been mentioned in various news accounts as the most likely potential nominees for a Supreme Court appointment under Obama: