Development for a ''Planet of the Apes'' remake started as far back as 1988 with Adam Rifkin. His project nearly reached the pre-production stage before being canceled. Terry Hayes's script, titled ''Return of the Apes'', would have starred Arnold Schwarzenegger, under the direction of Phillip Noyce. Oliver Stone, Don Murphy, and Jane Hamsher were set to produce. Creative differences ensued between Hayes and financier/distributor 20th Century Fox. Chris Columbus, Sam Hamm, James Cameron, Peter Jackson, and the Hughes Brothers later became involved.
With William Broyles, Jr.'s script, Tim Burton was hired as director, and the film was put into active development. Lawrence Konner and Mark Rosenthal rewrote the script, and filming took place from November 2000 to April 2001. ''Planet of the Apes'' was released to mixed reviews, but was a financial success. Much criticism focused on the confusing ending, although Rick Baker's prosthetic makeup designs were praised. Despite its financial success, Fox chose not to produce a sequel, but has decided to reboot the ''Apes'' franchise altogether with ''Rise of the Planet of the Apes''.
In the year 2029, aboard the United States Air Force space station ''Oberon'', Leo Davidson (Mark Wahlberg) works closely with primates who are trained for space missions. His favorite simian co-worker is a chimpanzee named Pericles. With a deadly electromagnetic storm approaching the station, a small space pod piloted by Pericles is used to probe the storm. Pericles' pod heads into the storm and disappears. Against his commanding officer's orders, Leo takes a second pod and goes in pursuit of Pericles. Entering the storm, Leo loses contact with the ''Oberon'' and crashes on a planet in the year 3002. He discovers that the world is ruled by humanoid apes who can speak human language and treat human beings as slaves. 
Leo comes across a female chimpanzee named Ari (Helena Bonham Carter), who protests the awful treatment humans receive. Ari decides to buy Leo and a female slave named Daena (Estella Warren) to have them work as servants in the house of her father, Senator Sandar (David Warner). Leo escapes his cage and frees other humans. Ari sees them, but Leo manages to convince Ari to join their cause. Leo forms a human rebellion against the apes and develops a love triangle with Ari and Daena. General Thade (Tim Roth) and Colonel Attar (Michael Clarke Duncan) march ape warriors in pursuit of the humans. Leo discovers Calima (the temple of "Semos"), a forbidden but holy site for the apes. 
Calima turns out to be the remains of the ''Oberon'', his former space station, which has crashed on the planet's surface and looks ancient (the name Calima coming from the sign "'''CA'''ution '''LI'''ve ani'''MA'''ls", the relevant letters being the only ones not covered in dust). According to the computer logs, the station has been there for thousands of years. Leo deduces that when he entered the vortex he was pushed forward in time, while the ''Oberon'', searching after him, was not, crashing on the planet long before he did.
The ''Oberon''s log reveals that the apes on board, led by Semos, organized a mutiny and took control of the vessel after it crashed. The human and ape survivors of the struggle left the ship and their descendants are the people Leo has encountered since landing. A battle ensues between the humans and the apes. A familiar vehicle descends from the sky and is identified immediately by Leo. It is the pod piloted by Pericles, the chimp astronaut. Pericles was pushed forward in time as Leo was, and had just now found his way to the planet. When Pericles lands, the apes interpret his landing as the return arrival of Semos, the first ape, who is their god. They bow, and hostilities between humans and apes disappear.
General Thade chases Leo into the ''Oberon'', where he attacks Pericles and breaks his leg. Thade becomes trapped in the pilot's deck and is last seen huddled under a control panel, still alive. Leo decides it is time for him to leave the Planet of the Apes, after he says goodbye to Ari and kisses Daena. Leo climbs aboard Pericles's undamaged pod and uses it to travel back in time through the same electromagnetic storm. Leo crashes in what appears to be Washington, D.C. on Earth in his own time. He looks up to see the Lincoln Memorial is now a monument in honor of General Thade. A swarm of ape police officers, firefighters, and news reporters descend on the confused Leo, who is left to wonder what Thade has done to this world.
Small roles include David Warner (Senator Sandar), Lisa Marie (Nova), Erick Avari (Tival), Luke Eberl (Birn), Evan Parke (Gunnar), Glenn Shadix (Senator Nado), Freda Foh Shen (Bon) and Chris Ellis (Lt. Gen. Karl Vasich).
Charlton Heston, who portrayed the lead role in the original film, makes a cameo appearance as Thade's father. Roth admitted he was "not comfortable" appearing opposite Heston, then president of the National Rifle Association. "I come from the exact opposite end of the political spectrum. Burton had to persuade me to do it. Finally, I decided that it was okay because it's fiction." Heston had no problem with his brief scene even though it highlights the perceived violent nature of firearms, says producer Richard D. Zanuck. "I was apprehensive when we wrote the scene and sent it to him. We didn't hear back from him for a while. Finally, I called him up and asked him what he thought of the lines. He said, 'Oh yeah, I think they're wonderful.' I thought, 'Oh, thank God, we got away with the gun'."
20th Century Fox president Craig Baumgarten was impressed with Adam Rifkin's filmmaking with ''Never on Tuesday''. In 1988, Rifkin was brought in the studio to pitch ideas for films. Rifkin, being a fan of the 1968 ''Planet of the Apes'' felt it was best to continue the film series. "Having independent film experience, I promised I could write and direct a huge-looking film for a reasonable price and budget, like ''Aliens''." Fox commissioned Rifkin to write what amounted to a sequel, "but not a sequel to the fifth film, an alternate sequel to the first film." He took influences from ''Spartacus'', with the storyline being "the ape empire had reached its Roman era. A descendant of Charlton Heston's character would eventually lead a human slave revolt against the oppressive Roman-esque apes. A real Sword and sandal spectacular, monkey style. ''Gladiator'' did the same movie without the ape costumes."
The project was put on fast track and almost entered pre-production. Rick Baker was hired to design the prosthetic makeup with Danny Elfman composing the film score. Tom Cruise and Charlie Sheen were in contention for the lead role. "I can't accurately describe in words the utter euphoria I felt knowing that I, Adam Rifkin, was going to be resurrecting the ''Planet of the Apes''. It all seemed too good to be true. I soon found out it was." Days before the film was to commence pre-production, new studio executives arrived at Fox, which caused creative differences between Rifkin and the studio. Rifkin was commissioned to rewrite the script through various drafts. The project was abandoned until Peter Jackson and Fran Walsh pitched their own idea, with the apes going through a renaissance. In the story, the ape government becomes concerned over the new art works, the humans are revolting and the liberal apes shelter a half-human, half-ape from the Gorillas. Roddy McDowall was enthusiastic about their proposal and agreed to play the Leonardo da Vinci type character they had written for him. However, the executive Jackson spoke to was not a fan of the series and seemingly unaware of McDowall's involvement in the series, and Jackson turned his attention back to ''Heavenly Creatures''.
 On the storyline, Stone explained in December 1993, "It has the discovery of cryogenically frozen Vedic Apes who hold the secret numeric codes to the Bible that foretold the end of civilizations. It deals with past versus the future. My concept is that there's a code inscribed in the Bible that predicts all historical events. The apes were there at the beginning and figured it all out."
Stone brought Terry Hayes to write the screenplay entitled ''Return of the Apes''. Set in the near future, a plague is making humans extinct. Geneticist Will Robinson discovers the plague is a genetic time bomb embedded in the Stone Age. He time travels with a pregnant colleague named Billie Rae Diamond to a time when Palaeolithic humans were at war for the future of the planet with highly-evolved apes. Robinson and Billie Rae discover a young human girl named Aiv (pronounced Eve) to be the next step in evolution. They protect her from the virus, thus ensuring the survival of the human race 102,000 years later. Billie Rae gives birth to a baby boy named Adam.
Fox president Peter Chernin called ''Return of the Apes'' "one of the best scripts I ever read". Chernin was hoping Hayes' script would create a franchise that included sequels, spin-off television shows and merchandise. In March 1994, Arnold Schwarzenegger signed on as Will Robinson with the condition he had approval of director. Chuck Russell was considered as a possible director before Phillip Noyce was hired in January 1995, while pre-production was nearly commencing with a $100 million budget. Stone first approached Rick Baker, who worked on Adam Rifkin's failed remake, to design the prosthetic makeup, but eventually hired Stan Winston.
Fox became frustrated by the distance between their approach and Hayes' interpretation of Stone's ideas, as producer Don Murphy put it, "Terry wrote a ''Terminator'' and Fox wanted ''The Flintstones''". Fox studio executive Dylan Sellers felt the script could be improved by comedy. "What if Robinson finds himself in Ape land and the Apes are trying to play baseball? But they're missing one element, like the pitcher or something." Sellers continued. "Robinson knows what they're missing and he shows them, and they all start playing." Sellers refused to give up his baseball scene, and when Hayes turned in the next script, sans baseball, Sellers fired him. Dissatisfied with Sellers' decision to fire Hayes, Noyce left ''Return of the Apes'' in February 1995 to work on ''The Saint''.
Oliver Stone pursued other films of his own, Peter Chernin was replaced by Thomas Rothman, and a drunken Dylan Sellers crashed his car, killing a much-loved colleague and earning jail time, while producers Don Murphy and Jane Hamsher were paid off. "After they got rid of us, they brought on Chris Columbus," Murphy stated. "Then I heard they did tests of apes skiing, which didn't make much sense."Hughes, p.41-43 Stan Winston was still working on the makeup designs. Columbus brought Sam Hamm, his co-writer on an unproduced ''Fantastic Four'' script, to write the screenplay. "We tried to do a story that was simultaneously a homage to the elements we liked from the five films, and would also incorporate a lot of material  that had been jettisoned from the earlier production," Hamm continued. "The first half of the script bore little resemblance to the book, but a lot of the stuff in the second half comes directly from it, or directly inspired by it."
Hamm's script had an ape astronaut from another planet crash-landing in New York harbor, launching a virus that will make human beings extinct. Dr. Susan Landis, who works for the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and Alexander Troy, an Area 51 scientist, use the ape's spacecraft to return to the virus' planet of origin, hoping to find an antidote. They find an urban environment where apes armed with heavy weapons hunt humans. Landis and Troy discover the antidote and return to Earth, only to find in their 74-year absence that apes have taken over the planet. "The Statue of Liberty's once proud porcelain features have been crudely chiseled into the grotesque likeness of a great grinning ape".
Arnold Schwarzenegger remained attached, but Fox had mixed emotions with Hamm's script. When Columbus dropped out in late-1995 to work on ''Jingle All the Way'', Fox offered the director's position to Roland Emmerich in January 1996. James Cameron was in talks during the filming of ''Titanic'' as writer and producer. Cameron's version would have drawn elements from the original film and its sequel ''Beneath the Planet of the Apes''. After the financial and critical success of ''Titanic'', Cameron dropped out. After learning about his previous involvement, Chernin and Rothman met with Peter Jackson to learn about his original renaissance idea. Jackson turned down directing the film with Schwarzenegger and Cameron as his producer, recognizing they would probably conflict over the direction. Schwarzenegger left to work on ''Eraser''. Michael Bay then turned down the director's position. Jackson again turned down the project while facing the possible cancellation of ''The Lord of the Rings'' in 1998, because he was unenthusiastic following Roddy McDowall's death. In mid-1999, the Hughes brothers were interested in directing but were committed to ''From Hell''.
In 1999, William Broyles, Jr. turned down the chance to write the script, but decided to sign on "when I found out I could have an extensive amount of creative control". Fox projected the release date for July 2001, while Broyles sent the studio an outline and a chronicle of the fictional planet "Aschlar". Entitled ''The Visitor'' and billed as "episode one in the Chronicles of Aschlar", Broyles' script caught the attention of director Tim Burton, who was hired in February 2000. "I wasn't interested in doing a remake or a sequel of the original ''Planet of the Apes'' film," Burton said later. "But I was intrigued by the idea of revisiting that world. Like a lot of people, I was affected by the original film. I wanted to do a 're-imagining'."Hughes, p.44-46 Richard D. Zanuck signed on as producer in March. "This is a very emotional film for me. I greenlighted the original ''Apes'' when I was the head of Fox in 1967."
Under Burton's direction, Broyles wrote another draft, but his script was projected at a $200 million budget. Fox wanted to cut it to $100 million. In August 2000, two months before principal photography, Fox brought Lawrence Konner and Mark Rosenthal for rewrites. Broyles "had a lot of respect with the work they  did. And to think that given what I'd done and given what Tim wanted, they navigated the right course." One of the considered endings had Leo Davidson crash-landing at Yankee Stadium, witnessing apes playing baseball. Various alternatives were considered before the filmmakers decided on the final one. The production of ''Planet of the Apes'' was a difficult experience for Burton. This was largely contributed by Fox's adamant release date (July 2001), which meant that everything from pre-production to editing and visual effects work was rushed.
Konner and Rosenthal were rewriting the script even as sets were being constructed. Ari, Helena Bonham Carter's character, was originally a princess. She was changed to "a Senator's daughter with a liberal mentality". One of the drafts had General Thade, Tim Roth's character, as an albino gorilla, but Burton felt Chimpanzees were more frightening.Tim Burton, DVD audio commentary, 2001, 20th Century Fox Limbo, Paul Giamatti's character "was supposed to turn into a good guy. There was supposed to be this touching personal growth thing at the end," Giamatti reflected. "But Tim  and I both thought that was kind of lame so we decided to just leave him as a jerk into the end."
Burton wanted to begin filming in October 2000, but it was pushed back to November 6, 2000 and ended in April 2001. Filming for ''Planet of the Apes'' began at Lake Powell, where parts of the original film were shot. Due to a local drought, production crews had to pump in extra water. The film was mostly shot at Sony Pictures Studios in Culver City, California, while other filming locations included lava plains in Hawaii and Trona Pinnacles at Ridgecrest. To preserve secrecy, the shooting script did not include the ending. Stan Winston was the original makeup designer but left because of creative differences. Fox considered using computer-generated imagery to create the apes, but Burton insisted on using prosthetic makeup designed by Rick Baker. Baker was previously involved with Adam Rifkin's unproduced remake. Burton commented, "I have a relationship with both of them , so that decision was hard," he says. "Stan worked on ''Edward Scissorhands'' and Baker did Martin Landau's makeup .
On his hiring, Baker explained, "I did the Dino De Laurentiis version of ''King Kong'' in 1976 and was always disappointed because I wasn't able to do it as realistically as I wanted. I thought ''Apes'' would be a good way to make up for that." In addition to ''King Kong'', Baker previously worked with designing ape makeup on '' '', '' '', and ''Mighty Joe Young''. The makeup took 4.5 hours to apply and 1.5 hours to remove. Burton explained, "it's like going to the dentist at two in the morning and having people poke at you for hours. Then you wear an ape costume until nine at night."Salisbury, Burton, p.191-202 Burton was adamant that the apes should be substantially "more animal-like; flying through trees, climb walls, swing out of windows, and go ape shit when angry." For a month and a half before shooting started, the actors who portrayed apes attended "ape school". Industrial Light & Magic, Rhythm and Hues Studios and Animal Logic were commissioned for the visual effects sequences. Rick Heinrichs served as the production designer and Colleen Atwood did costume design.
To compose the film score, Burton hired regular collaborator Danny Elfman. Elfman had previously been set as composer when Adam Rifkin was to do his remake in 1989. Elfman noted that his work on ''Planet of the Apes'' contained more percussion instruments than usual.
To help market ''Planet of the Apes,'' Fox commissioned an Internet marketing campaign that also involved geocaching. Hasbro released a toy line, while Dark Horse Comics published a comic book adaptation. Fox Interactive worked on a video game adaptation, but it was never finished for release. The original release date for the film was July 4, 2001. ''Planet of the Apes'' was released on July 27, 2001 in 3,500 theaters across North America, earning $68,532,960 in its opening weekend. This was the second-highest opening weekend of 2001, behind ''Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's Stone''. The film went on to gross $180,011,740 in North America and $182,200,000 elsewhere, for a worldwide total of $362,211,740. ''Planet of the Apes'' was the tenth-highest grossing film in North America, and 104-highest worldwide, of 2001. As of 2009, the film is the third-highest grossing science fiction remake, behind ''War of the Worlds'' and ''I Am Legend''.
Based on 155 reviews collected by ''Rotten Tomatoes'', 45% of the critics enjoyed ''Planet of the Apes''. The film fared more poorly in ''Rotten Tomatoes''' "Top Critics" poll, holding a 29% approval rating, based on 7 reviews. By comparison, ''Metacritic'' calculated an average score of 50 out of 34 reviews. Prominent critic Roger Ebert praised the ending, but felt the film lacked a balanced story structure. "The movie is great-looking. Rick Baker's makeup is convincing even in the extreme closeups, and his apes sparkle with personality and presence. The sets and locations give us a proper sense of alien awe," Ebert continued. "Tim Burton made a film that's respectful to the original, and respectable in itself, but that's not enough. Ten years from now, it will be the 1968 version that people are still renting." Peter Travers of ''Rolling Stone'' also gave a mixed review. "Call it a letdown, worsened by the forces of shoddy screenwriting. To quote Heston in both films, 'Damn them, damn them all'."
Kenneth Turan of the ''Los Angeles Times'' believed "the actors in the nonhuman roles are mostly too buried by makeup to make strong impressions. Unfortunately, none of the good work counts as much as you'd think it would," Turan said. "''Planet of the Apes'' shows that taking material too seriously can be as much of a handicap as not taking it seriously at all." Elvis Mitchell gave a more favorable review, feeling the script was balanced and the film served its purpose as "pure entertainment". Susan Wloszczyna of ''USA Today'' enjoyed ''Planet of the Apes'', feeling most of the credit should go to prosthetic makeup designer Rick Baker.
Much criticism was leveled against the ambiguous ending. Tim Roth, who portrayed General Thade, said "I cannot explain that ending. I have seen it twice and I don't understand anything." Helena Bonham Carter, who played Ari, said, "I thought it made sense, kind of. I don't understand why everyone went, 'Huh?' It's all a time warp thing. He's gone back and he realizes Thade's beat him there." Burton claimed the ending was not supposed to make any sense, but it was more of a cliffhanger to be explained in a possible sequel. "It was a reasonable cliffhanger that could be used in case Fox or another filmmaker wanted to do another movie," he explained.
The film was nominated for two BAFTA Awards, one for Best Make-up held by Rick Baker, the other for Best Costume Design. Roth (Supporting Actor), Carter (Supporting Actress), Colleen Atwood (Costume), and Rick Baker (Make-up) received nominations at the Saturn Awards. Atwood and Baker were nominated at the 55th British Academy Film Awards. while music composer Danny Elfman was nominated for his work at the 43rd Grammy Awards. ''Planet of the Apes'' won Worst Remake at the 22nd Golden Raspberry Awards, while Heston (Worst Supporting Actor) and Estella Warren (Worst Supporting Actress) also won awards.
 Paul Giamatti had been interested in reprising his role. "I think it'd be great to have apes driving cars, smoking cigars", Giamatti continued "wearing glasses, sitting in a board room, stuff like that". ''Planet of the Apes'' was the last film Burton worked with his former fiancee Lisa Marie. After their relationship broke up, Burton started a relationship with Helena Bonham Carter, who portrayed Ari. ''Planet of the Apes'' was also Burton's first collaboration with producer Richard D. Zanuck.