The '''2008 United States presidential election in Wisconsin''' took place on November 4, 2008 throughout all 50 states and D.C., which was part of the 2008 United States presidential election. Voters chose 10 representatives, or electors to the Electoral College, who voted for President and Vice President.
Wisconsin was won by Democratic nominee Barack Obama by a 13.9% margin of victory. Prior to the election, all 17 news organizations considered this a state Obama would win, or otherwise considered as a safe blue state, despite the extremely close margins of victory in the past two presidential elections. Polling throughout the state began to show a sizable and widening lead for Democrat Barack Obama of neighboring Illinois over Republican John McCain of Arizona. Obama carried Wisconsin with over 56% of the vote, significantly improving upon John Kerry's margin of victory in 2004.
There were 17 news organizations who made state by state predictions of the election. Here are there last predictions before election day:
Pre-election polling early on showed a tight race. Since May 18, Obama swept every single poll. Since September 21, Obama won every poll with at least 49% of the vote. The final 3 polls averaged Obama leading 53% to 40%.
John McCain raised a total of $1,728,185 in the state. Barack Obama raised $4,862,486.
Obama and his interest groups spent $13,586,634. McCain and his interest groups spent $9,240,899. Each ticket visited the state 7 times.
Having voted for the Democratic presidential nominees by extremely narrow margins in 2000 and 2004, Wisconsin was originally considered to be a swing state in 2008. However, Obama took a wide lead in the polls in Wisconsin near the final weeks before the election and many pundits and news organizations labeled the state as a safe blue state.
On Election Day, Obama won Wisconsin by a comfortable 13.91-percent margin of victory. Obama carried the heavily Democratic cities of Milwaukee and Madison by large margins, winning above two-thirds of the vote, along with some traditionally Republican cities like Green Bay and Appleton. This was consistent with Obama's pattern of strong performances in the states bordering Illinois. The state's Republican base essentially melted; John McCain only carried 13 of the state's 72 counties. McCain did best in the Milwaukee suburbs like Waukesha and Ozaukee counties. The election confirmed Wisconsin's status as a Democratic-leaning Midwestern state; the last time Wisconsin voted for a Republican presidential nominee was in 1984 when Ronald Reagan carried the Badger State in his landslide reelection.  A Democrat can lose most of the rest of the state and still carry it by running up the votes in Milwaukee and Madison, as John Kerry demonstrated in 2004.
During the same election, at the state level, Democrats picked up five seats in the Wisconsin State Assembly which gave them control of the chamber and marked the first time since 1992 that Democrats controlled both chambers of the Wisconsin Legislature.
Barack Obama swept the state, carrying seven of the state   s eight congressional districts, including two districts held by Republicans. 
Technically the voters of Wisconsin cast their ballots for electors: representatives to the Electoral College. Wisconsin is allocated 10 electors because it has 8 congressional districts and 2 senators. All candidates who appear on the ballot or qualify to receive write-in votes must submit a list of 10 electors, who pledge to vote for their candidate and his or her running mate. Whoever wins the majority of votes in the state is awarded all 10 electoral votes. Their chosen electors then vote for President and Vice President. Although electors are pledged to their candidate and running mate, they are not obligated to vote for them. An elector who votes for someone other than his or her candidate is known as a faithless elector.
The electors of each state and the District of Columbia met on December 15, 2008 to cast their votes for President and Vice President. The Electoral College itself never meets as one body. Instead the electors from each state and the District of Columbia met in their respective capitols. 