The first '''USS ''Warren''''' was a schooner that served in the American Revolutionary War from 1775 to 1776.
After returning to port and undergoing repairs into January 1776, ''Warren'' was placed under the command of William Burke. She set sail from Boston on 25 March 1776 to intercept a convoy of transports but was frustrated by the weather in her attempt to pick off any strays while sailing in company with the Continental 6-gun schooner ''Franklin''. The schooners then sailed their separate ways, with ''Warren'' going to the familiar waters north of Cape Ann.
After another rent and recruiting new crewmen, ''Warren'' joined schooners ''Lynch'' and ''Lee'' in an attempt to get to sea on 27 May 1776, but that day they could not slip past the British 28-gun frigate HMS ''Milford'' patrolling outside Cape Ann harbor. When ''Warren'' did manage to get to sea, she scoured the waters of the bay near Cape Ann but did not score any successes that summer. In June 1776, she tangled with the British troopship ''Unity'', bound for Halifax, Nova Scotia, with Hessian troops embarked, but met with a hot reception from the troopers' carriage guns and musket fire. While ''Warren'' was disengaging, some powder stored on her quarterdeck exploded, killing three and wounding seven.
Returning to Beverly for repairs, ''Warren'', still under the luckless Burke, put to sea again in late August 1776 to patrol the supply lanes between Nova Scotia and Boston. Before dawn on 26 August 1776, ''Warren'' and ''Lynch'' encountered the British 28-gun frigate HMS ''Liverpool'' patrolling. The two schooners separated to flee, and ''Liverpool'' chose to follow ''Warren''.
The ensuing engagement was one-sided, and ''Liverpool'' had little difficulty forcing ''Warren'' to strike her colors before noon. Burke and his crew were transferred to ''Liverpool'', which kept ''Warren'' as a tender until 4 September 1776. On that day, ''Liverpool'' rendezvoused with ''Milford'' off Cape Ann, transferred ''Warren''s guns to ''Milford'', and sent ''Warren'' to Halifax.
Condemned by a British prize court, ''Warren'' subsequently served as a tender to ''Milford'' until ''Warren'' ran aground in a storm near Portsmouth, New Hampshire, and was destroyed in late December 1776.