The third '''USS ''Warren''''' was a sloop-of-war that served in the United States Navy from 1799 to 1801.
Assigned the duty of protecting American commerce in Cuban waters against the possible incursions of French warships or privateers during the "Quasi War" with France, ''Warren'' set sail for Havana, Cuba, on 31 December 1799, escorting the schooner ''Trio''. ''Trio'' was laden with stores for the American men-of-war on the Havana station. As the ships stood out of Nantasket Roads, near Boston, Massachusetts, Sailing Master Joseph Whitmore, in ''Warren'', penned fervently in his journal, "God send us safe to our orders End in our Lawfull (sic) Ways in supporting our Independence."Unattributed quote in ''Dictionary of American Naval Fighting Ships'' entry; see http://www.history.navy.mil/danfs/w3/warren-iii.htm.
At 13:00 hours on 19 January 1800, ''Warren'' spoke with the sloop ''Mary'', 18 days out of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, and bound for Cuba. ''Mary'' needed assistance, and ''Warren'' provided her with rigging and the ship's foretopmast stay sail. Three hours later, ''Warren'' met the schooner ''Lucy'', 25 days out of Providence, Rhode Island, and took her into the convoy. ''Warren'' later passed a hawser to ''Mary'' and took her in tow. The three ships remained in company for five days before ''Warren'' lost sight of the two merchantnmen.
After a week at sea, ''Warren'' returned to Havana on 20 February 1800 and waited for a fleet of merchantmen to emerge from the harbor and form a convoy. That evening, a dozen ships sailed, and ''Warren'' joined them as they emerged from the harbor and gave them routing instructions as they headed for the United States. ''Warren'' remained at sea, on patrol, for another week thereafter, and returned to Havana on 28 February 1800. She stood out to sea again on the morning of 2 April 1800 and proceeded to Matanza where she arrived on 5 April 1800.
During ''Warren''s stay at Havana, her crew     hitherto "in general, healthy, and robust"     began to have "evident symptoms of an increasing universal debility." ''Warren'', departing Havana in company with the frigate USS ''General Greene'' and 12 merchantmen, sailed for Veracruz, Mexico, on 26 June 1800.
Gunner Dogget, convalescent in the hospital at Havana, was spared seeing the agony of many of his shipmates. For the remainder of June 1800, an average of 15 men per day were incapacitated for performing ship's work. The first fatality occurred shortly before dawn on 30 June 1800, when young Midshipman Jonathan Greenleaf died. Nineteen men, recorded Whitmore, who survived the yellow fever epidemic, were then down with "the fever."
Thirteen more, including the doctor's mate, died before ''Warren'' reached Veracruz on 13 July 1800. ''Warren'' sent 20 men ashore there, but four died in the ensuing days. ''Warren'' ultimately departed Veracruz on 23 July 1800, having had an average of 20 to 24 sick men ashore in the hospital and 25 on board unfit for duty.  Whitmore noted on 25 July 1800 that two dozen men were sick but noted optimistically that there were "many mending."
Meanwhile, as ''Warren'' sailed homeward, Secretary of the Navy Stoddert ordered Captain James Barron to take command of the ship as soon as possible after she arrived, with expressed instructions to "relieve the sick; recruit men to fill the deficiency; cleanse, reprovision, rewater, and prepare her for another cruise with the most dispatch." Stoddert later instructed Barron to provide "all the protection in your power to the vessels which sail under your convoy, and see that as many as may be practicable to their destined ports."