The '''2008 United States presidential election in Oregon''' took place on November 4, 2008 throughout all 50 states and D.C., which was part of the 2008 United States presidential election. Voters chose 7 representatives, or electors to the Electoral College, who voted for President and Vice President.
Oregon  was won by Democratic nominee Barack Obama with a 16.4% margin of victory. Prior to the election, all 17 news organizations considered this a state Obama would win, or otherwise considered as a safe blue state. Situated on the West Coast, which has become a reliably Democratic stronghold, Oregon is a relatively blue state. The last Republican presidential nominee to carry Oregon was Ronald Reagan in his 1984 landslide reelection. Although George W. Bush came within half a percent of Al Gore in 2000, the Republicans have never seriously contested here. On Election Day 2008, Obama kept Oregon in the Democratic column, receiving near 57% of the vote.
There were 17 news organizations who made state by state predictions of the election. Here are there last predictions before election day:
Obama won every single pre-election poll. Since September 22, Obama won each by a double digit margin of victory and at least 52% of the vote. The final 3 polls showed Obama leading 55% to 41%.
John McCain raised a total of $1,258,426 in the state. Barack Obama raised $6,660,622.
Obama and his interest groups spent 1,194,908. McCain and his interest groups spent just $159,222. Neither campaign visited the state.
Voters in Oregon, a fairly blue state, have a strong penchant for advancing the protection of civil liberties and individual freedoms, liberal values that give Democrats a big edge in the state. On Election Day, Obama carried the state by 16.35 points. Most rural counties favored McCain, though Obama improved the Democratic ticket's performance than John Kerry did in 2004.  However, Obama's strong support in the more urban Willamette Valley, home to two-thirds of the state's population, would have allowed him to win the state decisively in any event. The state remains geographically and politically divided by the Cascade Mountains, with eastern Oregon being more rural and less populated and therefore more strongly Republican, while western Oregon is more urbanized and populated and therefore more strongly Democratic. These two areas compose the core of each party's votes: rural Oregon is strongly Republican, while the Willamette Valley (especially the cities of Portland and Eugene) heavily favors the Democrats. Structurally, Oregon votes Democratic because Portland and Eugene have more voters than the rural east. In 2008, Obama's overwhelming margins from these two cities, combined with strong support from Portland's suburbs (which function as swing counties), enabled him to win a landslide in a structurally liberal state.
During the same election, Democratic Speaker of the Oregon House of Representatives Jeff Merkley defeated incumbent Republican U.S. Senator Gordon Smith by a narrow 3.35-percent margin of victory. Merkley received 48.90% of the vote while Smith took in 45.55 with the remaining 5.24% going to Dave Brownlow of the Constitution Party. At the state level, Democrats picked up five seats in the Oregon House of Representatives while Republicans picked up one seat in the Oregon Senate.
Barack Obama carried four of the state   s five congressional districts in Oregon, all districts held by Democrats.
Technically the voters of Oregon cast their ballots for electors: representatives to the Electoral College. Oregon is allocated 7 electors because it has 5 congressional districts and 2 senators. All candidates who appear on the ballot or qualify to receive write-in votes must submit a list of 7 electors, who pledge to vote for their candidate and his or her running mate. Whoever wins the majority of votes in the state is awarded all 7 electoral votes. Their chosen electors then vote for President and Vice President. Although electors are pledged to their candidate and running mate, they are not obligated to vote for them. An elector who votes for someone other than his or her candidate is known as a faithless elector.
The electors of each state and the District of Columbia met on December 15, 2008 to cast their votes for President and Vice President. The Electoral College itself never meets as one body. Instead the electors from each state and the District of Columbia met in their respective capitols.