In 1996 he earned a master's degree from Nanjing University's Sociology Department. In 1999 he received a PhD in philosophy from Nanjing University. From 1999-2001 he was a post-doctorate researcher at Nanjing Normal University.
In 2001 he was retained as a professor and PhD candidate advisor at Nanjing Normal University. He is also a researcher in the Nanjing Massacre Research Center.
In early 2008, Guo Quan, a university professor who had been dismissed after having founded a democratic opposition party, announced plans to sue Yahoo!( Chief Executive Jerry Yang)and Google in the United States for having blocked his name from search results in China.
He told The Times that he had now found that the Chinese Yahoo! site had also blocked his name and he planned to bring actions against both companies. Mr Guo said:    Since 1 January  a lot of friends told me that websites with my name had been closed. They told me it's impossible to search for my information on Google and Yahoo!    }}
Both Plaintiff Zheng Cunzhu (Ch:         ) and plaintiff Guo Quan alleged that Yahoo's business tactic had caused them personal and financial harm. Zheng Cunzhu claimed :"(he) lost his property in China when he did not return for fear of getting arrested for his pro-democracy activities" and Guo Quan claimed that " he lost business when his name and that of his garment company were blocked by the Yahoo search results."
List of claims against Yahoo:
Guo's very public open letters to President Hu Jintao demanding multi-party elections and the depoliticisation of the People's Liberation Army, was widely published in internet blogosphere as well as the tradition media. Since then the Chinese cyber-police had begun to black out his blogs.
Guo Quan's  wife Li Jing told reporter that Guo had been detained many times before, for a few days at a time. Now it could be for longer.    The police told me to prepare myself psychologically,    she said.
On 6 Feb 2008 Guo Quan told Jane Macartney, of The Times "that he had now found that the Chinese Yahoo! site had also blocked his name and he planned to bring actions against both companies." Mr Guo said:    Since January 1 a lot of friends told me that websites with my name had been closed. They told me it's impossible to search for my information on Google and Yahoo!   
On 13 Nov 2008 cnews reported that Guo Quan, was arrested Thursday in the city of Nanjing. According to his wife, the police's charge was "subversion of state power" Chinese police routinely uses the charge of "subversion of state power"to imprison dissidents for years.
On 17 Oct 2009, Reuters reported that he was sentenced to 10 years in jail. 