The '''2008 United States presidential election in New Jersey''' took place on November 4, 2008 throughout all 50 states and D.C., which was part of the 2008 United States presidential election. Voters chose 15 representatives, or electors to the Electoral College, who voted for President and Vice President.
New Jersey was won by Democratic nominee Barack Obama with a 15.5% margin of victory. Prior to the election, all 17 news organizations considered this a state Obama would win, or otherwise considered as a safe blue state. No fundraising money was spent by either campaign, as the state has trended towards the Democratic Party in recent years. A highly affluent and predominantly urban state with an ethnically diverse population, New Jersey has a tendency to lean Democratic. It is, nevertheless, a reliably blue state that was evident when Democrat Barack Obama won the state's 15 electoral votes by with 57% of the vote.
There were 17 news organizations who made state by state predictions of the election. Here are there last predictions before election day:
Pre-election polling was tight early on. However since October 12, Obama won each poll with a double digit margin of victory and with at least 52%. McCain didn't reach over 42% in that stretch. The final 3 polls found Obama leading with 55% to 39%.
John McCain raised a total of $4,761,251 in the state. Barack Obama raised $13,624,081.
Neither candidate spent anything here. The Republican ticket visited the state twice. Obama visited the state once.
Obama dominated the urban areas of the state, winning Essex County by over 50%, Hudson County by 47%, Camden and Mercer counties by 35%. Obama also won Somerset County, which had voted Republican in every election from 1968 to 2004. Most of the southern portion of the state voted Democratic, including Atlantic County, the one reliably blue county on the Atlantic shore.
McCain won most of Northwestern New Jersey, winning in Republican strongholds like Morris County and Sussex County (which McCain won by 21%). McCain also won most of the Jersey Shore counties. Along the New Jersey Shore, Monmouth voted Republican due to a high presence of affluent voters, while Ocean and Cape May voted Republican due to an abundance of elderly voters.
At the same time, incumbent Democratic U.S. Senator Frank Lautenberg was reelected over Republican Dick Zimmer by a 14.08-percent margin of victory. Lautenberg received 56.03% of the total vote while Zimmer took in 41.95%. Democrats also picked up a vacant U.S. House seat in New Jersey's 3rd congressional district that was previously held by a Republican; Democrat John Adler defeated Republican Chris Myers by a 3.30-percent margin of victory. Adler received 51.65% of the vote while Myers took in 48.35%.
Barack Obama carried 10 of the state   s 13 congressional districts in New Jersey, including two districts held by Republicans.
Technically the voters of NJ cast their ballots for electors: representatives to the Electoral College. NJ is allocated 15 electors because it has 13 congressional districts and 2 senators. All candidates who appear on the ballot or qualify to receive write-in votes must submit a list of 15 electors, who pledge to vote for their candidate and his or her running mate. Whoever wins the majority of votes in the state is awarded all 15 electoral votes. Their chosen electors then vote for President and Vice President. Although electors are pledged to their candidate and running mate, they are not obligated to vote for them. An elector who votes for someone other than his or her candidate is known as a faithless elector.
The electors of each state and the District of Columbia met on December 15, 2008 to cast their votes for President and Vice President. The Electoral College itself never meets as one body. Instead the electors from each state and the District of Columbia met in their respective capitols. 