I have my Wifi 'n' base station configured for WPA2 only and my WinXP machine cannot connect to it.  But if I change the base station to WPA/WPA2, XP can connect.  Any trick to getting it to access WPA2 only? --  ( ) 06:08, 16 November 2008 (UTC)
I just installed Ubuntu 8.10 desktop version on my PC. Unfortunately, my graphical device, SiS 661FX seems to not support hardware 3D acceleration so that the Compiz Fusion desktop effect is not available. Maybe, setting up a virtual machine could solve this problem as it could emulate a 3D acceleration devie (NVida, ATI, etc. graphic cards) on the virtual machine (I'm not sure as I never used it), but VirtualBox requires 512MB memory which my PC cannot satisfies. So I wonder is it possible to make a virtual device driver (for Linux) which can emulate a 3D accelerator and enables Compiz Fusion? -   ( ) 07:01, 16 November 2008 (UTC)
Thanks for you two precious advices. However, please try to be nice in response to other guy's questions and try not to be too emotional. If you think I have any ridiculous misunderstanding about Linux, OpenGL, X Window or whatever, you can directly point out the specific errors I made. I'm just new to Linux system and there are many thing I don't know and make me curious. Pleas don't think that I was criticizing the Linux or whatever I've mentioned. If I didn't like things from Linux community, I would not ask qustion here and try to install it. -   ( ) 12:24, 17 November 2008 (UTC)
So I recently installed Ubuntu Fiesty onto my laptop (I have not bothered to download the most recent as a distribution update is not that long) and then updated it to Hardy. The laptop is an EMachine. I have no clue what the model is as it just says "EMachine" and the sound card appears to be an ATI card. Anyways, I have all the codecs and I have installed alsa and oss..and a great amount of others. But to no avail. I have no sound and I have searched all over to find a driver or workaround. I am hoping you can make sense of what I am saying at 4:30 in the morning.    &nbsp; 09:22, 16 November 2008 (UTC)
Hi there, everyone:
Is there a programme that one can use to find chords of an MP3 or other music file. I wrote and recorded some songs a few years ago and forgot the unfortunately complicated chords.
Thanks in advance,
I have a computer but do not own a cell phone.  I have many friend who do have cell phones.  I want to be able to text them easily from my windows xp machine and have them easily be able to reply.  And, of course, I hope to do this free of charge, to me at least. 
What's the best way to do this? --  ( ) 14:44, 16 November 2008 (UTC)
I want to use ImageMagick to crop a region out of the middle of a larger image and draw a rectangle in the upper right-hand corner of the cropped image. So I tried this:
I have some photos where the horizon is not level, and I want to rotate them a few degrees. Can anyone suggest any freeware that can do this please? While a zillion programs can rotate an image 90 degrees etc., I have not found any that can rotate n degrees. I thought Xnview could do this, and it is mentioned in passing in the help file, but after downloading and installing Xnview I have not been able to find out how to get it to do n degree rotations. (Note - losing some of the edge of my image does not matter, loss of quality does not matter) Thanks.   ( ) 18:20, 16 November 2008 (UTC)
GIMP can definitely do it, but it is a bit daunting for a novice. Having said that if you take the time to learn it you'll be rewarded with a program that can do nearly anything you could ever want.   |   19:45, 16 November 2008 (UTC)
Thanks, after some more searching with different keywords I have found that Google's Picasa 2.7 will do n degree tilting, although its difficult to steer it to the particular image you want on your hard drive. I will have a look at ImageMagic. GIMP although doubtless very good would be too complicated for me. Thanks   ( ) 21:29, 16 November 2008 (UTC)
So, I got a rather large hub and I stripped it out without damaging anything.  I have the circuit board with all the little processor looking things (what are these) on it; I have the power board, and the fan.  I also have the guts of a cordless telephone I stripped.  Is there anything other than a hub or a phone I can make with these without having to buy many parts?  TIA,     19:41, 16 November 2008 (UTC)
Is there any free software that can automate the process of maintaining ? The tasks I'll need to perform are:
I may not have access to server-side scripting. I'll be uploading the pages from machines that run Windows XP Professional and on which I don't have admin access; I can't upload them from elsewhere directly, since the server works by mirroring a folder on my network drive. However, I also have a laptop running Kubuntu where I do have root access, and could e-mail or sneakernet files from the laptop to be uploaded.    20:57, 16 November 2008 (UTC)
My laptop keeps BSoD'ing for the above reason, which is starting to irritate me since it is actually *functional* for once. What does it mean, and what steps can I take to fix it? -''   '' ( ) 22:00, 16 November 2008 (UTC)