The '''2008 United States presidential election in North Carolina''' took place on November 4, 2008 throughout all 50 states and D.C., which was part of the 2008 United States presidential election. Voters chose 15 representatives, or electors to the Electoral College, who voted for President and Vice President.
There were 17 news organizations who made state by state predictions of the election. Here are there last predictions before election day:
Early on, McCain won almost every single pre-election poll. However, on September 23, Rasmussen Reports showed Obama leading in a poll for the first time. He won the poll 49% to 47%. After that, polls showed the state being a complete toss-up as both McCain and Obama were winning many polls and no candidate was taking a consistent lead in the state. Reasons for the drastic turnaround in the state point to the financial crisis and the heavy advertising by the Obama campaign in the fall election. The final 3 polls found a tie with both candidate at 49%, which was accurate compared to the actual results.
John McCain raised a total of $2,888,922 in the state. Barack Obama raised $8,569,866.
Obama and his interest groups spent $15,178,674. McCain and his interest groups spent just $7,137,289. The Democratic ticket visited the state 12 times. The Republican ticket visited the state 8 times.
The winner was not certain even several days after the election, when thousands of provisional and absentee ballots were still being counted. However, when it became evident that McCain would need to win an improbable majority of these votes to overcome Obama's election night lead, the major news networks finally called the state's 15 electoral votes for Obama. North Carolina was the second-closest state in 2008; only in Missouri was the race closer.
Situated in the South, which has become a Republican stronghold in recent elections, North Carolina is an anomaly. While very Democratic at the local and state level, the last Democratic presidential nominee to win the Tar Heel State was Jimmy Carter in 1976; not even the Southern moderate populist Bill Clinton from Arkansas could win North Carolina.
Obama decided early on to aggressively campaign in the state. It paid off quickly; most polls from spring onward showed the race within single digits. He also dramatically outspent McCain in the state. This was also one of the closest statewide contests of 2008, as Obama captured North Carolina just by 0.32 percent of the vote - a margin of only 14,177 votes out of 4.2 million statewide. Only in Missouri was the race closer where McCain nipped Obama by less than 4,000 votes or by a margin of 0.14 percent.
Republicans have traditionally done well in the western part of North Carolina that is a part of Appalachia, while Democrats are stronger in the east. When a Democrat wins in North Carolina, almost everything from Charlotte eastward is usually coated blue. Even when Democrats lose, they often still retain a number of counties in the industrial southeast (alongside Fayetteville), the African-American northeast, the fast-growing I-85 Corridor in the Piedmont, and sometimes the western Appalachian region next to Tennessee. For example, a map of Bill Clinton's narrow 1992 loss in North Carolina shows him narrowly winning all these regions.
Obama, however, did not take the traditional Democratic path to victory. Instead, his main margins came from the cities, where he did particularly well throughout the country. While Obama only won 35 of North Carolina's 100 counties, these counties contained more than half of the state's population.
Obama's victory margin came largely by running up huge majorities in the I-85 Corridor, a developing megalopolis which is home to more than two-thirds of the state's population and casts almost 70 percent of the state's vote.  The state's five largest counties--Mecklenburg (home to Charlotte) Wake (home to Raleigh), Guilford (home to Greensboro), Forsyth (home to Winston-Salem) and Durham (home to Durham)--are all located in this area, and Obama swept them all by 11 percentage points or more. In 1992, Bill Clinton had only been able to win Durham County by this margin; he actually narrowly lost Forsyth and Mecklenburg (the latter was where Obama had his biggest margin in the state).  Ultimately, Obama's combined margin of 350,000 votes in these counties was too much for McCain to overcome.
However, McCain did well in the Charlotte suburbs, Appalachian Foothills and mountain country; indeed, he carried all but four counties west of Winston-Salem.  Aside from the I-85 Corridor, Obama's results were mediocre in the traditional Democratic base.  He lost badly in Appalachia, mirroring the difficulties he had throughout this region.  Obama only won three counties in this region, one of which was Buncombe County, home to the largest city in the region, Asheville.  He did as well as Al Gore (who lost North Carolina by double-digits) in the Fayetteville area.
Thus, Obama did not rely on the traditional Democratic base but rather a new coalition of city voters to win North Carolina. Obama would have lost the state by a comfortable margin without the state's five largest counties; instead, he barely pulled off a victory by creating a unique coalition of voters, particularly among highly affluent and educated migrants from the Northeast who traditionally tend to vote Democratic, as well as among African Americans and college students, the two voting blocs that overwhelmingly supported him during the course of the 2008 Democratic presidential primary.
During the same election, Democrats picked up a seat in the U.S. House of Representatives in North Carolina's 8th congressional district where incumbent Republican Robin Hayes was ousted by Democrat Larry Kissell, a high school social studies teacher who almost toppled Hayes in 2006. Kissell received 55.38% of the vote while Hayes took in 44.62%, a 10.76-percent difference. Democrats also held onto the Governor's Mansion as term-limited incumbent Democratic Governor Mike Easley was ineligible to seek a third term. Lieutenant Governor Beverly Perdue defeated Republican Pat McCrory, the incumbent mayor of Charlotte. Perdue received 50.23% of the vote while McCrory took in 46.90% with the remaining 2.86% going to Libertarian Michael Munger. In a highly targeted U.S. Senate race, Democratic State Senator Kay Hagan defeated incumbent Republican Elizabeth Dole by a wider-than-anticipated margin - by 8.47 points. Hagan received 52.65% while Dole took in 44.18%. The race received widespread attention after the National Republican Senatorial Committee (NRSC) ran its infamous "Godless" ad that accused Hagan, a Sunday school teacher, of accepting money from atheists and accused her of being an atheist. The ad backfired terribly and was one of the major factors that contributed to Dole's defeat. At the state level, Democrats increased their gains in the North Carolina General Assembly, picking up five seats in the North Carolina House of Representatives and one seat in the North Carolina Senate.
According to exit polls over 95% of African Americans cast ballots for Obama. This played a critical role in North Carolina, as 95% of the state's registered African American voters turned out, with Obama carrying an unprecedented 100% of African-American females and African Americans age 18 to 29, according to exit polling. Comparatively, the turnout statewide was only 69%.
Despite Barack Obama winning North Carolina, John McCain carried seven of the state   s 13 congressional districts, including two districts represented by Democrats in the U.S. House of Representatives.
Technically the voters of North Carolina cast their ballots for electors: representatives to the Electoral College. North Carolina is allocated 15 electors because it has 13 congressional districts and 2 senators. All candidates who appear on the ballot or qualify to receive write-in votes must submit a list of 15 electors, who pledge to vote for their candidate and his or her running mate. Whoever wins the majority of votes in the state is awarded all 15 electoral votes. Their chosen electors then vote for President and Vice President. Although electors are pledged to their candidate and running mate, they are not obligated to vote for them. An elector who votes for someone other than his or her candidate is known as a faithless elector.
The electors of each state and the District of Columbia met on December 15, 2008 to cast their votes for President and Vice President. The Electoral College itself never meets as one body. Instead the electors from each state and the District of Columbia met in their respective capitols.