The '''Flood Control Act of 1928''' (FCA 1928)(70th United States Congress, Sess. 1. Ch. 596, enacted May 15, 1928) authorized the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers to design and construct projects for the control of floods on the Mississippi River and its tributaries as well as the Sacramento River in California.  It was sponsored by Sen. Wesley L. Jones (R) of Washington and Rep. Frank R. Reid (R) of Illinois, in response to the Great Mississippi Flood of 1927.
FCA 1928 had three important effects. It increased public awareness of advances in flood control theory and practice.  It put flood control on par with other major projects of its time with the largest public works appropriation ever authorized.  And, FCA 1928 increased debate on local contributions to a new level.
Authorized the project for the flood control of the Mississippi River in its alluvial valley and for its improvement from the Head of Passes to Cape Girardeau, Missouri, in accordance with the engineering plan set forth and recommended in the report submitted by the Chief of Engineers. 
Created a board consisting of the Chief of Engineers, the president of the Mississippi River Commission, and a civil engineer chosen from civil life appointed by the President.  Such board is authorized and directed to consider the engineering differences between the adopted project and plans recommended by the Mississippi River Commission. Such project and the changes therein, if any, shall be executed in accordance with section 8 of the Act. 
Such surveys shall be made between Baton Rouge, Louisiana, and Cape Girardeau, Missouri, as the board may deem necessary to enable it to ascertain and determine the best method of securing flood relief in addition to levees, before any flood-control works other than levees and revetments are undertaken on that portion of the river.
All diversion works and outlets constructed under the provisions of the Act shall be built in a manner and of a character which will fully and amply protect the adjacent lands.  Areas shall be given the same degree of protection as is afforded by levees on the west side of the river contiguous to the levee at the head of said floodway, but nothing herein shall prevent, postpone, delay, or in anywise interfere with the execution of that part of the project on the east side of the river.
All unexpended balances of appropriations heretofore made for prosecuting work of flood control on the Mississippi River in accordance the Flood Control Act of 1917 and the Flood Control Act of 1923, were made available for expenditure under the provisions of this Act, except section 13.
Reiterated the soundness of the principle of local contribution toward the cost of flood-control work which had been incorporated in all previous national legislation, recognizing the special interest of the local population in its own protection, and as a means of preventing inordinate requests for unjustified items of work having no material national interest. 
Recognized the expenditure estimated at approximately $292 million already made by the local interests; in view of the extent of national concern in the control of these floods in the interests of national prosperity, the flow of interstate commerce, and the movement of the United States mails; and, in view of the gigantic scale of the project, involving flood waters of a volume and flowing from a drainage area largely outside the States most affected, and far exceeding those of any other river in the United States, no local contribution to the project was required, and given.
Prohibited expending funds until the States or levee districts gave assurances that they would maintain all flood-control works after their completion, except controlling and regulating spillway structures, including special relief levees; would agree to accept land turned over to them, and provide without cost to the United States, all rights of way for levee foundations and levees on the main stem of the Mississippi River between Cape Girardeau, Missouri, and the Head of Passes.
A key provision of the act was that no liability of any kind would attach to or rest upon the United States for any damage from or by floods or flood waters at any place, provided that if on any stretch of the banks of the Mississippi River it was impracticable to construct levees (either because such construction is not economically justified or because such construction would unreasonably restrict the flood channel), and lands in such stretch of the river are subjected to overflow and damage which are not now overflowed or damaged by reason of the construction of levees on the opposite banks of the river it shall be the duty of the Government to acquire either ownership or floodage rights over such lands.
The United States shall provide flowage rights for additional destructive flood waters that will pass by reason of diversions from the main channel of the Mississippi River: Provided, That in all cases where the execution of the flood-control plan herein adopted results in benefits to property such benefits shall be taken into consideration by way of reducing the amount of compensation to be paid.
The Government can acquire by condemnation, purchase, or donation any lands, easements, or rights of way which are needed in carrying out this project. The provisions of sections 5 and 6 of the Rivers and Harbors Act of 1918 were made applicable to the acquisition of lands, easements, or rights of way needed for works of flood control.
The Secretary of War, on the recommendation of the Chief of Engineers, may engage the services and assistance of the Coast and Geodetic Survey, the United States Geological Survey, or other mapping agencies of the Government, in the preparation of maps required for this project.
Funds appropriated under authority of section 1 of this Act may be expended for the prosecution of such works for the control of the floods of the Mississippi River as have heretofore been authorized and are not included in the present project, including levee work on the Mississippi River between Rock Island, Illinois, and Cape Girardeau, Missouri, and on the outlets and tributaries of the Mississippi River between Rock Island and Head of Passes in so far as such outlets or tributaries are affected by the backwaters of the Mississippi: Provided, That for such work on the Mississippi River between Rock Island, Illinois, and Cape Girardeau, Missouri, and on such tributaries, the States or levee districts shall provide rights of way without cost to the United States, contribute 331/3 per centum of the costs of the works, and maintain them after completion: And provided further, That not more than $10,000,000 of the sums authorized in section 1 of this Act, shall be expended under the provisions of this section.
In an emergency, funds may be expended for the maintenance of any levee when it is demonstrated that the levee can not be adequately maintained by the State or levee district.
The project shall be prosecuted by the Mississippi River Commission under the direction of the Secretary of War and supervision of the Chief of Engineers. For all other purposes the existing laws governing the constitution and activities of the commission shall remain unchanged. The commission shall make inspection trips of such frequency and duration as will enable it to acquire first-hand information as to conditions and problems germane to the matter of flood control within the area of its jurisdiction; and on such trips of inspection ample opportunity for hearings and suggestions shall be afforded persons affected by or interested in such problems. The president of the commission shall be the executive officer thereof and shall have the qualifications now prescribed by law for the Assistant Chief of Engineers, shall have the title brigadier general, Corps of Engineers, and shall have the rank, pay, and allowances of a brigadier general while actually assigned to such duty: Provided, That the present incumbent of the office may be appointed a brigadier general of the Army, retired, and shall be eligible for the position of president of the commission if recalled to active service by the President under the provisions of existing law.
The salary of the president of the Mississippi River Commission shall hereafter be $10,000 per annum, and the salary of the other members of the commission shall hereafter be $7,500 per annum. The official salary of any officer of the United States Army or other branch of the Government appointed or employed under this Act shall be deducted from the amount of salary or compensation provided by, or which shall be fixed under, the terms of this Act.
It is the sense of Congress that the surveys of the Mississippi River and its tributaries be prosecuted as speedily as practicable.
The Corps of Engineers is directed to prepare and submit to Congress at the earliest practicable date projects for flood control on all tributary streams of the Mississippi River system subject to destructive floods which shall include
The reports shall include the effect on the subject of further flood control of the lower Mississippi River to be attained through the control of the flood waters in the drainage basins of the tributaries by the establishment of a reservoir system; the benefits that will accrue to navigation and agriculture from the prevention of erosion and siltage entering the stream; a determination of the capacity of the soils of the district to receive and hold waters from such reservoirs; the prospective income from the disposal of reservoir waters; the extent to which reservoir waters may be made available for public and private uses; and inquiry as to the return flow of waters placed in the soils from reservoirs, and as to their stabilizing effect on stream flow as a means of preventing erosion, siltage, and improving navigation.
That the Secretary of War shall cause the Mississippi River Commission to make an examination and survey of the Mississippi River below Cape Girardeau, Missouri, where levees had previously been constructed on one side of the river and the lands on the opposite side thereby subjected to greater overflow.  Where, without unreasonably restricting the flood channel, levees can be constructed to reduce the extent of this overflow where the construction of such levees is economically justified
Concerning a recommendation by the Mississippi River Commission October 1912 to build a levee from Tiptonville, Tennessee, to the Obion River in Tennessee, the Commission was authorized to resurvey the proposed levee (relocate the same if necessary).  If such levee was found feasible and approved by the board, it shall be built out of appropriations hereafter to be made.
All laws or parts of laws inconsistent with the above are hereby repealed.
The project for the control of floods in the Sacramento River, California, adopted by section 2 of the Act approved March 1, 1917, entitled    An Act to provide for the control of the floods of the Mississippi River and of the Sacramento River, California, and for other purposes,    is hereby modified in accordance with the report of the California Debris Commission, provided that the total amounts contributed by the Federal Government, including previous amounts contributed, shall not exceed $17.6 million.
In every contract or agreement to be made or entered into for the acquisition of land either by private sale or condemnation as in this Act provided the provisions contained in section 3741 of the Revised Statutes being section 22 of title 41 of the United States Code shall be applicable.
For related legislation which sometime also implement flood control provisions, see the following: