The '''Asian Poker Tour''' (APT) is a major poker tour focusing on the Asia-Pacific region. It aims to promote poker by conducting poker tournaments and events in major Asia-Pacific cities such as Macau and Philippines. The APT holds main events as well as assists in the setting up of smaller, accredited events throughout the Asian region.
The Asian Poker Tour (APT)  is the biggest and original poker tour in Asia.
The first ever APT event was held in Singapore in November 2006 while the APT was still under the management of Singapore-based Capital Events Pte. It was then that poker player Tony G  was named the first APT Champion. 
The Asian Poker Tour was acquired by AsianLogic  (AIM:ALOG) in early 2008 and  seeks to continue positioning itself as the premier poker tournament in Asia. Its growing popularity as a highly respected poker tour is a testament to its goal of bringing world-class poker experience in Asia. As a result, the Asian Poker Tour continues to be highly anticipated by poker players and enthusiasts in Asia and all over the world.
This year, the Asian Poker Tour will once again be holding big events at Asia   s most popular poker destinations, including Macau and the Philippines. In line with its commitment to helping the growth of the game in Asia, the Asian Poker Tour is also providing assistance with the setting up of smaller, accredited events in different locations all over the region.
The Asian Poker Tour (APT) has held two major events in 2008: APT Philippines and APT Macau. The Asian Poker Tour Philippines 2008 , was held in Manila, Philippines from May 27 to June 1, 2008, and was won by Australia-based poker player David Saab. The Asian Poker Tour Macau 2008 , on the other hand, was held in Macau, the Gaming Capital in Asia, from 27th 'til the 28th of August in 2008 with Yevgeniy Timoshenko grabbing the APT Macau 2008 Main Event Champion title.
In 2009, Filipino poker player Neil Arce won the APT Philippines 2009's Main Event. While the Main Event in APT Macau 2009, the twelve-day festival of poker, was won by French online qualifier Adrien Allain.
The now annual APT Philippines was held at the Resorts World Manila complex from August 23 to 29, 2010. the APT Philippines 2010 Main Event title was taken home by local player Michael Cua.
The APT closed off the year by hosting by the Asian Poker Tour Macau 2010 held from the 6th 'til the 14th of November 2010 at the Hard Rock poker lounge in City of Dreams, Macau. China's Zhang Dan Peng was crowned the Main Event Champion for the APT Macau 2010 Main Event.
The APT began the year with it's new event format dubbed the APT Asian Series. This event features the same type of tournaments the APT is known for but at a much lower buy in. In January, the APT Asian Series Cebu was won by Andreas Lindblom from Sweden. The the APT went back to Resorts World Manila for the Asian Poker Tour Philippines 2011 from March 28 to April 3 which was won by Enrique Del Prado, Jr. from the Philippines