The '''2008 United States presidential election in Illinois''' took place on November 4, 2008 throughout all 50 states and D.C., which was part of the 2008 United States presidential election. Voters chose 21 representatives, or electors to the Electoral College, who voted for President and Vice President.
Illinois, the home state of Barack Obama, who won state with a 25.1% margin of victory. Prior to the election, all 17 news organizations considered this a state Obama would win, or otherwise considered as a safe blue state. One of the most reliably blue states in the nation, the Land of Lincoln has not voted for a Republican presidential nominee since 1988 when George H.W. Bush carried the state. In 2008, continuing that trend, it appeared that a generic Democratic presidential nominee could have easily won Illinois. Thus, it came as no surprise that Barack Obama, who represented Illinois in the U.S. Senate, won Illinois in 2008 over Republican John McCain in a landslide victory, clinching near 62% of the total vote.
There were 17 news organizations who made state by state predictions of the election. Here are there last predictions before election day:
Obama won every single pre-election poll, and each by a double digit margin and with at least 52% (with the exception of an ARG poll). The final 3 polls averaged Obama leading 60% to 35%.
Obama raised $35,307,625. McCain raised $7,207,428.
Obama spent $23,319. McCain and interest groups spent $52,865. The Democratic ticket visited the state 13 times. McCain's ticket visited the state twice.
For most of the second half of the 20th century, Illinois was reckoned as a Republican-leaning swing state.  It voted Republican in every election from 1952 to 1988, save for 1960 and 1964.  However, since 1992, the Democrats have won the state by fairly comfortable margins, and it is now reckoned as the most solidly Democratic state in the Midwest. 
The blue trend in the Land of Lincoln in presidential elections can be largely attributed to Cook County, home to Chicago, which makes up about 41.2% of the state's total population.  Democrats also do very well in the Illinois portions of the Quad Cities and St. Louis areas.  Additionally, the historically Republican collar counties near Chicago--DuPage, Lake, McHenry, Kane, and Will--have become friendlier to Democrats at the national level.
Barack Obama, the junior U.S. Senator from Illinois at the time of the election, carried the state handily, defeating John McCain of Arizona by a margin of 1.38 million votes.  Obama carried his home county, Cook County, with roughly 76 percent of the vote.  He also swept the collar counties, with DuPage, Kendall, Lake and Will giving him double-digit margins.  Notably, DuPage and McHenry hadn't supported a Democrat for president since 1948.  Obama also did very well in several rural counties that historically voted Republican.  McCain did, however, win several of the more rural counties in Southern Illinois.  It was not nearly enough, however, to put a serious dent in Obama's 25-point margin in the state.  
During the same election, senior U.S. Senator and Senate Majority Whip Dick Durbin, a Democrat, was reelected to the U.S. Senate with 67.84% of the vote over Republican Dr. Steve Sauerberg who received 28.53%. At the state level, Democrats picked up three seats in the Illinois House of Representatives.
Favorite son Barack Obama swept 16 of the state   s 19 congressional districts, including all districts held by Democrats and four districts held by Republicans.
Technically the voters of Illinois cast their ballots for electors: representatives to the Electoral College. Illinois is allocated 21 electors because it has 19 congressional districts and 2 senators. All candidates who appear on the ballot or qualify to receive write-in votes must submit a list of 21 electors, who pledge to vote for their candidate and his or her running mate. Whoever wins the majority of votes in the state is awarded all 21 electoral votes. Their chosen electors then vote for President and Vice President. Although electors are pledged to their candidate and running mate, they are not obligated to vote for them. An elector who votes for someone other than his or her candidate is known as a faithless elector.
The electors of each state and the District of Columbia met on December 15, 2008 to cast their votes for President and Vice President. The Electoral College itself never meets as one body. Instead the electors from each state and the District of Columbia met in their respective capitols.