The '''Denver 2008 Convention Host Committee''' is a non-profit organization that was responsible for private funding of the 2008 Democratic National Convention in Denver, Colorado on August 25   28, 2008. In addition to securing sponsors, other obligations included organizing a volunteer base, managing a vendor database, coordinating local events, providing hospitality to delegates and credentialed media, and promoting tourism in Denver, Colorado and the Western U.S. 
As the fundraising arm of the convention, the Host Committee had four contractual partners: the Democratic National Convention Committee, which was responsible for logistics of convention activities within the Pepsi Center; the City and County of Denver, which provided security, traffic management, and operational support; Kroenke Sports, owner of the Pepsi Center arena where the convention was held; and its own Executive Committee.
The following individuals are listed on the inside cover of the ''Official 2008 Democratic National Convention Visitors Guide'', produced by the Denver Metro Convention & Visitors Bureau. 
The following individuals are listed on page 10 of the ''Official 2008 Democratic National Convention Visitors Guide'', produced by the Denver Metro Convention & Visitors Bureau. 
During the convention, more than 50,000 visitors came to Denver, including more than 16,000 members of the media, bloggers, and independent journalists. Early projections estimated an economic impact of $160   $200 million dollars; however a final report released on October 16, 2008 by Denver Mayor John W. Hickenlooper put the official estimate at a $266.1 million regional economic benefit to the Denver metro region, of which $153.9 million occurred directly within the City and County of Denver.
One mission of the 2008 Denver Convention Host Committee was to ensure that the 2008 Democratic National Convention set a new standard for green conventions whereby sustainability and environmental health concerns are factored into the event planning. The Host Committee led this effort by setting green standards for events, completing environmental improvements at city facilities, setting up recycling areas, partnering with local restaurants and venues for healthy options, and encouraging the use of carbon offsets.
On October 16, 2008, the Denver 2008 Convention Host Committee announced that it generated just over $55 million in cash contributions and $5.46 million of in-kind support. The balance of the $60.9 million came from interest income and miscellaneous refunds. That surpassed the Host Committee's original $40 million contractual target by more than $20 million. In a 1,400-page Federal Election Commission report, the Host Committee detailed financial and in-kind contributions from more than 700 businesses and individuals.  Security-related expenses, not detailed in the report, were covered separately by a $50 million federal grant.
An estimated 15,000 volunteers answered telephone calls, collated mailings, prepared and distributed convention materials, assisted at media and public events, and even collected and sorted trash at waste recovery stations for recycling and composting.