The title character is Michael Tree, a female private detective who takes over her husband's investigation business when he is murdered. In her first case, she captures the murderer and discovers his link to the Muerta organized crime family.
Ms. Tree's dead husband was named Michael Tree, the joke being that after the marriage they had the same name. Series creator/writer Max Allan Collins makes no secret of the fact that Ms. Tree was inspired by Velda, Mike Hammer's secretary, a stacked, gun carrying, six-foot tall brunette and Mike's lover, who was almost as tough as he was. The basic premise of ''Ms. Tree'' was, "What if Velda and Mike Hammer eventually got married, and on their honeymoon he was murdered?"
Throughout the series, in addition to isolated cases, Ms. Tree's vendetta against the Muerta family is a major plot thread.  Her methods often include deadly violence which she uses with little hesitation.  In contrast to genre conventions, she faces serious consequences throughout the series for these violent actions including arrest, imprisonment, commitment to a mental hospital, and involuntary medication.
In another genre divergence, the male Michael Tree's son, Mike (of course), inadvertently falls in love with the daughter of the Muerta matron. The female Michael disapproves of this arrangement but respects her stepson's decision.  To her shock, when their relationship grows enough to make marriage probable, the Muerta family decides Mike's stepmother is now family and initiates a reconciliation with her while going legit.
In addition, Michael is impregnated by an old flame who is manipulating her to kill his wife.  She decides to keep the baby, creating a unique series of adventures of this homicidal PI fighting off criminals even while dealing with a full term pregnancy while the mob family she hates moves to protect her in their own way.
In 2007, Hard Case Crime published ''Deadly Beloved'', the first novel about Ms. Tree. The book was written by Max Allan Collins, with a painted cover by Ms. Tree co-creator Terry Beatty. The character's first appearance in 14 years, ''Deadly Beloved'' has received generally positive reviews.
Eclipse Comics
Aardvark-Vanaheim
Aardvark-Vanaheim/Renegade Press co-publishers
Renegade Press
DC Comics
Hard Case Crime