 On 13 February 2011, program managers told their workforce that STS-135 would fly    regardless    of the funding situation via a continuing resolution. Until this point, there had been no official references to the STS-135 mission in NASA official documentation for the general public.
During an address at the Marshall Space Flight Center on 16 November 2010, NASA administrator Charles Bolden said that the agency needed to fly STS-135 to the station in 2011, due to likely delays in the development of commercial rockets and spacecraft designed to transport cargo to the ISS. "We are hoping to fly a third shuttle mission  in June 2011, what everybody calls the launch-on-need mission ... and that's really needed to  the risk for the development time for commercial cargo," Bolden said.
The U.S. government budget approved in mid-April 2011 called for $5.5&nbsp;billion for NASA's space operations division, including the space shuttle and space station programs. According to NASA, the budget running through 30 September 2011 ended all concerns about funding the STS-135 mission.
NASA announced the STS-335/135 crew on 14 September 2010. It will be the first time that a crew of four will fly to the International Space Station. The last shuttle mission to fly with just four crew members occurred 28 years prior to STS-135, on STS-6 on 4 April 1983 aboard . The reduced crew size allows the mission to maximize the amount of payload carried to the ISS and also allows for a rescue by a Russian Soyuz spacecraft to be performed if necessary. 
With support from both the House of Representatives and the Senate, the fate of STS-135 ultimately depended on whether lawmakers could agree to fund converting the mission from launch-on-need to an actual flight.
On 15 July 2010, a U.S. Senate committee passed the 2010 NASA reauthorization bill, authored by Senator Bill Nelson, to direct NASA to fly an extra space shuttle mission (STS-135) pending a review of safety concerns. The bill still needed the approval of the full Senate. A draft NASA reauthorization bill considered by the House Science & Technology Committee did not provide for an extra shuttle mission. On 22 July 2010 U.S. Rep. Suzanne Kosmas, during a meeting of the House Science Committee, successfully amended the House version of the bill to add an additional shuttle mission to the manifest.
On 5 August 2010, the U.S. Senate passed its version of the NASA reauthorization bill just before lawmakers left for the traditional August recess. On 20 August 2010, NASA managers approved STS-135 mission planning targeting a 28 June 2011 launch. On 29 September 2010 the U.S. House approved the Senate-passed bill on a 304   118 vote. The bill, approved by the U.S. Congress, went to President Barack Obama for his signature.
On 11 October 2010, President Obama signed the legislation into law, allowing NASA to move forward with STS-135, though without specific funding.
As of 20 January 2011, STS-135's designation was officially changed from STS-335. It is targeting a 28 June 2011 launch date but still lacks funding.
As of 14 February 2011, NASA managers announced that STS-135 will fly 'regardless' of the funding situation in Congress.
The mission marks:
Multi-Purpose Logistics Module (MPLM) ''Raffaello'' will make up the majority of the payload. The MPLM will be filled with 16 resupply racks, which is the maximum that it can handle.
The Lightweight Multi-Purpose Carrier (LMC) will also be flown on this mission. The External Thermal Cooling System (ETCS) Pump Module (PM) which failed and was replaced on orbit in August 2010, is planned to have a ride home on the LMC so that a failure analysis can be performed on the ground. It has not been determined what, if anything, will ride up to the station on the LMC.
Atlantis will carry the Robotic Refueling Mission (RRM) developed by the Satellite Servicing Capabilities project at the Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC). It plans to demonstrate the technology and tools to refuel satellites in orbit by robotic means. After the proof of concept, the long-term goal of NASA is to transfer the technology to the commercial sector. 
RRM will include four tools, each of these incorporating electronics and two cameras and lights. Additionally it will have pumps and controllers and electrical systems such as electrical valves and sensors. 
The RRM payload was transported to the Kennedy Space Center in early March, 2011 where the GSFC team will perform the final preparations for space flight. Once up in the International Space Station, RRM will be installed into the ELC-4. The Dextre robot will be used during the refueling demonstration.
The failed ammonia pump module that was replaced in August 2010 is expected to be returned inside Atlantis' payload bay. Also, a problematic Common Cabin Air Assembly (CCAA) Heat Exchanger (HX) is expected to be returned inside the MPLM.
ET-138 was produced at the Michoud Assembly Facility (MAF) in New Orleans and arrived at the Kennedy Space Center on the Pegasus barge. After offloading, the tank was transported into a checkout cell inside the VAB on 14 July 2010. 
NASA initially planned for STS-134 (''Endeavour'') to fly with the newer ET-138 and for the LON STS-335 (''Atlantis'') mission to utilize the refurbished ET-122 only in the event that a rescue of ''Endeavour''s crew were required. During Hurricane Katrina, ET-122 was damaged at the Michoud Assembly Facility (MAF) in New Orleans and while the tank was certified as completely flight-worthy after its repairs were completed, NASA management ruled that ET-122 posed a slightly higher risk of losing foam from the repaired areas and therefore assigned it to the STS-335 mission that would likely never fly. However, once it was decided to fly ''Atlantis'' on a full STS-135 mission, the tank assignments were swapped so that in the event STS-134 (''Endeavour'') were to suffer damage from ET-122, ''Atlantis'' with the newer and less risky ET-138 would be poised to rescue ''Endeavour''s crew.  
Early December 2010, ground technicians installed the main engines on ''Atlantis''. The Shuttle received the center engine on 7 December 2010, followed by the lower-right engine and the lower-left on 8 and 9 December 2010 respectively inside Orbiter Processing Facility (OPF-1). The event marked the last set of main engines ever to be installed on a space shuttle.
Stacking operations of the Solid Rocket Boosters (SRBs) for the mission commenced in the evening hours of 29 March 2011. Technicians inside the VAB, lifted the left-aft segment from the handling crate and carefully maneuvered into High Bay No. 1 and finally onto the mobile launch platform. The booster stacking was completed in mid April. The completed boosters had a mixture of refurbished and unflown elements (11 sections on each booster). For example, the forward dome for the right-hand booster is new, while the upper cylinder on the left booster flew with STS-1     the historic maiden flight of Space Shuttle Columbia. (For detailed information on the STS-135 boosters, see) 
After completing the assembly process, the External Tank-138 was mated to the SRBs on 25 April.
President Barack Obama, First Lady Michelle Obama, and their daughters Malia Obama and Sasha Obama viewed ''Atlantis'' at the Orbiter Processing Facility (OPF-1) on their visit to the Kennedy Space Center on 29 April 2011. The first family missed the launch of ''Endeavour'' on the STS-134 mission, as the launch was scrubbed due to problems with two heaters on one of ''Endeavour''s auxiliary power units (APUs).
During their tour of the Orbiter Processing Facility, the first family was accompanied by United Space Alliance tile technician Terry White and astronaut Janet Kavandi. Standing under the wings of space shuttle ''Atlantis'', White gave the president and his family an informal tutorial.
On the early morning of 17 May 2011, Space Shuttle ''Atlantis'' departed OPF-1 and headed to the VAB for mating operations with ET-138. The short trip took longer than normal and allowed the shuttle workers to pose for a photo opportunity with the shuttle. The four STS-135 astronauts were also present to greet the workers and representatives of the media. ''Atlantis'' remained on the Orbiter Transport System overnight, as opposed to heading over to High Bay 1 on the same day.
Inside the VAB transfer aisle, lifting operations to rotate ''Atlantis'' vertically commenced on 18 May 2011. The crane that hoisted the shuttle placed it into the adjacent high bay. ''Atlantis'' was next lowered to meet up with the external tank and the two solid rocket boosters. The mating operations were completed on 19 May 2011. On the same day, NASA officially announced 8 July 2011 as the intended launch date of the STS-135 mission.
Large crowds, including the families of NASA's workforce, were present during the rollout. The STS-135 crew was also at the Kennedy Space Center to witness the last-ever rollout of a Space Shuttle. The crew participated in an informal Question & Answer session with news media, which was aired live on NASA TV. While ''Atlantis'' was rolled out to the launch pad, ''Endeavour'' was landing a few miles away at the Shuttle Landing Facility, touching down on Kennedy Space Center's Runway 15 at 2:34 a.m. EDT after completing its final mission, STS-134.