The player assumes the role of various characters during the single-player campaign, changing perspectives throughout the progression of the story.
Each level is a mission that features a series of objectives that are displayed on the heads up display, which marks the direction and distance towards and from such objectives. Damage to the player is shown by blood shown on the screen. The player's health regenerates as time passes. Tasks vary in their requirements, having the player arrive at a particular checkpoint, eliminate enemies in a specified location, stand their ground to defend an objective, or plant explosive charges on an enemy installation. The player is accompanied by friendly troops who cannot be issued orders. Laptop computers that contain enemy intelligence appear throughout the campaign and may be collected.
Special Ops is divided into five separate groups of missions: Alpha, Bravo, Charlie, Delta, and Echo. Each mission may be played at three difficulty levels: regular, hardened, or veteran. Successfully completing a mission earns the players stars; there are up to three stars available for each mission: one star for completing the mission on regular difficulty, two for hardened, and three for veteran. Once enough stars are earned, more missions are unlocked. There are a total of 23 missions with their respective 69 stars available for unlock. At the end of each mission, a statistics screen displays how long the player(s) took to complete the level and how many kills were scored by each player, amongst other data.
 ''Modern Warfare 2'' introduces several new features. Aside from new weapons, equipment, and perks that upgrade to "pro versions" after meeting utilization requirements. The player can choose three of fifteen killstreaks, which are earned after getting a certain amount of consecutive kills. Among these is the ability to receive a supply drop after achieving four kills in a row, guide a Predator missile strike after five kills, and control an AC-130 gunship, or Chopper Gunner, after eleven kills. Some killstreak rewards earn kills that go towards your killstreak.  For example, Harrier Strike(7 killstreak) will stay and shoot down enemies after it has bombed a general area. Players can also gain a tactical nuke if they obtain a 25 kill streak. The nuke will achieve victory in a match for the player or team that called in the nuke regardless of whether the team was winning or losing at the time the nuke was called in. Another new feature is the in-game host migration; if a match host leaves the game, or if the host struggles to support the game, a 'host migration delay' allows a new host to be selected and the game to continue. There is also the addition of an optional third person mode which can be used in certain game types.
In the Xbox 360 version of the game, the party chat system is disabled while the player is playing online in certain playlist types. This decision, designed to promote cooperation amongst team members, has caused some   within the Xbox Live community. The offline (splitscreen and LAN) multiplayer mode retains the experience and rewards system found online, a first for the series since the system was introduced. However, the rewards are separate from those that are earned while playing online.
 In addition, the PC version shares the same 18-player cap as the console versions (matches are a maximum of 9 versus 9).
 However, the player begins the game controlling Private First Class Joseph Allen, a Ranger stationed in Afghanistan, who later goes undercover in Russia for the Central Intelligence Agency under the alias of "Alexei Borodin". Private James Ramirez, a member of 1st Battalion 75th Ranger Regiment stationed in the United States, serves as the player character during the defense of the United States' eastern coast against a Russian invasion. John "Soap" MacTavish becomes the player character in the final three missions. In the five years since ''Call of Duty 4'' took place, he has been promoted to the rank of captain in the Special Air Service. He now commands most of Task Force 141 and its field operations, acting as Sanderson's superior officer. The player also briefly assumes the role of an unnamed International Space Station astronaut during an EVA moments prior to the station's destruction.
Several non-playable characters (NPCs) play prominent roles in the story. As mentioned, Captain John "Soap" MacTavish (voiced by Kevin McKidd) returns as a NPC for a majority of the game and serves as Roach's superior officer and mentor. Captain John Price (voiced by Billy Murray) also returns from ''Call of Duty 4'' to assist Task Force 141 after MacTavish, Roach, and other members rescue him from a Russian gulag. The other primary member of the unit is the mysterious Lieutenant Simon "Ghost" Riley, (voiced by Craig Fairbrass, who also voiced Gaz in ''Call of Duty 4'') who conceals his face with a skull print balaclava. Sergeant Foley (voiced by Keith David), along with his subordinate, Corporal Dunn (voiced by Barry Pepper), is initially Joseph Allen's squad leader while stationed in Afghanistan, and becomes James Ramirez's squad leader in the United States later in the story. Nikolai, the Russian informant from ''Call of Duty 4'', returns to aid Task Force 141 at various points in the story. Lieutenant General Shepherd (voiced by Lance Henriksen) is the commander of both Task Force 141 and the Army Rangers, and becomes an antagonist after he betrays the Task Force members near the end of the game. Vladimir Makarov, a former protege of Imran Zakhaev (the chief antagonist from ''Call of Duty 4''), serves as the primary antagonist throughout most of the story.
Despite the   of the United States Marine Corps and the Special Air Service, the Ultranationalists seize control of Russia and declare Imran Zakhaev a hero and martyr, erecting a statue of him in the heart of Red Square. Meanwhile, Vladimir Makarov, one of Zakhaev's former lieutenants, begins a campaign against the West by committing acts of terrorism over the course of five years.
Allen is later sent on an undercover mission in Russia for the CIA under the name Alexei Borodin, joining Makarov in a massacre of civilians at the Zakhaev International Airport in Moscow. Makarov has been aware of Allen's identity and kills him during extraction, leaving his body behind to spark a war between Russia and the United States. Angered by what was believed to be an American-supported terrorist attack, Russia retaliates with a massive surprise invasion on the United States after bypassing its early warning system, revealing that the ACS module had already been compromised before its retrieval. Sergeant Foley leads his squad of Army Rangers, including Pvt. James Ramirez, in defense of a suburb in northeastern Virginia against the invasion. They then proceed towards Washington, D.C., where more U.S. forces are fighting against the Russians for control of the capital.
Meanwhile, Task Force 141 searches for evidence that implicates Makarov as the mastermind behind the airport massacre, as proof of Makarov's involvement died with Allen. Intelligence leads them to a favela in Rio de Janeiro, where the team investigates Makarov's contact, weapons dealer Alejandro Rojas. They find out from Rojas that Makarov's worst enemy, known as Prisoner 627, is incarcerated in a Russian gulag east of Petropavlovsk. Task Force 141 assaults the prison and manages to free 627, who turns out to be Captain Price. Price agrees to aid the 141 and Shepherd in tracking down Makarov, but argues that the war in America needs to end before the 141 can do so. To end it, he temporarily goes rogue, and leads the 141 to raid a Russian port to gain control of a nuclear submarine. Price uses the submarine to launch a submarine-launched ballistic missile towards Washington D.C. He sets the warhead to detonate in the upper atmosphere, which unintentionally destroys the International Space Station and creates an electromagnetic pulse that cripples vehicles and electronic equipment on both sides, giving the Americans an advantage. Back on the ground, Foley and his squad seek shelter from the disabled aircraft that are now literally falling from the sky, and proceed to the White House. There, they receive a transmission informing them that the Air Force is preparing to carpet bomb the entire city to deny the Russians a strong foothold. Foley's squad fight their way to the roof of the White House and set off green-colored flares, aborting the air strike with less than thirty seconds to spare. Flares are lit on the rooftops of other landmarks, signifying that the city is in American hands. 
Narrowing down Makarov's hiding place to two separate locations, Task Force 141 decides to split up. Price and Soap travel to an aircraft boneyard in Afghanistan, while Roach and Ghost raid Makarov's safe house on the Georgian-Russian border. At the safe house, Roach and his team obtain vital intelligence from Makarov's computer and escape with Makarov's men in pursuit. However, when they reach the extraction point, Shepherd betrays and kills them, retrieving the intelligence and taking it with him. Price and Soap quickly learn of Shepherd's betrayal and escape a battle between Shepherd and Makarov's men with the help of Nikolai. Price contacts Makarov on an open radio channel and makes a deal to kill Shepherd, with Makarov grudgingly revealing the location of Shepherd's mountain base in Afghanistan. Price and Soap raid the base in an attempt to take revenge on Shepherd in a suicide mission. During the infiltration, Shepherd destroys the base using the self destruct system then tries to escape and a boat pursuit ensues.
At the climax of the pursuit, Shepherd boards a helicopter, only for Price to disable it by shooting the helicopter's rotor, causing it to crash. Price and Soap tumble over a waterfall in the process. After recovering from the fall, a dazed Soap follows Shepherd and attempts to kill him. Shepherd slams Soap into a rusted car, stabs him in the chest and prepares to kill him with his revolver. Just before he can, Price attacks Shepherd and the two engage in a hand to hand fight, with Shepherd slowly gaining the upper hand. Soap manages to pull the knife from his chest and throws it at Shepherd, piercing his left eye and killing him. Price bandages Soap's wounds as Nikolai arrives in a helicopter to extract them, having gone against Price's advice not to return for him and Soap. Nikolai warns them that they will be pursued, but Price insists that Soap receive medical attention. Nikolai mentions that he knows a safe place to go to.
Infinity Ward announced on October 2009 that the PC version of ''Modern Warfare 2'' would not support the use of user-run dedicated servers or in-game console commands. Such announcement was received poorly by some members of the PC community, a negative response that eventually drew Infinity Ward's own response on the matter in an effort to put the community at ease. During brainstorming sessions, an idea came forth on what if the ending of Modern Warfare was a loss, leading to the sequel. In an interview with Jesse Stern, he talked to producers of Infinity Ward with ideas such as "outbreaks, viruses, chemical warfare, and even outlandish things such as aliens and the living dead." Stern mentioned having the game based on real-life conflicts before they halted further planning at first due to events in the 2008 South Ossetia war and in the Mumbai terrorist attacks.
On August 20, 2009, Robert Bowling revealed through Twitter that Kevin McKidd, Craig Fairbrass, Barry Pepper, Keith David, and Glenn Morshower were confirmed voice actors for the game. It was later confirmed that McKidd would voice the protagonist, "Soap" MacTavish. Fairbrass, who voiced Gaz in ''Call of Duty 4'', provided voice work for "Ghost". Billy Murray confirmed that he would reprise his role as Captain Price from ''Call of Duty 4''. Rapper 50 Cent provided voice work for the Special Ops and multiplayer modes, portraying "one of the squad  voices." The main theme of ''Call of Duty: Modern Warfare 2'' was provided by Hollywood composer Hans Zimmer, while the soundtrack was composed by Lorne Balfe who co-produced 2009 film Sherlock Holmes score with Zimmer. The soundtrack was officially released on June 1.
The game utilizes the in-house IW 4.0 game engine, which is claimed to be a generation beyond the capabilities of the engine used in ''Call of Duty 4''. Although proprietary, it is based on an unspecified id Tech engine, and can accommodate larger worlds, enhanced graphic detail, and more efficient rendering. Infinity Ward has addressed the issue of enemies that continually respawn at different points of a level. The developer demonstrated that the game engine uses a "dynamic AI", which has replaced the infinite respawn system and allows enemies to act more independently. These "smarter" enemies are designed to actively seek out and drive the player forward through a level, and can break away from set behaviors such as following a designated route in order to attack. The player cannot depend on enemies to be found in the same locations as a previous play-through because enemies will behave differently each time a level is played.
 and released on the Xbox Live Marketplace and the PlayStation Network a short time later. A second teaser was released on May 10, 2009 and showed gameplay features such as snowmobile driving and underwater actions. The teaser announced that the game would be "revealed" on TNT during the NBA Eastern Conference Finals on May 24, 2009. The "reveal" was the first full-length trailer, which debuted extended sequences of actual in-game scenes and combat; the trailer was subsequently made available on the ''Modern Warfare 2'' official website, which was kept updated for the occasion. A fourth trailer was released on July 27, 2009, and showed the first footage of the game's multiplayer mode. On October 4, 2009, a second full-length cinematic trailer was released and revealed that part of the game would take place in a war-torn Washington, D.C.
 Peripherals manufacturer Mad Catz was contracted by Activision to create a line of ''Modern Warfare 2'' controllers and accessories for all platforms that the game would be available on. Activision stated, in its quarterly earnings report, that pre-orders for the game had broken a company record; more copies of ''Modern Warfare 2'' had been pre-ordered than any other game that the company had published before. In September 2009, Monster Energy teamed up with Activision to bring special redeemable codes on the Monster Energy website,  where people may submit codes included in Monster Energy packs to redeem items such as Xbox 360 Premium Themes and a ''Modern Warfare 2'' Map Pack code.
The original teaser trailer confirmed that the game's title of ''Call of Duty: Modern Warfare 2'' was officially (and initially) shortened to just ''Modern Warfare 2''. After photographs of the official retail boxes were posted by Robert Bowling, Activision confirmed that the standard-edition ''Modern Warfare 2'' packaging would feature the ''Call of Duty'' brand logo in order to reflect the game's association with the ''Call of Duty'' franchise. It is speculated that the decision was influenced by findings that brand awareness for the game was significantly lower without the ''Call of Duty'' logo. However, the developers still prefer to simply call the game ''Modern Warfare 2'' as they consider it a new IP. The menus in the game also refer to the title of ''Modern Warfare 2''.
On September 15, 2009, Activision and Microsoft jointly announced a special, limited ''Modern Warfare 2'' version of the Xbox 360 with a 250GB hard disk. The unit is highlighted by special game product branding and includes two wireless controllers and a headset. This is the first Xbox 360 to come with a 250GB hard drive. On September 18, UK retailer GAME announced a Veteran Edition of ''Modern Warfare 2'' that would be exclusively for the UK. It will come with a 12" (30.5&nbsp;cm) tall statue of "Soap" MacTavish with interchangeable arms and weapons; has the same contents as the Hardened Edition. In September 2009, a Veteran Statue Bundle of ''Modern Warfare 2'' was posted on the EBGames website and is available for all platforms.
Activision has announced that two downloadable map packs will be released for ''Modern Warfare 2''. At E3 2009, Microsoft stated that these map packs would first be made available for the Xbox 360 via Xbox Live before they would be released for other platforms. Robert Bowling has stated that the community response to the game and the first ten downloadable map packs would be used in designing other potential map packs.
The first map pack, titled the "Stimulus Package," was released first for Xbox Live on March 30, 2010 and for PlayStation Network and PC on May 4, 2010 in North America. The map pack is priced at US$14.99 (or 1200 Microsoft Points). The pack contains five maps: reincarnations of the ''Crash'' and ''Overgrown'' maps from ''Call of Duty 4'', and three new maps: ''Bailout'', a multi-level apartment complex; ''Storm'', an industrial park littered with heavy machinery; and ''Salvage'', an abandoned car junkyard in the middle of the snow.
Within 24 hours of its release, it was downloaded over one million times. Within the first week it had been downloaded 2.5 million times, breaking Xbox Live DLC records.  In addition to integrating the maps into all existing game types, the Stimulus Package adds two new game modes, randomizing the built-in game types in either normal or hardcore mode.
 The package includes five new multiplayer maps: reincarnations of the ''Strike'' and ''Vacant'' maps from ''Call of Duty 4'', and three new maps: ''Carnival'', a desolated amusement park; ''Trailer Park'', a mobile home park; and ''Fuel'', an oil refinery.
 as well as items from other media types. After five days of sales, the game had earned revenue figures of $550 million worldwide. As of January 18, 2010, it has taken over $1 billion in sales. Activision also claims that ''Modern Warfare 2'' had 8 million players online within the first five days, constituting the largest 'army' of players in the world. On March 8, 2010, Robert Bowling announced that the game had amassed 25 million unique players.
According to the NPD Group, ''Modern Warfare 2'' sold approximately 4.2 million units for the Xbox 360 and 1.87 million units for the PlayStation 3 in the U.S. during the month of November 2009. In Japan, ''Modern Warfare 2'' sold 64,000 copies for the PlayStation 3 and 42,000 copies for the Xbox 360 in its first week of sales. The game later sold 117,000 copies on the PlayStation 3 and 61,000 on the Xbox 360.  Anita Frazer of the NPD Group reported in March 2010 that the game had sold slightly under 10 million copies in the U.S. alone.
Modern Warfare 2| publisher = Game | accessdate = 2011-03-20}}
 In addition, many reviewers have complained about the lack of innovation to the formula of the series.      
The accolades heaped on the title weren't limited to gameplay, either     in June 2010, composers Hans Zimmer and Lorne Balfe were presented with the ASCAP Top Video Game Award for their work on ''Modern Warfare 2''.
Various portions of the campaign have caused some   in certain communities. The   of a massacre carried out in a Russian airport has caused anger in the international community. Additionally, an   early in the campaign involving the don't ask, don't tell policy of the American military has led some to accuse the game and its developers of homophobia.
After the successful hack on the PlayStation 3 in January 2011, some ''Modern Warfare 2'' players on PS3 have had their stats hacked or completely deleted. Infinity Ward replied that their advice was to play in private games, waiting for Sony to fix the problems on the platform side, saying that they could not patch the security problem themselves.
 and received from ''GameTrailers'' overall six awards. GameSpot and Metacritic, both gave it the ''Best Xbox 360 Game'' award, the Pakistani game reviewing site, PakGamers, has awarded ''Modern Warfare 2'' with 'Best Xbox 360 Game of 2009'. and from GameTrailers received the game the ''Best Multiplayer'' award including the ''Best First-Person Shooter'' award.