The '''2008 United States presidential election in Hawaii''' took place on November 4, 2008 throughout all 50 states and D.C., which was part of the 2008 United States presidential election. Voters chose 4 representatives, or electors to the Electoral College, who voted for President and Vice President.
There were 17 news organizations who made state by state predictions of the election. Here are their last predictions before election day:
Just 3 pre-election polls were ever taken in the state, averaging Obama at 64% to McCain at 30%.
Obama raised $3,098,395. McCain raised $424,368.
Obama spent $113,838 while a conservative interest group spent $31. Obama visited the state once.
One of the most reliably blue states in the nation, Hawaii has only voted for two Republican candidates since statehood, both in national Republican landslides--Richard Nixon in 1972 and Ronald Reagan in 1984.  A large concentration of Asian Americans makes the state very favorable to the Democrats and is the birthplace of Barack Obama. Although Governor Linda Lingle and Lieutenant Governor James Aiona are both Republicans, Democrat Barack Obama still won the state in a landslide over Republican John McCain. During the same election, Democrats picked up one seat in the Hawaii House of Representatives and two seats in the Hawaii Senate. Following Election 2008, Democrats control a supermajority status in the Hawaii state legislature with 45 out of 51 seats in the Hawaii House and 23 out of 25 seats in the Hawaii Senate.
Barack Obama swept both of Hawaii   s two congressional districts easily. 
Technically the voters of Hawaii cast their ballots for electors: representatives to the Electoral College. Hawaii is allocated 4 electors because it has 2 congressional districts and 2 senators. All candidates who appear on the ballot or qualify to receive write-in votes must submit a list of 4 electors, who pledge to vote for their candidate and his or her running mate. Whoever wins the majority of votes in the state is awarded all 4 electoral votes. Their chosen electors then vote for President and Vice President. Although electors are pledged to their candidate and running mate, they are not obligated to vote for them. An elector who votes for someone other than his or her candidate is known as a faithless elector.
The electors of each state and the District of Columbia met on December 15, 2008 to cast their votes for President and Vice President. The Electoral College itself never meets as one body. Instead the electors from each state and the District of Columbia met in their respective capitols. 