The title is a documentary by Kasparov chronicling his intrepid series of chess matches against Deep Blue.  My understanding is that chess is a game of 100% logical strategy and 0% happenstance.  Will there come a time when it is impossible for a human to beat a computer even in a single match?  
If true, then I'd like to ask:  if chess is a game that can be won in 3 moves, will there come a time when humans struggle to modestly even surpass this lower limit?    ( ) 00:39, 3 December 2008 (UTC)
Because of the way chess computers are programmed, humans can still defeat even the most powerful by puzzling them with an ingenious innovation that they cannot recognise. However, because chess theory is today so well developed, true innovations are scarce and likely to be flawed. --  ( ) 10:43, 3 December 2008 (UTC)
Not that we'd want to, or need to. Environmental crises withstanding, does any country have this capability?   ( ) 01:15, 3 December 2008 (UTC)
If we had the technology to send a massive bullet, say the mass of a truck but compacted, @90% of the speed of light into the ground, what would happen? Would we be any closer to digging the completely useless unobtanable hole?    ( ) 23:05, 6 December 2008 (UTC)
What is the chemical reaction of copper in the presence of limestone or concrete (a limestone derivative)?  I know that copper corrodes, as unshielded copper pipe will do when embedded in crushed limestone under concrete floor slabs or in the floor itself; but what exactly is the reaction?  I have asked several chemistry professors without success and can find no help in scientific encyclopedias.  ( ) 02:46, 3 December 2008 (UTC)
If you were alone on a deserted island and you knew there was iron ore in the ground, would it be possible for you to create metal, and in turn create useful metal tools?   ( ) 04:24, 3 December 2008 (UTC)
As we understand physics at this time, nothing can move faster than the speed of light. Thus, since even light can not move fast enough to escape the gravity of a black hole, nothing can escape. Theroetically, IF there were a way to surpass the speed of light would the gravity of a black hole still be too strong to escape from? How much faster than the speed of light would an object need to be going to escape the gravitational forces of a black hole?    Preceding   comment added by   (       ) 04:57, 3 December 2008
The hypothetical tachyons (which would violate causality) always travel on spacelike world lines (never within the light cone). In a Schwarzschild black hole the radial coordinate is timelike at values smaller than the Schwarzschild radius, and the time coordinate becomes spacelike in this region. Therefore, tachyons shouldn't be able to travel along radial trajectories inside the black hole without traveling a longer way along the time coordinate (i. e. without traveling at low speeds in the reference frame of an observer outside the black hole). Somehow that looks like tachyons behave like ordinary particles and vice versa beyond the event horizon.   ( ) 11:00, 3 December 2008 (UTC)
Further to my original query, I was thinking along the lines of Star Trek (ya, I'm a Trekker!) where there is a way to create a "warp bubble" allowing one to traverse distances at super-light speed without contradicting the known laws of physics.If this were possible, would one still be screwed once past the event horizon?
It is my understanding that coffee is a diuretic, but that drinking coffee will still increase hydration levels (just not as much as water). Is that correct, and is it possible to quantify the "hydration effect" for a given type/strength of coffee (assuming that water is 100%)? Thanks   ( ) 12:40, 3 December 2008 (UTC)
Hi, I could use some help here, please. I'm trying to gain some understanding of protein structures, necessary background info for a project I'm involved with. THe thing is, the paragraph on tertiary structures is much more complex than the parts before it, therefore I would be really grateful if someone could translate the following section into something a bit more understandable:
Thank you--  ( ) 14:48, 3 December 2008 (UTC)
I recently read that light emitted by the sun takes approximately 8 minutes to reach earth. Nothing remarkable in that you may think, but it then got me pondering the possibility of sending a satellite into space to then peer back at earth and look back in time. So, assuming that we had the technology, we could send our super-satellite 670,616,629.40 miles into the universe for every hour that we wish to look back in time. However the speed at which we can send our satellite into space is capped at the speed of light so there is by this method there is no way to look back at earth before the point at which our satellite was launched. Is there a solution to this problem, so that we one day might be able to peer back at earth to the time of Jesus and beyond to the point at which the earth formed? Or will we have to hope that our alien friends have beaten us to it and have had us under CCTV surveillance for the past 4.54bn years? --  ( ) 14:50, 3 December 2008 (UTC)
Don't physical effects propogated via quantum entanglement effectively travel faster than the speed of light? Might this be useful?     Preceding   comment added by   ( ) 11:11, 4 December 2008 (UTC) 
Hello. Is perceiving your own bad body odor as difficult as perceiving your own bad breath because of habituation?   ( ) 14:58, 3 December 2008 (UTC)
Is there a way to measure the speed of light with everyday household products?  --  ( ) 15:01, 3 December 2008 (UTC)
If you are being serious Sean, how does that measure the speed of light?--  ( ) 15:21, 3 December 2008 (UTC)
What are the tooth-like structures on the roof of the bird on the left's mouth?  Thanks.    Preceding   comment added by   (       ) 
I remember reading something (I think it was in Stephen Hawking's a brief history of time) about Mercury being so close to the sun that the time distortion allows it to experience an extra day each year or something like that (not sure if it was a mercury day/mercury year or ours or a combination).  Also not sure if it was extra time or missing time or if you'd have to be on the planet or if it could be observed from earth... just trying to remember what the fact was.  I read it Tests_of_general_relativity that mercury experiences an extra 43 arc-seconds a century under relativity versus newtonian laws, but not sure how that translates into what I'm trying to understand about Mercury.  If anyone knows what I'm talking about, please fill in any details I am missing.   ( ) 17:45, 3 December 2008 (UTC)
I think the "extra day" thing is nothing to do with relativity, but refers to the difference between the sidereal day and the solar day.  If a planet rotates around its axis in the same direction that it revolves around the Sun, its year includes exactly one more sidereal day than the number of solar days.  This is true for any planet, simply because of the geometrical facts of rotation.  For example, the Earth has about 3651/4 solar days in a year and about 3661/4 sidereal days, so the sidereal day is shorter by 1 part in 3661/4 or about 4 minutes -- not exactly a huge difference.
For Mercury, on the other hand, its position close to the Sun produces a large tidal drag that has greately slowed its rotation until it has only 11/2 sidereal days in a year.  (That's exactly 11/2, a situation what has developed instead of tidal locking due to its high orbital eccentricity.)  So it has just 1/2 a solar day in a year, which is a huge difference from 11/2 days.  As seen from a typical point on Mercury's surface, the Sun rises only once every 2 years.  (Mercurian years, that is -- about 88 Earth days each.)
Oh, and another thing.  Like any planet, Mercury rotates at a constant rate, but its motion around its orbit is faster during the part of the year when it is closer to the Sun.  I've read that because its rotation is so slow, this variation actually causes the Sun to appear to reverse temporarily in its apparent motion.  So from some places on Mercury, the Sun rises ''twice'' during the 2 years that one day lasts.  In between the two risings, it sets again in the same place where it rose.  That might be considered an "extra day".
Will using wind farms to generate electricity change the weather pattern for areas downwind?
If solar panel collectors are collecting the Sun's heat, instead of warming the Earth's surface layer, what will happen because of this temperature change in future generations21:09, 3 December 2008 (UTC)Will harnessing the power of ocean waves end up destroying the biology of the oceans  ( ) 21:09, 3 December 2008 (UTC)
Now, I've always believed that parrots are very hardy birds and tolerant of low temperatures by virtue of being far better insulated than I am. Just had a disagreement today with someone who believes that I should be keeping the heating in my house on full blast at night in winter for the sake of my Hyacinth macaw. I'm convinced that she doesn't care about the chilly weather in the slightest. I've owned her for more than 20 years and for all that time, she's been doing what comes naturally and turning into a big blue puffball when she needs to keep warm and never seemed any the worse for it.
I have some heating but I never keep my house hot. That's the way it's always been. If I'm feeling cold, I prefer to put a jumper on instead of turning the radiators up. We're having a cold spell in England at the moment but it's not like the temp. ever drops below zero in my home.
So my question, do you think I'm doing the wrong thing by my birdy? I know that macaws are supposed to be tropical birds but I don't know for sure if this bird has even seen the rainforest on TV, let alone been there.   Preceding   comment added by   (       ) 23:21, 3 December 2008 