Although agreement on the exact boundaries of 'Central Florida' can vary, the region is generally considered to be Orlando and it's surrounding suburbs, including Orange, Osceola, Seminole, Lake, Brevard, and Volusia counties. Polk, Flagler, and Sumter counties are often included in Central Florida demographics and are primarily served by Orlando media outlets.
Counties west of this designated area are geographically in Central Florida, however they are considered part of the Tampa Bay Area or the Suncoast.  This includes the city of Tampa and it's surrounding suburbs around Tampa Bay: Hillsborough, Pinellas, Pasco, and Hernando counties.
The central cities of both metropolitan areas (Orlando and Tampa) are in close proximity (85 miles), and as a result, their two metropolitan areas blend together in the area of Lakeland to make up a larger contiguous population center often referred to as the I-4 corridor.  This is a population concentration that stretches from Tampa Bay on the west coast to Daytona Beach and Cape Canaveral on the east coast of the state.
With the exception of hill terrain in Northern Lake County, Central Florida is mostly flatland's with significant amounts of open space and over 1,500 lakes and ponds. There is a mixture of wetlands, Cypress forests, pastures, and coastline.
Hurricanes are a threat to the coastal cities as evident by the 2004 Hurricane Season, which brought 3 major hurricanes to the Central Florida area; Charley, Jeanne, and Francis. Major rivers include the St. Johns River, the Ocklawaha River, the Banana River, the Halifax River, and the Econlockhatchee River. Major lakes include Lake Apopka, Lake Tohopekaliga, East Lake Tohopekaliga, Lake Louisa, Lake Monroe, Lake Jessup, and the Butler Chain of Lakes.
There are over  of coastline in Central Florida along the Atlantic Coast. Major beaches include Canaveral National Seashore, New Smyrna Beach, Daytona Beach, Cocoa Beach, Florida, and Indiatlantic Beach near Melbourne, FL.
Winters are dry and temperate with the average winter high temperature in Orlando being .  Summers are hot and humid with high temperatures averaging .  Peak summer heat generally arrives in early June and continues to early October.
The combination of high temperatures, high humidity, and opposing sea breezes from both the Gulf and Atlantic coasts, results in significant thunderstorm activity from July to September for the interior counties.  Central Florida records more lightning strikes per area than any other region in Florida, and Florida records more lightning strikes than any other state in the USA.  As a result, Florida, and more specifically, Central Florida, is often referred to as the "Thunderstorm capital of the USA".
These severe thunderstorms often make Central Florida prone to many tornados.  However, they are usually small, short lived, and almost always rated as EF0 or EF1 size storms.
In 2009, the estimated total population of the Central Florida region was 3.3 million people. This includes the populations of Orange, Seminole, Osceola, Brevard, Volusia, and Lake Counties. If the populations of Polk, Flagler, and Sumter counties were included, the estimated population would be 3.969 million people. Explosive growth has fueled Central Florida for the past thirty years, but this trend plateaued in 2009.
Below are the populations from the Orlando-Deltona-Daytona Beach, Florida, Combined Statistical Area (CSA), Orange, Seminole, Osceola, Lake, Volusia, Flagler, and The Villages.
None in the CSA
Brevard County, which is considered by many locals to be part of Central Florida (although not included in the CSA) includes Titusville (between 25,000-50,000), Melbourne (between 50,000-100,000) and Palm Bay (over 100,000). Polk County, which is part of the television market (but not in the CSA), includes Winter Haven and Lakeland (50,000-100,000).
Major international airports include:
Major Surface Arterials:
Amtrak serves Central Florida running on CSX Transportation's A line and stops at the Orlando Amtrak Station. The ''Auto Train'' stops in Sanford, Florida, north of downtown Orlando.
Port Canaveral, located in Cape Canaveral 45 minutes east of Orlando, is a cruise, cargo, and naval port. It is one of the busiest ports in Florida and is economically tied to Orlando. Locally perceived to be Orlando's seaport, Port Canaveral is the closest port for tourists and Orlando residents alike to cruise on Disney Cruise Lines and Carnival Cruises. Future plans for the port include a rail and natural gas line running directly to Orlando International Airport.
Central Florida is currently developing a regional commuter rail network. The first of these initiatives, SunRail, is a commuter rail line that will run from Deland south to Kissimmee. The first phase should be complete by 2013 with the full system in place by 2015.
A High Speed Rail line was in the planning stages at one point during the years of 2009-2011, however, that plan was eventually canceled by the Governer of Florida, Rick Scott, after a cost analysis of the project.  The train line had been planned to run from the Orlando International Airport to downtown Tampa; with future lines eventually connecting to downtown Orlando, Jacksonville, and Miami.
Other major attractions include Kennedy Space Center, Cypress Gardens, Bok Tower Gardens, Daytona International Speedway, The Holy Land Experience, and Gatorland. Central Florida also has a wide variety of natural attractions including the Wekiwa Springs State Park, Blue Spring State Park, Rock Springs Run State Reserve, Canaveral National Seashore, and Merritt Island National Wildlife Refuge. The region also boasts an extensive network of recreational trails (jogging, biking, equestrian, etc.). While many connections are already in place, construction continues and will link all of the trails and greenways. Major trails include the Cady Way, Cross Seminole and West Orange Trails.
Central Florida has two major zoo, the Central Florida Zoo and Botanical Gardens, in Sanford, and the Busch Gardens Tampa Bay animal park. Minor zoos include the Brevard Zoo.
There are also two theme parks in Orlando featuring animals: Disney's Animal Kingdom and SeaWorld Orlando.
Cultural attractions in Central Florida include The Orlando Museum of Art, Orlando Science Center, Bob Carr Performing Arts Centre and Orange County Regional History Center; all of which are located in downtown Orlando. The Cornell Fine Arts Museum and Charles Hosmer Morse Museum of American Art are located in Winter Park, just north of downtown Orlando. The Museum of Arts and Sciences and the Daytona International Speedway, home to NASCAR, are located in Daytona Beach.
Films shot in the area include Parenthood, My Girl, Monster, Apollo 13, Armageddon, Instinct, and The Waterboy.
Tourism is a large contributor to Central Florida's economy. However, the area has economically diversified in the past decade. As a high-tech industrial hub, Metro Orlando has the seventh largest research park in the U.S., Central Florida Research Park, the engineering and business school of the University of Central Florida. It has defense companies such as Lockheed Martin and Siemens.  
Medical research is conducted in Orlando's Lake Nona area with the University of Central Florida medical school, the Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute biomedical research facility and a new Veterans Administration hospital. These facilities, along with several research support companies, have lead this research cluster to be referred to as Medical City. 
Kennedy Space Center is a NASA facility. Patrick Air Force Base and Cape Canaveral Air Force Station are military installations located on the Atlantic coast.
Major malls and open-air centers in the area include: