Prior to being confirmed by the Senate to lead the CEQ, Sutley served as deputy mayor for Energy and Environment in Los Angeles, California, and as Mayor Antonio Villaraigosa's appointment to the board of directors for the Metropolitan Water District of Southern California. Mayor Villaraigosa  turned to her to achieve his goal of transforming L.A. into one of the greenest big cities in America. As a result, Sutley retrofitted 500 of the city's oldest buildings to make them more energy efficient and imposed environmental standards on new large communities. 
Sutley has committed more than 20 years to protecting public health and the environment and to energy and climate change issues. She has also devoted much of her career to public service.
Sutley was born April 20, 1962 in Argentina, and was later raised in Queens, New York. Her parents came to the United States in search of a better life, and who ultimately shaped her values of hard work and the importance to giving back to the community. She holds a master of public policy from the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University, and an undergraduate B.A. degree in government from Cornell University. During the Clinton Administration, she was an Environmental Protection Agency official, and served as special assistant to the EPA administrator in Washington, D.C. Sutley was the first prominent gay person named to a senior role in the Obama administration.
Sutley served as a member of Hillary Clinton's Southern California Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender steering committee. She was also a prominent supporter of Senator Clinton's primary campaign. In addition, she supported a requirement for Los Angeles to produce 20 percent of its power from renewable sources. From 1999 to 2003, she worked as deputy secretary for policy and intergovernmental relations at the California Environmental Protection Agency. She furthered her environmental career as a member of the California State Water Resources Control Board and as the top energy advisor to former Governor Gray Davis.
Sutley is a member of the Los Angeles Metropolitan Water District board of directors. She has promoted measures to conserve energy in the White House, which include installing low-flush toilets, adding sensors that automatically turn off lights in unused areas, and introducing the use of recycling bins. The CEQ chair defines her mission as translating Obama's green agenda across government agencies, preserving natural heritage sites such as the Chesapeake Bay, the Everglades, and the Great Lakes, and putting science at the heart of decision-making. As part of the Department of Energy's demonstration project showing that American solar technologies are available, she has led  plans to install solar panels and a solar hot water heater on the roof of the White House.