Temecula is bordered by Murrieta on the northwest and the Pechanga Indian Reservation on the south, with unincorporated areas of Riverside County on all of its other borders. It is served by the Interstate 15 (Temecula Valley Freeway), Interstate 215 and California State Route 79 (Winchester Road to the northeast and Temecula Parkway to the southeast).
With neighboring Murrieta, Temecula forms the southwestern anchor of the Inland Empire region. It is almost equidistant to San Diego, Los Angeles, and Orange County, California.  Temecula is also home to military families from nearby Camp Pendleton, MCAS Miramar, March Air Reserve Base and the Naval bases in San Diego.
The area was inhabited by the Temecula natives for many hundreds of years before their first meeting with the Spanish missionaries (the people are now generally known as the ''Luisenos'', after the Mission San Luis Rey de Francia).  The Pechanga Band of Luiseno Indians believe their ancestors have lived in the Temecula area for more than 10,000 years.  In Pechanga mythology, life on earth began in the Temecula Valley.  They call it, "Exva Temeeku", the place of the union of Sky    father, and Earth    mother ("Tuukumit'pi Tamaayowit"). The Temecula Indians ("Temeekuyam") lived at "Temeekunga"    "the place of the sun".
Other popular interpretations of the name, Temecula, include "The Sun That Shines Through The Mist" or  "Where the sun breaks through the mist". According to the city website, "Temecula is the only city in California to still retain its original Indian name", although this is not true (for one counterexample, see Malibu, California.
The first recorded Spanish visit occurred in October 1797, with a  Franciscan padre, Father Juan Norberto de Santiago, and Captain Pedro Lisalde. Father Santiago kept a journal in which he noted their seeing "Temecula ...an Indian village". The trip included the Lake Elsinore area and the Temecula Valley.
In 1798, Spanish Missionaries established the Mission of San Luis Rey de Francia and designated the Indians living in the region "Sanluisenos", or shortened to "Luisenos".  In the 1820s, the Mission San Antonio de Pala was built.
The Mexican land grants made in the Temecula area were Rancho Temecula granted to Felix Valdez and Rancho Pauba to the east granted to Vicente Moraga in 1844.  Rancho Little Temecula on fertile well watered land at the southern end of the valley, which included the village of Temecula, was made in 1845 to Luiseno Pablo Apis, one of the few former mission converts to be given a land grant. A fourth grant, known as Rancho Santa Rosa in the hills to the west of Temecula, was made to Juan Moreno in 1846.
The Luiseno and Cahuilla tribes were involved in the local battles of the Mexican-American War during the following years.  In January 1847 in an event known as the Pauma Massacre, Luiseno captured 11 Mexican soldiers, who had stolen some of the tribe's horses. The Californios mounted a military retaliation directed by General xx in Los Angeles.  A combined force of Mexican soldiers and Cahuilla Indians killed 33 to 100 Luisenos (most estimates are 33-40 dead), in an action that became known as the Temecula Massacre.
As American settlers began to move into the area after the war, friction with the native tribes increased.  A Treaty was signed in the Magee Store in Temecula in 1852, but never ratified by the United States Congress. In addition, the Luisenos challenged the late land grant claims, as under Mexican law, they were supposed to be able to stay on the mission lands which they had cultivated and settled.  They challenged the Apis claim to the Little Temecula Rancho by taking the case to the Land Commission.  On November 15, 1853, the Board rejected the Luiseno claim. When they appealed in 1856, the court found in favor of the heirs of Pablo Apis (who had died in late 1853 or early 1854).  The Luiseno of Temecula village remained on the south side of Temecula Creek until 1872 when the Apis grant was acquired by Louis Wolf.  They were then evicted in 1875.
When a stagecoach line started a local route from Warner Ranch to Colton in 1857, it passed through Temecula Valley.  Within a year, the Butterfield Overland Mail stagecoach line, with a route between St. Louis, Missouri and San Francisco, stopped at Temecula's Magee Store.  On April 22, 1859, the first inland Southern California post office was established in Temecula in the Magee Store.  This was the second post office in the state, the first being located in San Francisco. The Temecula post office was moved in the ensuing years.  Its present locations are the seventh and eighth sites occupied.  When the American Civil War put an end to the great Butterfield Overland Stage Service, but stage service continued on the route under other stage companies until the railroad reached Fort Yuma in 1877.
In 1862, Louis Wolf, a Temecula merchant and postmaster, married Ramona Place, who was mixed-race and half Indian. Author Helen Hunt Jackson spent time with Louis and Ramona Wolf in 1882 and again in 1883. Wolf's store became an inspiration for Jackson's fictional "Hartsel's store" in her 1884 novel, ''Ramona''.
In 1882, the US established the Pechanga Indian Reservation of approximately  some 8 miles (13&nbsp;km) from downtown Temecula. Also in 1882, the California Southern Railroad, a subsidiary of the Santa Fe Railroad, completed construction of the section from National City to Temecula. In 1883, the line was extended to San Bernardino. In the late 1880s, a series of floods washed out the tracks and the section of the railroad through the canyon was finally abandoned. The old Temecula station was used as a barn and later demolished.  
In the 1890s with the operation of granite stone quarries, Temecula granite was shaped into fence and hitching posts, curb stones, courthouse steps, and building blocks.  At the turn of the 20th century, Temecula gained a place of importance as a shipping point for grain and cattle.
In 1904 Walter L. Vail, who had come to the United States with his parents from Nova Scotia, migrated to California and with various partners began buying land in Southern California. Vail  started buying ranch land in the Temecula Valley in 1905, buying  of Rancho Temecula and Rancho Pauba, along with the northern half of Rancho Little Temecula. Vail was killed by a street car in Los Angeles in 1906, and his son, Mahlon Vail, took over the family ranch.  In 1914, financed by Mahlon Vail and local ranchers, the First National Bank of Temecula opened on Front Street.  In 1915, the first paved, two-lane county road was built through Temecula.
By 1947, the Vail Ranch contained over . In 1948, the Vail family built a dam to catch the Temecula Creek water and created Vail Lake.  Through the mid-1960s the economy of the Temecula Valley centered around the Vail Ranch; the cattle business and agriculture were the stimuli for most business ventures.  In 1964, the Vail Ranch was sold to Kaiser Land Development Company. A later purchase by the group brought the total area to , and the area became known as Rancho California.  The I-15 corridor between Los Angeles County and San Diego was completed in the early 1980s and the subdivision land boom began. When Rancho California incorporated in December, 1989, the citizens voted to officially name their city "Temecula".
The 1990s brought rapid growth to the Temecula Valley. Many families began to move to the area from San Diego and Orange County drawn by the affordable housing prices and the popular wine country. In 1999, The Promenade Mall opened in Temecula. In 2005, Temecula expanded by annexing the neighboring planned community known as Redhawk. The annexation brought the population to 90,000.  After a period of rapid population growth and home construction, the 2007 subprime mortgage financial crisis and the resultant United States housing market correction caused a sharp rise in home foreclosures in the Temecula-Murrieta region.
According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which, 26.3&nbsp;square miles (68.0&nbsp;km  ) of it is land and  of it (0.11%) is water.
Temecula has a Mediterranean climate (Koppen climate classification ''Csa''). August is typically the hottest month of the year with December being the coldest month. Most precipitation occurs from November to March with February being the wettest month. Winter storms generally bring moderate precipitation, but strong winter storms are not uncommon especially during "El Nino" years. The driest month is June. Annual precipitation is 13.25&nbsp;inches. Morning marine layer is common during May and June. From July to September, Temecula experiences hot, dry weather with the occasional North American monsoonal flow that increases the humidity and brings isolated thunderstorms. Most of the storms tend to be short lived with little, if any rainfall. During late fall into winter, Temecula experiences dry, windy north-eastern Santa Ana winds. Snowfall is rare, but Temecula has experienced traces of snowfall in recent memories. A rare F1 tornado touched down in a Temecula neighborhood on February 19, 2005.
As of the census of 2000, there were 57,716 people, 18,293 households, and 15,164 families residing in the city.  The population density was 2,198.3 people per square mile (848.6/km  ).  There were 19,099 housing units at an average density of 727.4 per square mile (280.8/km  ).  The racial makeup of the city was 78.9% White, 3.4% African American, 0.9% Native American, 4.7% Asian, 0.3% Pacific Islander, 7.4% from other races, and 4.4% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 19.0% of the population.
There were 18,293 households out of which 52.4% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 68.8% were married couples living together, 10.0% had a female householder with no husband present, and 17.1% were non-families. 12.6% of all households were made up of individuals and 3.5% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older.  The average household size was 3.2 and the average family size was 3.5.
In the city the population was spread out with 34.7% under the age of 18, 7.8% from 18 to 24, 33.3% from 25 to 44, 17.2% from 45 to 64, and 7.1% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 31 years. The above average number of young people in Temecula was attributed to an influx of middle-class families came to buy homes in the 1990s real estate boom. For every 100 females there were 97.6 males.  For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 94.2 males.
According to a 2007 estimate, the median income for a household in the city was $75,335, and the median income for a family was $80,836. Males had a median income of $47,113 (2000) versus $31,608 (2000) for females. The per capita income for the city was $24,312 (2003). About 5.6% of families and 6.7% of the population were below the poverty line, including 7.1% of those under age 18 and 3.2% of those age 65 or over.
According to the City's 2009 Comprehensive Annual Financial Report, the top employers in the city are:
The Temecula Valley Unified School District (TVUSD) has schools in Temecula, Murrieta and Winchester, California. The general boundaries extend north to Baxter Road in French Valley, south to the Riverside/San Diego county line, east to Vail Lake, and west to the Temecula city limit.  The district covers approximately , with an enrollment of approximately 25,000 students (Grades K-12).
In the state legislature Temecula is located in the 36th Senate District, represented by Republican Joel Anderson, and in the 64th and 66th Assembly Districts, represented by Republicans Brian Nestande and Kevin Jeffries respectively. Federally, Temecula is located in California's 49th congressional district, which has a Cook PVI of R +10 and is represented by Republican Darrell Issa.
Temecula provides police service in cooperation with the Riverside County Sheriff's Department via a contract with the department fulfilled through its Southwest Sheriff's Station, located in the unincorporated community of French Valley, just immediately north of the city of Temecula, east of State Route 79. The station is adjacent to the Riverside County Superior Court's Southwest Regional Judicial District Courthouse and Southwest Detention Center, one of the five regional jails in Riverside County.  The sheriff's station is currently commanded by Captain Andre O'Harra, who also serves as Temecula's Chief of Police.
Temecula contracts for fire protection with the Riverside County Fire Department through a cooperative agreement with the California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection (Cal Fire). Temecula currently has four fire stations with a fifth one currently under construction. Ten paramedic engine companies and one truck company cover the city.
American Medical Response (AMR) is the medical authority responsible for emergency medical services (EMS) in Temecula, including all advanced life support (ALS) emergency transports.
Temecula Crime Statistics (2007)
More than 40 years after Richard Break and Leon Borel first planted 56 varieties of wine-making grapes in five different locations for the newly formed Rancho California Development Corporation, the Temecula Valley has become recognized as a full-fledged appellation.  It has more than 30 wineries and more than  of producing vineyards. The wine country is east of historic Old Town Temecula, with a variety of tasting rooms.  The annual Temecula Valley Balloon & Wine Festival is held at nearby Lake Skinner.  The festival offers live entertainment, hot air balloon rides, and wine tasting, with many of the area's local wineries represented.
Golfers can use one of the nine local golf courses including Pechanga's Journey, Redhawk, Temecula Creek Inn, Temeku Hills, CrossCreek, Pala Mesa and the SCGA Member's Course (in nearby Murrieta).
Temecula was a proposed city for a charter membership in the California Inline Hockey League. The California Inline Hockey league was a grassroots minor league inline hockey league with clubs based in the state of California but later added two teams in Nevada.  The CIHL awarded the city of Temecula a club which was to be a part of the CIHL's first season in 1995. The club was named the Temecula Desert Rats and they were going to be members of the CIHL along with the San Francisco Seals, Santa Barbara Sandsharks, Los Angeles Golden Bears, High Desert (Adelanto) Rattlers, Reno Express, Carson City Mavericks and a proposed team in San Diego which like Temecula suspended operations for 1995.  Temecula's reason for suspending operations was because no suitable rink was available for the club and was the reason the club moved to Phoenix Arizona for the 1996 season. The team was going to be called the Phoenix Desert Rats
Temecula is also known as the home for the Freestyle Motocross group Metal Mulisha with members such as Brian Deegan, Jeremy "Twitch" Stenberg, and Ronnie Faisst living in or near Temecula.
Old Town is also home to the Temecula Museum which features exhibits about the local band of Native Americans and the local natural history and city development.  The newly completed City Hall is located in Old Town.
In 2001, the Pechanga Band of Luiseno Indians built the $262 million Pechanga Resort and Casino complex. Linked together in an architectural design that subtly highlights the tribe's Luiseno culture, the facility includes: an  casino, 1,200-seat bingo hall, , 13-story, 522-room  and  convention center, 1,200-seat showroom, 200-seat cabaret lounge, and seven restaurants. The new casino also features 2,000 slot machines, 60 card tables and over 50 poker tables.
In 2004, a new gaming area was completed. It is almost  in area, including a new nightclub, Silk, and the Round Bar. Silk has a capacity of 1600 people and has five bars inside the club. The Round Bar features California's largest glass structure. The new casino also features a new sportsbar and restaurant, Kelseys, and five new eateries at the Festival of Foods.
Pechanga Resort and Casino is Temecula Valley's largest employer, with about 7,500 people employed.
Temecula maintains international relations with two cities, Leidschendam-Voorburg in the Netherlands and Daisen, Tottori in Japan.
Margarita Middle School is the sister school to Daisen-cho, Japan. The three high schools, Temecula Valley High School, Great Oak High School, and Chaparral High School switch off sending students to the Netherlands while they all share hosting. The Dutch students have usually come during October, but came in May in 2010, and the American students go during Spring Break. Margarita Middle sends a delegation every other year during Spring Break, while Daisen sends a delegation every year during the summer. The sister cities celebrated their 13th year of cooperation this year.
The city recently dedicated a Japanese Garden at the centrally located Temecula Duck Pond to honor the 10th anniversary of the city's relationship with sister city Daisen.
The Temecula Duck Pond is also home to an art piece entitled Singing in the Rain. It was commissioned by the city of Leidschendam-Voorburg as a gift to the city to commemorate the resilient American spirit in the aftermath of the September 11, 2001 attacks. The piece depicts a mother and her children bravely pedalling a bicycle into the strong headwinds of a storm. The statue stands as a lasting tribute to the strength and courage of those who refuse to be broken by brutality and terrorism.
In a March 1983 speech to the U.S. Olympic Committee, President Ronald Reagan praised the community and their "can-do" volunteer spirit: "... There are many similar stories right here in California, the folks in a rather small town, Temecula. They got together and built themselves a sports park, held fundraising barbecues and dinners. And those that didn't have money, volunteered the time and energy. And now the young people of that community have baseball diamonds for Little League and other sports events, just due to what's traditional Americanism... ". At the time of the speech, Temecula was six years away from becoming a city and many projects were completed by community leaders and volunteers who provided money, labor and equipment.
Reagan also owned a  spread in nearby Tenaja where he contemplated building a ranch. He bought the land in 1968 and sold it 11 years later.
On the 22nd anniversary of the speech, in 2005, the Rancho California Sports Park was named after Reagan.