Israel has embraced solar energy.  There is no oil on Israeli land and the country's tenuous relations with its oil-rich neighbors has made the search for a stable source of energy a national priority., David Faiman for the Jewish Virtual Library.  Israeli innovation and research has advanced solar technology to a degree that it is almost cost-competitive with fossil fuels. Its abundant sun made the country a natural location for the promising technology.  The high annual incident solar irradiance in the Negev Desert has spurred an internationally renowned solar research and development industry, with Harry Tabor and David Faiman of the National Solar Energy Center two of its more prominent members.  At the end of 2008 a feed-in tariff scheme was approved, which immediately put in motion the building of many residential and commercial solar energy power station projects.
In 1949 prime minister David Ben-Gurion sent a letter to England to offer Harry Zvi Tabor a job on the 'physics and engineering desk' of the Research Council of Israel, which he accepted.  His first task was to create the Israeli National Physical Laboratory to create standards amongst the different measurements in use in the country, primarily British, Ottoman and metric., Ehud Zion Waldoks, ''Jerusalem Post'', October 1, 2008., Cleveland Cutler, Encyclopedia of the Earth, 2007.   Once the laboratory was established, he first focused on solar energy for research and development.
Solar energy was particularly attractive for two reasons. First was the abundance and strength of the sun's rays on Israeli land. Israel's geographic latitude location is on the 30th parallel north, where the annual incident solar irradiance is 2000 kWh per sq.m.  Second, Israeli land lacks oil, and the conflicts with its neighbors made the procurement of a stable source of energy a national priority. In particular, it is argued that the best defense against missile attack felling the national power grid would be to build a distributed power network, which would mean solar fields of 25&ndash;50 megawatts across Israel., Yosef I. Abramowitz and David Lehreer, ''Haaretz'', November 2, 2008.  
Early in the 1950s, Harry Tabor began to examine why solar installations were inefficient.  He eventually devised    selective black surfaces   , which his team at the National Physical Laboratory modified using nickel and chrome methods to blacken metals. These surfaces, which became known as Tabor surfaces, are particularly effective at trapping heat for use in solar water heaters.
Tabor and French immigrant Lucien Bronicki developed a small solar power unit, the Organic Rankine Cycle turbine, for developing countries with problematic power grids., edited by Gershon Grossman, Faculty of Mechanical Energy, Technion, Haifa; Final draft.  It was designed to neutralize the maintenance issues of reciprocating engines so it had only one moving part, the rotor.  A 3 kWe prototype was exhibited at the 1961 United Nations Conference on New Sources of Energy in Rome, but it failed to find commercial success.
In 1965 Lucien Bronicki established Ormat Industries to commercialise the Organic Rankine Cycle turbine concept. In the 1970s and 1980s Ormat built and operated one of the world's first power stations to produce electricity from solar energy; the plant was located just north of the Dead Sea in Israel. 
The plant utilised a technology known as solar pond, a large-scale solar thermal energy collector with integral heat storage for supplying thermal energy.  It was the largest operating solar pond ever built for electricity generation and operated up until 1988. It had an area of 210,000 m   and gave an electrical output of 5 MW.
In the 1950s there was a fuel shortage in the new Israeli state, and the government forbade heating water between 10 a.m. and 6 p.m. As the situation worsened, engineer Levi Yissar proposed that instead of the construction of more electrical generation plants, homes should switch to solar water heaters.  He built a prototype in his home, and in 1953 he started NerYah Company, Israel's first commercial manufacturer of solar water heaters.  By 1967 around one in twenty households heated its water with the sun and 50,000 solar heaters had been sold.  However, cheap oil from Iran and from oil fields captured in the Six-Day War made Israeli electricity cheaper and the demand for solar heaters  dropped.  After the energy crisis in the 1970s, in 1980 the Israeli Knesset passed a law requiring the installation of solar water heaters in all new homes (except high towers with insufficient roof area). As a result, Israel is now the world leader in the use of solar energy ''per capita'' (3% of the primary national energy consumption).
As of the early 1990s, all new residential buildings were required by the government to install solar water-heating systems, and Israel's National Infrastructure Ministry estimates that solar panels for water-heating satisfy 4% of the country's total energy demand.  Israel and Cyprus are the per-capita leaders in the use of solar hot water systems with over 90% of homes using them.
The Ministry of National Infrastructures estimates solar water heating saves Israel two million barrels of oil a year.
On June 2, 2008 the Israeli Public Utility Authority approved a feed-in tariff for solar plants. The tariff is limited to a total installation of 50MW during 7 years, whichever is reached first, with a maximum of 15 kWp installation for residential and a maximum of 50kWp for commercial. The National Infrastructures Ministry announced on December 2009 on expanding the feed-in tariff scheme to include medium-sized solar-power stations ranging from 50 kilowatts to 5 megawatts, though only one project was approved correct for June 2010.
Multidisciplinary scientists at Technion - Israel Institute of Technology are pooling resources at  to advance the science behind solar power.
With its strong basis in nanotechnology and science, GTEP is pioneering the field of nano-energy. 
  In 2007, David Faiman, the Center's director, announced that the Center had entered into a project with Zenith Solar to create a home solar energy system that uses a 10-square meter reflector dish., Ari Rabinovitch, Reuters, August 10, 2007.  In testing, the concentrated solar technology proved to be up to five times more efficient than standard flat photovoltaic silicon panels, which would make it almost as cheap as oil and natural gas.  A prototype ready for commercialization achieved a concentration of solar energy that was more than 1,000 times greater than that from standard flat panels.  According to Faiman, who led the Israeli team that developed the technology, 10% of Israel   s population (1,000 megawatts) could live on the energy from 12 square kilometres of land., ''Green Prophet'', December 17, 2007.
The Jacob Blaustein Institutes for Desert Research facility was founded by Amos Richmond, and its faculty is part of the Ben-Gurion University of the Negev.  It has a solar energy research program that has assisted in the development of passive heating, involving the mitigation of extremes of heat and cold in the desert through efficient storage from day to nighttime. One research project is an inhabited adobe house with rational fenestration. Prisms that transmit heat during the day are installed in the room and can be rotated to allow the heat to discharge at night. 
There is a double-skin greenhouse that uses copper sulfate solution as a heat screen during the day. The liquid is pumped between the two skins, protects the interior from ultraviolet rays, and collects heat. At night the liquid is recirculated, returning the heat to the greenhouse.
In addition to a solar reactor, the solar research facilities of the Weizmann Institute are among the most advanced laboratories in the world for concentrated solar energy research.  They have tested solar technology in the production of hydrogen fuel, which has been successfully trialled on a large scale., American Committee for the Weizmann Institute, August 6, 2005.  Tareq Abu-Hamed, an Israeli scientist at the University of Minnesota, with colleagues Jacob Karni and Michael Epstein, head of the Solar Facility at Weizmann, were the developers of a new method to produce hydrogen fuel more cheaply, efficiently and safely while solving storage and transportation issues., Nicky Blackburn, ''Jerusalem Post'', September 20, 2006.
Other innovations include: harnessing sunlight for space communications and meteorological information; controlling light-dependent chemical reactions; and developing photodynamic cancer therapy.
The Negev Desert and the surrounding area, including the Arava Valley, are the sunniest parts of Israel and little of this land is arable, which is why it has become the center of the Israeli solar industry., Ehud Zion Waldoks, ''Jerusalem Post'', March 10, 2008.  David Faiman, a world expert on solar energy, thinks the energy needs of Israel's future could be met by building solar energy plants in the Negev.  As director of Ben-Gurion National Solar Energy Center, he operates one of the largest solar dishes in the world., John Lettice, ''The Register'', January 25, 2008
A 250 MW solar park in Ashalim, an area in the northern Negev, was in the planning stages for over five years, but is not expected to produce power before 2013.   In 2008 construction began on three solar power plants near the city; two thermal and one photovoltaic.
, Ari Rabinovitch, Reuters, June 11, 2008.
Israel's first solar power station opened in August 2008. Moshe Tenne built the 50 KW plant on his Negev farm for NIS 1.3 million, and he expects to earn NIS 220,000 a year from selling excess electricity to the national power grid., Avi Bar-Eli, Haaretz, September 18, 2008.  After the National Infrastructures Ministry announced it would expand its feed-in tariff scheme to include medium-sized solar-power stations ranging from 50 kilowatts to 5 megawatts, Sunday Solar Energy announced that it would invest $133 million in photovoltaic solar arrays for installation on kibbutzim., Cleantech.com news, October 17, 2008.  In December 2008, the Sunday company announced that it would make Kibbutz Reim, in the western Negev, the first community in the world to rely entirely on solar energy., Amir Ben-David, Ynet, December 22, 2008. The Reim installation's cost is estimated at NIS60-100 million and will generate at least 2.5 megawatts during peak consumption.  Excess energy will be sold to the Israel Electric Company.  The investment is expected to pay for itself in 10 years, and the costs and revenues will be divided evenly between the kibbutz and Sunday.
The largest solar installation in Israel to date was built by Sunday Solar Energy at the Dalton Winery. The installation is 100 KWp, hence twice the size of other projects in Israel. The panels are made by American manufacturer Sunpower.
The Aora's Solar "Flower" Tower is the world's first solar hybrid power plant, comprising 30 heliostat solar reflectors. The plant switches to natural gas-powered turbines after dark so that it can continue producing power 24 hours a day.