The first Spacebus satellite, Arabsat-1A, was launched in 1985. Since then, fifty two have been launched, with four more completed, and twelve outstanding orders. The launch of the 50th Spacebus satellite, Star One C1, occurred in November 2007.Christian Lardier, << Ariane-5 : un tir de l'industrie europeenne - le 50e Spacebus >>, dans ''Air & Cosmos'', N   2100, du 16 novembre 2007 It was a Spacebus 3000B3, launched by an Ariane 5 rocket flying from the Guiana Space Centre in Kourou, French Guiana.
Several variants have been built: the early Spacebus 100 and Spacebus 300; followed by the Spacebus 2000, optimised for launch on the Ariane 4 carrier rocket; and the subsequent modular Spacebus 3000 and 4000 series, designed for use with the Ariane 5 rocket. Some Spacebus satellites are built using alternatives to US ITAR-controlled components, making it one of a few Western satellites that can be launched by Chinese Long March rockets.
Aerospatiale had produced a number of satellites, including Symphonie, with the German company Messerschmitt. On December 9, 1983, the two companies signed the ''Franco-German Spacebus Agreement''. The name Spacebus was suggested by Guy Lebegue, a member of Aerospatiale's marketing department, and is based on the name Airbus.Guy Lebegue, ''Nom generique pour la famille de plate-formes MBB-AS : Spacebus'', 23 August 1983, archives Aerospatiale/Cannes and  The Spacebus designation was first applied to satellites which were under construction by Aerospatiale when the programme started. These included three satellites for Arabsat, which became the Spacebus 100 series, and five further satellites: two for Deutsche Bundespost, two for TeleDiffusion de France, and the Swedish Space Corporation's Tele-X, which became the Spacebus 300 series. Later series' names were followed by a number indicating the approximate mass of the bus in kilograms, to the nearest tonne. Spacebus designations were not applied retrospectively to satellites which had already been launched.
Spacebus satellites consist of a satellite bus, which provides power, propulsion, and other subsystems necessary for the satellite's operation, and a payload which is customisable depending on the customer's requirements. The bus was designed to be adaptable to perform various missions; however, as of 2009, only communications satellites have been ordered. It was also designed to be adaptable when the capacity of launch systems increased.
The bus is made of carbon fibre with a composite honeycomb structure. It contains fuel tanks, equipment needed to interface with a carrier rocket, and other critical systems. Panels are attached to the outside of the structure with externally mounted equipment, including the solar panels, payload, and engine. The payload, which is developed separately from the bus, takes up three panels. Once it has been outfitted with transponders or other equipment, it is transported to Cannes-Mandelieu, where it is integrated onto the bus.
Thermal control is achieved by the means of two panels with an aluminium honeycomb structure, which act as thermal radiators allowing the heat generated by the spacecraft to radiate out into space. The radiators were originally produced in Les Mureaux; however, it was subsequently moved to Cannes Mandelieu after the Les Mureaux centre was taken over by EADS. The core structure of the bus is still produced at Les Mureaux. Other parts of the cooling system include insulation, electric heaters, and heat pipes.
The satellites are powered by rigid solar panels. Several configurations are used depending on the amount of power that the satellite is expected to require. The batteries used to store this power are produced by the Belgian company ETCA. Early satellites used nickel-hydrogen batteries, while later spacecraft use lithium-ion batteries.
Most Spacebus satellites use bipropellant, liquid-fuelled chemical engines to achieve their orbits, and subsequently perform station-keeping. Electric propulsion was used on the Stentor and Astra 1K satellites, both of which were subsequently involved in launch failures. A three-axis stabilisation system is used for attitude control.
Spacebus satellites were developed to be compatible with a large number of available carrier rockets, particularly the Ariane family of rockets. As the performance of the Ariane has increased, the satellites have become larger to take advantage of this increased capacity. Guy Lebegue, (trad. Robert J. Amral), << Spacebus 3000: A Platform for 'Satellite Alliance' >>, in Revue aerospatiale,  n  99, June 1993
Three Spacebus 100 satellites were produced for Arabsat, to serve the 22 members of the Arab League. These satellites produced  of electrical power, which was used to operate 27 transponders per satellite. One of the solar panels on the first satellite, Arabsat-1A, failed to deploy resulting in reduced power to the spacecraft. This, combined with gyroscope issues, resulted in it spending most of its operational lifespan as a reserve satellite.
Arabsat-1A and Arabsat-1C were launched using Ariane 3 and Ariane 4 rockets respectively, whilst Arabsat-1B was deployed from  during the mission STS-51-G, by means of a PAM-D upper stage.
Five direct-to-home television satellites were built using the Spacebus 300 bus, which provided   of electrical power. These consisted of two satellites for TeleDiffusion de France and two satellites for Deutsche Bundespost, as part of the original Franco-German programme, plus the Tele-X satellite for the Swedish Space Corporation.
Three of the launches used Ariane 2 rockets, with the remaining two satellites flying on the Ariane 4.
The Spacebus 2000 series was developed to use additional capacity provided by the Ariane 4. Its solar panels generated  of power. Eleven were built, of which ten were launched on Ariane 4 rockets, and the eleventh went on an Atlas II. Eutelsat II F5 and Turksat 1A were destroyed in a launch failure when the third stage turbopump of the Ariane 4 rocket that was carrying both satellites failed. 
Eutelsat ordered six satellites for the Eutelsat II series, making it the first customer for Spacebus 2000 satellites. The F6 satellite was later converted to become Hot Bird 1. The Argentine satellite operator Nahuelsat ordered two spacecraft. Their second satellite, Nahuel 1B, was subsequently transferred to GE Americom as GE-5, and later SES Americom as AMC-5, making it the first European satellite to be sold to an American company. Turksat ordered two satellites, with a third being ordered in 1994 to replace the one destroyed during launch.
The Spacebus 3000 was introduced around the time the Ariane 5 entered service. Spacebus 3000 satellites have masses ranging between  and produce between  of electrical power. Increasingly larger payload fairings allowed larger spacecraft to be produced. In 1991, the Satellite Alliance was formed, bringing together Aerospatiale, Alenia, and Space Systems/Loral.
The first version of the Spacebus 3000 to be produced was the Spacebus 3000A, which was originally developed for Arabsat. 3000A satellites were also ordered by Shin Satellite of Thailand and China's Sino Satellite Communications Company. Five were built and three were launched on Ariane 4s, one on a Long March 3B, and one on an Ariane 5.
The base of the Spacebus 3000B series measured , with the length of the spacecraft being varied depending on the customer's requirements. The 3000B2 satellite measured , and was equipped with solar panels capable of producing  of power. The 3000B3 had a length of  and could generate  of power, and the larger 3000B3S was capable of generating .
Twelve 3000B2 satellites were ordered. Five of these were ordered by Eutelsat for their W Series, one of which later became Eurobird 1. A sixth order from Eutelsat was for Atlantic Bird 2. Nordic Satellite AB, a Scandinavian company which later became SES Sirius, ordered Sirius 2, a replacement for the Spacebus 300-based TeleX satellite. Spanish satellite operator Hispasat ordered two satellites, and Arabsat ordered one satellite, Arabsat-3A. The final two satellites were ordered by the German Bundeswehr and were launched on October 1, 2009,
Nine B3 satellites were ordered, three for Eutelsat, two for Star One of Brazil, GE-12 for GE Americom, Turksat 2A for Turksat, and the Stentor experimental communications satellite for CNES. Stentor was lost in a launch failure on the maiden flight of the Ariane 5ECA.
Only one Spacebus 3000B3S was built, Astra 1K for SES Astra. It was destroyed when the Block DM3 upper stage of its Proton-K carrier rocket failed to restart for its second burn.
The Spacebus 4000 series was derived from the 3000 series but featured upgraded avionics. The potential difference of the electrical system was increased from 50 volts to 100 volts, and an integrated onboard computer, designed to be more flexible than previous versions, was added. It was also the first satellite bus to be equipped with an attitude and orbit control system with star trackers designed for use in geostationary orbit.
The B series used the same basic structure as the 3000 series. The C version had a base measuring . An ITAR-free version is also offered, which does not use components produced in the United States in order to avoid restrictions under US International Traffic in Arms Regulations. This allows ITAR-free satellites to be launched on rockets that are not approved by the US Government, including the Chinese Long March.
 Athena-Fidus for the French and Italian space agencies CNES and ASI, and Sicral-2 for the Italian Ministry of Defence and the French Defence Procurement Agency (DGA), a contract worth about    295m in total.
Spacebus 4000B3 satellites are  in height and generate  of power. So far, five have been ordered, including two for the French Delegation Generale pour l'Armement and two for RascomStar-QAF.
The fifth, Palapa D1 for Indosat, uses the ITAR-free configuration, and was launched by a Long March 3B in September 2009, but was initially placed in a low orbit. Thales Alenia Space made corrections allowing the satellite to reach the planned geostationary transfer orbit on September 3. It finally reached geostationary orbit on September 9. It is now undergoing on-orbit testing upon its arrival at 113   East about mid-September, where it will be used to provide communications to Asia and Australia. It has enough fuel for 10 years of service, according to Reynald Seznec, President of Thales Alenia Space, instead of the planned 15 years due to the orbit-raising maneuvers.Bi Mingxin, ''Indonesian satellite reaches preset orbit despite skewed launch'', China view, 2009-09-12, 
The first Rascom satellite, Rascom-QAF1, suffered a propulsion system failure during its first apogee manoeuvre on 21 December, 2007. It was confirmed to have reached its final geostationary orbit at a longitude of 2.85   east on 4 February 2008, but with only two years of expected operational life, compared to the fifteen expected prior to launch. On September 9, 2008, the Rascom-QAF1R satellite was ordered to replace it, also based on the 4000B3 bus.Thales Alenia Space to supply RASCOMSTAR-QAF with a new telecommunication satellite, Cannes, September 9th, 2008, 
The Spacebus 4000C1 has a height of , and is capable of generating  of electricity. The only C1 to have been ordered so far is Koreasat 5 for Korea Telecom of South Korea. It was launched by a Sea Launch Zenit-3SL from the Ocean Odyssey platform on the equator, at 03:27 GMT on 22 August 2006.
The Spacebus 4000C2, which has a height of , generates  of power. Five have been ordered, all using the ITAR-free option, by companies in the Peoples' Republic of China. Chinasat, a state-owned company ordered two satellites, whilst the APT Satellite Company ordered three. All were launched by Long March 3B rockets from Launch Area 2 at the Xichang Satellite Launch Centre.
Eight Spacebus 4000C3 satellites, each of which has a height of  and generates  of power, have been ordered. SES Americom and Eutelsat ordered two spacecraft each.Eutelsat W3C ordered, Paris, 12 March 2009,  The Eutelsat spacecraft are being built using ITAR-free parts, and one of the satellites, Eutelsat W3B launched on a Ariane 5 on 2010-10-28 and was declared lost on 2010-10-30 due to a fuel leak.''Eutelsat suffers spacecraft loss'', BBC News 30 October 2010,  Eutelsat W6A was ordered by June 9, 2010.;''Eutelsat Selects Thales Alenia Space to Build W6A Satellite'', Satellite Today, June 10, 2010,  Eutelsat W3D ordered on 3 December 2010; Russian satellite operator Gazprom also ordered two satellites for its Yamal programmeGazprom & Thales Alenia Space signed the contract for manufacturing 2 Yamal-400 comm. satellites, Cannes, 05  February  2009, Thales Alenia Space Press release,    the first time it had procured Yamal spacecraft that were not manufactured in Russia. Only one will be a Spacebus, the second one is based on a Express-2000 platform. Inmarsat ordered one spacecraft, EuropaSat.Thales Alenia Space and Inmarsat signed an ATP for the development of the "EuropaSat" satellite to provide mobile broadcast and two-way telecommunications services in the S-Band throughout Europe, Cannes, August 22, 2008, press release Thales Alenia Space 
The Spacebus 4000C4 bus is  high and can generate  of power with its solar panels. Three have been ordered so far: Ciel 2 for Ciel Satellite of Canada, which was launched on December 10, 2008,Successful launch for Ciel II satellite built by Thales Alenia Space, Thales Alenia Space Press release, December 10, 2008,  and two spacecraft for Eutelsat, W2AEutelsat-W2,  and W7, launched by Proton on November 23, 2009.
On December 6, 2007, Thales Alenia Space signed an agreement with NPO PM of Russia to jointly develop the Ekspress-4000 bus, based on the Spacebus 4000. The Ekspress-4000 is designed for direct injection into geostationary orbit by a Proton-M rocket. The satellites will be constructed and integrated in Krasnoiarsk and marketed by NPO PM, while Thales Alenia Space will provide the payload.