This article was opened as a community reassessment, but the nominator,   has left a fairly complete review, along the lines of an individual reassessment.  Please read the review by  , but do not add to it. A discussion section is available to discuss the review. I have further added a section below to allow a community reassessment to continue. In this section, reviewers and other editors should state whether they believe the article should be kept or delisted, giving their reasoning based on the good article criteria. '''Please note that WikiProject criteria are ''not'' per se part of the good article criteria'''; they may, however, be used to inform reviewers' interpretation of the good article criteria.  '' '' 20:57, 2 January 2009 (UTC)
The article now fails   on several points:
Fails in the first sentence - "'''Scotland''' is a country that is part of the United Kingdom."
Apart from the ugly grammar it should be noted that other country articles do '''not''' begin, eg:
Note that the Scotland article comes under the auspices of WikiProject:Countries, which states explicitly that .
Until 20 December 2008 the long-standing lead sentence (and, as far as I can work out, the lead sentence when the article was promoted to WP:GA status - when was this? where is the assessment page?), which had the consensus of ''the editors who actually wrote the article'', was:
Surely this is more in line with the word (and the spirit) of WP:LEAD?
The original lead when the article was first awarded GA status (in April 2006; note: page does not appear to be recorded) was :
At the time it passed the   the lead was :
The imposition of the new lead sentence was achieved on 20 December 2008 by a small group of Users who do not hide their agenda to promote the United Kingdom; and who are trying to portray England, Northern Ireland, Wales and Scotland as somehow having identical status within the Union, which is clearly and demonstrably contrary to the real-life complexity of the constitution of the UK. Eg. both England and Scotland are ancient nations, who can trace their origins deep back into the 1st millenium. The UK has only existed during the last 208 years (arguably 301 years). Whereas Northern Ireland was invented in a smoke-filled room or two approx 80 years ago. 
It is a grave error of historiography to over-emphasise ''recent'' history over an overview of the entire history of a topic (see also  ).
WP:LEAD states clearly: "It should establish context, explain why the subject is interesting or notable, and summarize the most important points   including any notable controversies that may exist." How on earth can one "establish context" on the Scotland article without mentioning the word 'Europe' in the lead sentence? Scotland is one of the oldest still-extant countries on the entire continent, and has both had a profound influence on the history of Europe, as well as being formed and shaped itself by wider events throughout the continent.
The introduction also falls down on the second guideline: "add a few facts about the country, the things that it is known for". No mention of golf, whisky, Scottish inventions and discoveries?
Probably a pass here.
Probably a pass here.
Fail. This article has been clearly manipulated in recent months in an effort to claim   weight for Scotland's modern role as a constituent of the United Kingdom. This phase in the history of this article kicked off when a neutral, geographical map of Scotland's location within Europe was replaced by a political map, highlighting the United Kingdom.
Scotland's membership of the Union is no more important than the UK's membership of the EU is to that political entity, yet I note that the United Kingdom article does not begin:
Crystal clear fail.
Note that the article is now permanently semi-protected due to ceaseless vandalism and edit warring over the years.
The only reason that it is "stable" is because it has been 'sat-upon' by a small group of editors who are only interested in promoting the UK in the lead sentence/map/infobox and other high visibility features. The actual editors who wrote the body of the article have been scared off.
It is "stable" because it is utterly ''stagnant''. It cannot possibly be reviewed and improved upon because all knowledgeable Scottish editors have abandoned the article due to the   campaigns of recent months.
Also, the History section keeps getting mucked about with for some reason.
Not checked yet.
Probably fails as GA's now require page numbers to be cited.      10:50, 2 January 2009 (UTC)
Mais Oui, just to make this clear.  The above comments are your view on the articles GA status, not an independent reviewer?  --    12:06, 2 January 2009 (UTC)
Just to clarify and allay concerns. This is a community reassessment: Mais Oui! may not be independent enough to carry out an individual reassessment, but ''any editor'' can initiate a community reassessment and ''any editor'' may comment on a community reassessment. (For the intentions of Mais Oui!, see  .) The decision is then determined by an evaluation of the consensus of reviewing editors with reference to the current state of the article and the good article criteria. The decision is made by a reviewer (such as myself) who has not previously been involved with the article. Please comment in the section below to inform this decision! '' '' 21:51, 2 January 2009 (UTC)
To clarify my point. I feel there are some issues with the lead section, and some issues with coverage, but not strong enough to delist. I feel this is a decent article within GA criteria and is one that the general reader would find useful and agreeable to read. My feeling is that the main points raised by Mais are more to do with concerns outside the GA remit. ''' ''' *  14:06, 8 January 2009 (UTC)
As a recent contributor to the article I have no wish to pass an opinion as to its overall quality. Nonetheless, a specific feature of this "review" is the nature of the lead.  The opening sentence (ex Gaelic and sound) is "Scotland is a country that is part of the United Kingdom." As I have said elsewhere I don't believe this is an especially well-phrased opening sentence to an important article and most similar beginnings are a little more expansive. However, another feature of the sentence is its innate political position. A significant minority in Scotland do not (apparently) support the continuance of this union and it is evident that a majority ("the settled will") take the view that there are benefits to a measure of local empowerment. On the assumption of good faith, I presume this sentence is not intended as a calculated insult to these groups, but I suspect whilst it remains in place that it may be more difficult to redress the current imbalance in participation than otherwise might be the case.      20:40, 9 January 2009 (UTC)