Can an admin protect the   from editing for a while, preferably at an older version before the changes started?  A group of editors disagrees strongly with the naming guidelines for article titles in plants and performed some 117 edits to the   page over the month of December.  When this page, the flora naming guidelines, was protected from editing, the editors moved on to the Wikipedia:Naming conventions (common names) page.  It would be easier for other Wikipedians using these guidelines, if they guidelines were not the targets of an edit war.  And, it would not be much of a burden for the editors concerned to gain concensus, propose the change, then ask an admin to allow the change or do the change.  Thanks.  --  ( ) 02:29, 2 January 2009 (UTC)
I request for your opinions and neccessary actions in the artcle Bukidnon State University which has been the subject of reverts since October 2008. Another concernced user, , and I already went to   on seperate occassions but declined since the reverts are too slow. The problems are with  and his anons who re-adds unsourced cheerdance competition data and removes sourced sections and   (Although it needs some help in reducing the image size. It would be great if anyone can help with that too). I believe his motivations are  which translates to Ownership issues. I already talked to him in my edit summaries and   but judging from his talkpage, I think the discussion is getting nowhere.--  ( ) 03:52, 2 January 2009 (UTC)
An admin may want to check his image uploads...seems like he's uploading his personal graphic images for the school that he then created articles for the primary purpose of showing off his images?? Not sure that's against any policies or guidelines, but seems like a waste of space. I've CSDed all the "articles" I found, which weren't articles at all, just a text line then his images. They aren't good redirects as they are very general and not just fitting to that school.  --  &nbsp;( &nbsp;'''  '''  ) 04:11, 2 January 2009 (UTC)
The AfD on the Centrist Party article doesn't appear to have been listed properly. I would fix it, but it's several days old now, so I'm not sure if it's okay to just list it on the current day's crop, or if it needs to be completely redone or whatever. It's not my AfD, so any advice or help to the editor who added it would be appreciated. Thanks.   ( ) 05:39, 2 January 2009 (UTC)
24.160.240.250 is having   issues with  .  Basically, he wants to hold a discussion about a controversial claim about Farah based on no evidence whatsoever.  He has reverted a number of editors who have blanked the discussion in accordance with  .  Though I considered making a block myself, since I have been discussing the issue with him, I felt it better to recuse myself from it and bring it here.  --  ( ) 07:01, 2 January 2009 (UTC)
Can an admin check http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dharmasthala&action=history
I have given an offer to discuss at  , but the other user refuses to discuss and keeps on reverting. Thanks,     07:24, 2 January 2009 (UTC)
This is a relatively more active SSP case, and the case page is getting a bit active and heated. Could use some more eyes. (As usual it is always appreciated to have more admin attention to the   backlog in general as well.) Thank you, ''' ''' ( ) 08:39, 2 January 2009 (UTC)
Lightbot has been removing delinking "meters" in the infoboxes of most television stations and has now started on the radio stations.  Also is delinking "Square Miles" and "Kilometers" in city/county/state pages, among other forms of measurement.  Should this be stopped, should I revert, what should be done? -             December 31, 2008 @ 18:36
Is it supposed to be unlinking hundreds and hundreds of units of measurement?     18:40, 31 December 2008 (UTC)
Well, it seemed out of its mind to me. Sorry for the mess  won't be blocking bots again in the near future.      18:52, 31 December 2008 (UTC)
If I ran programs that run as sloppily and destructively as these bots are allowed to, I'd have been fired long ago.   '' '' 19:43, 31 December 2008 (UTC)
So here is the crux of the problem.  There is no issue with any editor bringing any article into compliance with Wikipedia guidelines.  By extension, there should also be no problem with an editor using an approved bot to do the same; as long as the bot is making edits that someone using Firefox and a keyboard would be expected to make, there is no issue.  So let me make clear that my recent block of the bot is not because I have anything wrong with the bot ''per se''.  However, before the bot is to continue doing its good work, we should establish exactly what the guidelines '''should''' say.  There is a clear conflict between at least two three guidelines:
Mr. Nygaard notes that there are a half-dozen or so guidelines that also deal with this, I have left a place for the list above to be expanded, please do so.
As far as Baseball Bugs's concern; it appears that Lightbot was exactly ''in compliance'' with   and the bot was not slopily programed; it is not unreasonable to think that our guidelines would be consistant!  That they are not is something that needs to be addressed.  Given that this is likely a problem spread across several pages; I think we need a centralized discussion.  If there is enough interest here, I will start an RFC to provide that centralized discussion.  What does everyone think? -- . .  20:21, 31 December 2008 (UTC)
Kralizec wrote that wp:overlink had an inexact definition of common units. Please look again, wp:overlink provides an exact definition by giving examples. Just click on the  at the end of the guidance at  . Feet and metres are the most commonly linked items on Wikipedia, so most of this discussion is about those. We don't link plain english terms like river even the first time it appears. Similarly we don't need to link feet or metre even the first time it appears on a page about the height of a mountain or a person. If a conversion is provided, that is double the reason not to link.   ( ) 21:21, 1 January 2009 (UTC)
That is a valid link in a definition article. We don't link plain english terms elsewhere.   ( ) 12:01, 2 January 2009 (UTC)
Is  supposed to do things like ? See it's contribs. -- &nbsp;( &nbsp;/&nbsp; ) 03:38, 2 January 2009 (UTC)
Should we be worried about  edit summary?     10:37, 2 January 2009 (UTC)
Could someone uninvolved please tell   about page move rules, particularly cut and paste (see Archbishop of Armagh and Archbishop of Armagh (Roman Catholic)). I pointed this out but user insists on edit-warring over it anyway. I reverted him twice, but don't wanna look like I'm "edit warring" 'cause you just never know what will happen.    ( ) 14:06, 2 January 2009 (UTC)
For the past month, I've been involved in a dispute at Threshold (online game), Frogdice and Michael Hartman with an editor or small cluster of editors, at least one of which has a  .  (which resolves to a webserver operated by the subject) began to revert my edits to that group of articles blindly and with   (see , , , , , ). The redir soon got full protection (per  ), and the two articles got semi'd to encourage discussion. Well, a user, , showed up at  , where he began    that I'm a "disgruntled banned player", which  are without actual evidence. Throughout, Cambios also performed repeated reverts with edit summaries along the same lines of the IP, which is one sign that suggests to me that they are one and the same.
I've sought outside assistance from several venues ( ,   and other users who had shown interest in the article previously); this has gotten me some help (the earlier protections) and advice (). However, even when applying the advice, Cambios has reverted blindly (,  where even trivial changes to the infobox get reverted). While I'd rather not drive away someone knowledgeable about the game, he's continued to make it very clear that he  made by me on a personal basis. &mdash;/ / / / 19:06, 1 January 2009 (UTC)
I've been going through this and removing what doesn't belong, which is frankly most of it. This mud was apparently covered as part of a larger article on mmos a few years ago (possibly to the tune of a name drop and not much else, someone would have to get a hold of the issue) and little else. The company itself hasn't received any coverage that has been provided and this article is written almost entirely on primary sources. The whole lot of it looks like promotion to me.--  ( ) 10:37, 2 January 2009 (UTC)
Anyone else experiencing a problem with the orange new message notification? It keeps popping up for me without any new messages actually posted to my talk page.    &#124;    16:48, 2 January 2009 (UTC)
Dear WIKIPEDIA admins,
Not hoping to get many help here, since most of the times i report vandals, questions/phrases like "Don't know what you are after with this" or "Cool it, both of you (meaning me and the vandal)", but the case is duly reported and clarified with proper situation links. The rest, not up to me...
Sincerely, from PORTUGAL, wishing a pleasant 2009,
VASCO AMARAL - --  ( ) 20:10, 2 January 2009 (UTC)
There has been an unsourced claim in this article identifying the subject as a realtor of similar name/appearance. It was originally added by an SPA. The account's only edit. The edit included a link giving the subject's (supposedly) current workplace address, workplace phone, cell phone, etc.  A few weeks ago,   changed the article to make the privacy violating information more prominent and the workplace link more conspicuous. Although he did remove other unsourced statements.  The named realtor whether or not she is this porn star has no notability as a realtor. There is no justification for including personal information like this. Either the bad edits should be oversighted or the article should be deleted and recreated to make this violation inaccessible. I deleted the info and link but it still sits in the article history.   ( ) 20:45, 2 January 2009 (UTC)
Is it appropriate for a user to call another user a "kike" and a "yid" on their Talk page, as is done at  ?   '' '' 21:17, 2 January 2009 (UTC)
Amazingly, that isn't what he was blocked for - and only 24 hours, at that.    22:05, 2 January 2009 (UTC)
Regarding the situation on the Rick Warren article above by  ,   has repeatedly used personally demeaning language towards me , yet more offensive are his repeated hypocritical threats towards me. He claims that by identifying the person responsible for the situation discussed above as a "vandal" (and I would claim accurately, given the situation) I was "name-calling" (after both he and User:Teledildonix314 had repeatedly called me names) and he has threatened to have me blocked (he seems to believe that it is solely his purgative whom to block). This, despite the fact that he himself is requesting action to be taken against User:Teledildonix314 (see above)! His most recent message to me is posted below.
Now I realize this all sounds rather juvenile, but I assure you that he is the one doing it - I could care less if he calls me names and I have no desire to have him blocked. What ticks me off are the threats - please tell him to stop. Just investigate his comments on the Rick Warren discussion page, along with mine and his for the evidence. I'm sure you will come to a logical and fair resolution. Thanks.   ( ) 21:43, 2 January 2009 (UTC)
True.:) He's received two warnings after a final warning   with the warnings coming from several different editors. After a final warning plus more acting up, the next step is usually a block of some kind.     00:40, 2 January 2009 (UTC)
Meanwhile, I'm trying to figure out what kind of "love toy" a "teledildo" would be.   '' '' 00:53, 2 January 2009 (UTC)
Oh, for the love of- is there any way we can topic ban him from me? He sent me another tone deaf message on my talk.       00:57, 2 January 2009 (UTC)
I think someone needs to adopt him. But it sure as hell isn't gonna be me.       01:02, 2 January 2009 (UTC)
Ok, now he's gone on my ER again and called me a bully for performing normal tasks. This really needs to end. Where are the damn admins?       01:20, 2 January 2009 (UTC)
Another editor,  at this article (Rick Warren) who also exhibits a bit of tone-deafness to Wikipedia procedure, culture and policy has been falsely accusing others of vandalism and making other inflammatory comments about other editors, in particular Teledildonix314, in talk  and , and in edit summaries  and . He has returned from a bit of a hiatus with another edit with an edit summary claiming he's fixing vandalism by other editors  when clearly that is not true. This will only serve to inflame the situation surrounding this article. I have final warned Manutdglory regarding his abusive comments ; if this behavior continues I'll be back to open another incident here.   ( ) 07:40, 2 January 2009 (UTC)
I'm seeing a user with some issues, like his   detector turned off, but nothing blockable. What kind of admin action are you guys expecting? I hate to send you to yet another forum, but at the time being, it looks like a   issue. I actually don't see any personal attacks...we don't block people for feeling overly antagonized... --   17:15, 2 January 2009 (UTC)
Straight Edge PXK wrote: "What the actual fuck? Is this guy some kind of idiot savant? (serious, not a personal attack)"
If somebody said that about you, how would you feel? Would you feel like they were really trying to give everybody in the situation an equal opportunity to be treated with respect and civility?
I was informed that PXK is only fifteen years old. I'm sorry, i forgetfully assumed they were an adult. Given their age, and a willingness to admit that i was very uncertain about respect and civility when *i* was fifteen, i see now that i should just get over it, forget about such remarks, and avoid lashing back at people in the future (regardless of whether they are fifteen, fifty-five, or one hundred five).
Mike Doughney wrote : "Your regurgitation of what I suppose is Marxist terminology is quite quaint. Again, let me say this very slowly and in small words in a short sentence so perhaps this time you'll understand what I'm saying."
When somebody says something like that to _you_, do you think, "This person is trying to help me"? or do you think, "This person is belittling me!"?
When somebody says your honest efforts to write with civility on a subject which feels very inflammatory is a "regurgitation" of a "quaint" terminology, i wonder how you feel. I wonder whether you would say, "This person is trying to help me, they are concerned for the good of everyone in this situation, they are very friendly."
When somebody tells you that small words and short sentences are necessary, although you were trying very hard to be civil and open to criticism, would you feel like that person was really trying to help you? Do you think that person truly respects you at all?
Manutdglory wrote : "Mike, even comparing an established, veteran editor like me to someone like User:Teledildonix314 is a complete joke, and you know it."
That type of remark almost automatically causes a person to feel as though you are not able to give respect and Assume Good Faith. That sort of remark about a total stranger sounds insulting, and a put-down only serves to antagonize the subject of that insult, rather than causing them to want to proceed peacefully with you toward a polite and civil goal. They might seem like very innocent words which you quickly and probably rather unthinkingly wrote in a moment's haste, but i hope you will see how they make other people feel, and i hope you will understand why i was so immediately provoked to feel hostile toward you.
You called me a 'vandal' repeatedly, you reverted my edits without asking anybody else for consensus, and you implied to other editors that it would be a joke to respect my literacy skills as you would have them respect yours.
I understand that you will probably remove this text from the page, and i would probably feel like doing the same thing upon my initial embarrassment. But maybe if you leave it here for a little while, and it reminds you of how your words affect other people's feelings, it will be useful. Thank you for bothering to read this at all, i know you don't like to hear anything from me. I know you don't want to believe there could be anything respectable about what i say or write, but i am a human being in this world just like you, with a viewpoint and a bit of a need to feel as though it deserved at least the most minimal amount of respect before being dismissed and villified.
I am posting in this thread with my remarks directed to all three of you editors at the same time-- the first three people with whom i have really had any extensive interaction at Wikipedia-- because i feel like it's the only way i can show you some respect and civility while speaking about my frustration and anger. I'm sure i could learn from the mistakes i have made with the three of you this week. I hope you won't just delete this without giving it a moment of consideration.
If you look at the recent history (today) of Solutrean hypothesis  and Pre-Siberian American Aborigines  - these two editors (are they 2?) have deleted the same sourced text.   also edited 's page a while ago as though it was his own. I suspect they are the same editor.   ( ) 21:04, 2 January 2009 (UTC)
I just stumbled upon this account while checking WhatLinksHere on an image and blocked it indefinitely as a sock of . I seem to recall this "case" being treated with somewhat unusual deference (perhaps not the right word) due to BLP concerns, so if anything should be done about the userpage/Talk page (protection, courtesy blanking, deletion etc.) please feel free to do it.  &nbsp;(    ) 00:27, 3 January 2009 (UTC)
Most admins will be familiar with   caused by this vandal. Most such edits are apparently carried out using proxies and anonymisers. However, following the recent blocking of several more socks,   carried out a , as a result of which s/he blocked additional sleepers and IPs. The blocked IPs were on the University of Haifa network; presumably the blocked accounts were from these same IPs. Could a note be sent to the university regarding this misuse of their equipment? Since the university should keep a record of who has been allocated these IPs at the relevant times, is there any way in which this could be used to put a stop to this ongoing vandalism?   ( ) 18:07, 2 January 2009 (UTC).
Can anyone see  , because I can't seem to see the photo with my computer. If anyone can see the photo, please leave a message on my talk page. Otherwise, I will contact OTRS to get details of the photo's permissions and re-upload the photo. Thanks. ''' ''' 00:53, 3 January 2009 (UTC)
Oh, thanks very much. Found the pic that I was looking for. Thanks everyone. ''' ''' 03:11, 3 January 2009 (UTC)
This appears to be a clear SPA account only used to comment at the AdminWatch proposal located  . Thoughts?   ( ) 17:47, 1 January 2009 (UTC)
I see no policies being breached.    &#124;    19:27, 1 January 2009 (UTC)
I wouldn't even have ever bothered commenting to WP:ANI, except that someone put this discussion here and couldn't even be civil enough to speak with me first via my talkpage, nor civil enough to inform me I was being discussed.   ( ) 20:34, 1 January 2009 (UTC)
Shall we close this as resolved seeing as WhoWatches is now editing though proxies as described immediately above and  ?   ( ) 08:58, 3 January 2009 (UTC)
I'm having some trouble with   at Earthquake engineering.
Useful links:
The article came to my attention on 28 December through a thread started by Shustov on WP:AN on a matter (not related to content or user conduct):  .  I glanced at the article and noted some passages which seemed...out of place.  A quick Google search revealed that the bulk of phrases and passages in the article section on Failure modes were copied from United States Geological Survey (USGS) documents.  I reported this problem on the article talk page () and watchlisted the article.  (Since the USGS is a US goverment agency, its reports are generally in the public domain; the issue here is one of plagiarism rather than of copyright violation.)
On 29 December, I had a brief look at the article history.  It's quite thick, as Shustov had a habit of making many, many, many rapid-fire minor edits with few edit summaries.  Nevertheless, I surmised that the passages I was concerned about had been added by Shustov, so I dropped him a note about the problem on his talk page, and encouraged him to review and correct his contributions: .
Over the following couple of days things took a turn for the worse.  Shustov repeatedly denied () any problem with the passages in question, despite several attempts to explain both the problem and how to fix it: , , .  His responses became mocking and derisive (, ).  I eventually removed the offending text to the article talk page, and explained the problem (again).  He has reverted this removal three times now ( while logged in, and   while logged out as confirmed (, ) by Checkuser), and I'm afraid that I don't have any other ideas what to do here. 
He has some sort of academic credentials, but seems to be unfamiliar with normal academic standards for ''verbatim'' copying of other authors' writing.  I'm not getting through, and I fear there may be a language barrier issue at work.  In any case, I'm out of ideas.  As I've gotten closely involved in this mess, I'd like another admin to have a look at what's going on, and to issue a final warning or block as necessary &ndash; or to protect the article (''sans'' plagiarism) until Shustov or another editor can rewrite or properly cite the section in question.  ( ) 21:43, 1 January 2009 (UTC)
TenOfAllTrades is doing a patient job of trying to explain to Shustov why he needs to change his ways, but Shustov seems to think that we somehow cannot commit plagiarism because we are nto authors (see Earthquake engineering).  I left a note on  , but if anyone here is good with patient explanations of that kind of thing I'd appreciate some more input.   ( ) 09:35, 3 January 2009 (UTC)
A admin called Ricky81682 has latly been removing a lot of images, paragraphs and formats from pages such as Dalet School  and Obadiah School of the Bible saying images arent relevant! He has been covering this up by putting 
1. In Cites 
2. Rickys 
1.In Cites 
2. Rickys 
1. previous 
Spot the difference? Rickys edits are drastically worsening the articles and I dont think its fair on all the users who have been trying so hard to improve them. I tried to reverse his changes but all I get is a warning that if I do it again I will get a penalty. Not very proper for a admin is it? A image of a Bible is allowed to be shown about a school that studies the Bible. A image of a Dalet is allowed to be shown on a school whose name is Dalet school etc. There is nothing wrong wih the images - until someone uploads some beter ones, these will make do. It isnt contravening any rules   ( ) 14:09, 2 January 2009 (UTC)
Could an outside admin please inform   that attacks like at  ,  ,  ,   and   are inappropriate?  I really don't think that any of my changes could be considered "ghastly" (let alone the incorrect claim that I'm a Christian) and I would hope someone would remove them but I'd like an outsider's opinion.  --   ( ) 02:53, 3 January 2009 (UTC)
Red-link user trying to narrow the focus of the term to something having to do with Israel. I'm not Jewish, but I don't know that that's the point of the concept. In any case, edit war going on and some kind of assistance is needed to put a stop to it.   '' '' 21:26, 2 January 2009 (UTC)
Strongly encourage everyone to keep this on the article talk page, and close down all the ancilliary threads at ANI/3RR/EAR/etc.  The editor appears to have stopped edit warring, so I don't think admin action is required.  If they resume edit warring, a block is in order; 3RR has been explained.  Also, while I'm here, "red link user" is essentially a way of saying "new user" in a derogatory way, and there is nothing inherently wrong with being an  ; it's the disruption that's usually the problem, not the single purposeness. If the edit warring stops, then they may (or may not) have something worth listening to on the talk page. --  ( ) 22:22, 2 January 2009 (UTC)
Would someone please take a look at this editor's contributions?  There aren't all that many of them, but as far as I can tell, none of them are good: badly formatted, badly written, inappropriately placed, and so on.  I believe I've reverted most, if not all, of the edits, but what I can't figure out is whether the badness is deliberate, and therefore vandalism, or simply an editor who just needs more time to assimilate the right way to edit Wikipedia.     /   02:00, 3 January 2009 (UTC)
Very similar kinds of edits are now coming from , although the IP geolocates from the UK, while the original IP was in Alabama.     /   16:51, 3 January 2009 (UTC)
This page is constantly under edit warring. I noticed some highly biased and unsourced material being inserted so I reverted but I don't know what to do next as the IP editor keeps reverting and instead accuses me to be biased on my talk page. --  ( ) 13:13, 3 January 2009 (UTC)
This user repeatedly comes up at Arbcom following what seems to be a fairly solid history of issues starting with   and socking. The user is highly technically skilled and has written extensively in an adverse style or to promote his own views and himself, from what I can gather.
I happened to check the article Reliability of Wikipedia and suspect that an IP that is heavily skewing it to Hewitt's disparaging viewpoint may be that user himself. There are IP posts inserting significant tracts of adverse Hewitt quotes, case material, and writings (article) and links/cites (talk page). IP socking is a known problem here. Eyeballs may be useful to determine if these edits are good quality or not. See  . (Also, is this article balanced in regard to "being used for the purpose of presenting specific complaints to a wide audience in mainspace" as opposed to documenting of the topic?)
This user has a long long history of disruption and was indef blocked several months ago. Since then he has created over a dozen sock puppets, many of them have not been added to the list of USEDfan's socks, some of them have. Seicer usually deals with him but he isn't online right now. He creates sole purpose accounts to edit The Used and his newest sock is  . Will one of you take a look and see if there is anything you can do? Thanks,   ( ) 06:54, 3 January 2009 (UTC)
HI, This user keeps removing information from The Used page. I sourced it properly and updated the page but they keep removing it. I told them it was vandalsim but they didn't listen. They even got me banned for correcting the page. Can some one please tell them that they cannot just remove a bunch of sourced information and updated information because they don't believe it. Thanks.   ( ) 07:00, 3 January 2009 (UTC)
The point being what? That I sometimes remove comments from my talk page? Doing so does not violate any policy or guideline, hence does not require administrative action. This is the incidents noticeboard; I may start an editor review one day though.   ( ) 21:11, 3 January 2009 (UTC)
Sorry, I did try to resolve this with the user without success.  is again reverting edits without discussion, and using edit summaries as platforms for personal attacks. As per  edit:
This is despite the fact that DG has made a total of four edits to the Scarlet Pimpernel article,  was on October 6th, 2008, and three of the four are reverts. I would point out that the accusation of wiki-stalking seems unfounded, as I had begun that article , and have made 6x more edits to it. 
Were this the first instance of this behavior, I'd simply shrug it off as someone having a bad day. Unfortunately, this is something that happens (and keeps happening) in most of the articles that DG edits, as his user talk page (including those bits he likely finds a bit more embarrassing and removes) would seem to indicate. The user is currently under AE civility parole, which has been extended again and again, as the user is considered a net asset to the project. I submit that these benefits to the project are diminished by shutting down those other editors who grow weary of being exposed to DreamGuy's thick layer of hostility and rudeness. In the past, his incivility and personal attacks have chased away new editors. The current resurgence of uncivil and unfriendly behavior is of precisely the same sort that led to the user being placed under ArbCom behavioral restriction in the first place. 
I did attempt to address this behavior in a civil fashion on multiple occasions recently during the Annie Chapman image discussion (, ) before he  the section as "serving no point". As well,  , and his usertalk page (), where he deleted it again with yet another PA edit summary, an action which prompted my posting here.
I am certainly not the first to have had unhappy interactions with DG, but I think I've done everything civilly possible to defuse the behavior he seems to reserve for anyone who doesn't share his exceptionally narrow worldview. He reverts and edit-wars without discussion, and it just keeps happening over and over again in any article he touches. 
I would remind the noticeboard (for the three or four people unaware of his status) that DreamGuy is currently under behavioral restriction by ArbCom, reinforced by AE on a few occasions (to be more civil in his dealings with others). Looking at the edit summaries of DG's contributions over the past month, I am not sure this civility parole is being followed. -     21:00, 3 January 2009 (UTC)
Arcayne has a well-demonstrated history of personal conflict with me and also for wikilawyering to try to get his way, including misleading reports here and to ArbCom. Quite often he shows up here and gets some well-meaning but inexperienced admin to jump in and do whatever he wants because they do not take the time to examine the full facts. He knows he is banned from my talk page, per my instructions and warnings from several admins, so claiming he is trying "to resolve this with the user without success" by posting there is complete nonsense. He is not trying to resolve anything, he just blind reverts my edits on any article he happens to be on with misleading edit comments, often with statements to "see talk" when he didn't put anything on the talk page... in fact he quite regularly on Jack the Ripper says to "see talk" or "per talk" or claim no evidence was ever given for an action when he has deleted the discussion of the article talk page (calling it an archive, but doing so so often that current discussions go away). I would caution anyone seeing this to not fall for Arcayne's little tricks as others have in the past.
Double-indef. banned, long term chronic sockpuppet, troll, and otherwise ultra-abusive/distruptive   has been back, again, breifly as  . Leaving rather unplesant messages about me on his talk page. Leaves a racist message about me, then calls me a nazi (!), ''then'' says he's a good editor and should be unblocked because he's reformed. Of course that won't happen, but just wanted the incident on the noticeboard so as to make sure I'm not accused of maltreatment. 
However, I wouldn't mind a quick checkuser being performed on this account and   to make sure there isn't a correlation, and also as a means to doublecheck there are no more sock farms being built up by Yorkshirian as we speak.
Also, what is the policy on Yorkshirian working on sister sites please? --  |    22:24, 3 January 2009 (UTC)
I just blocked   due to harassment (). When I wanted to inform him about his block, I saw  made after the block. Because of that, I decided to extend the block to 1 month (cf. .) Now I saw . Could one block him indefinitely, please?       //&nbsp;  01:28, 4 January 2009 (UTC)
So...my question...sockfarm, meatfarm, offwiki canvassing or some fourth suggestion I'm not thinking of? --   05:30, 3 January 2009 (UTC)
What exactly is the problem?  I came back to Wikipedia because I wanted to, I was not asked to by anyone. I have a long history at Wikipedia and have edited many pages, but have not edited the page under discussion recently, in fact, I have purposely not done so because of the hostile environment there.  I believe the Nizevyn is not a sockpuppet and the proper procedure to show that he was a sockpuppet was not followed. I merely asked for clarification and confirmation that Nizevyn was not a sockpuppet and am still waiting for this.  I believe if someone is accused of being a sockpuppet they should be checkusered, its not exactly an onerous requirement as it doesn't take long.  I am sorry if I improperly bugged you about Nizevyn Smashville, I saw that you were an administrator familiar with the situation and thought maybe you could help.
I am really at a loss why I am being reported for an incident, could you please explain exactly what I have done wrong?  --  ( ) 07:01, 3 January 2009 (UTC)
It's also worth noting that he is now canvassing on Wikipedia:  --   17:06, 3 January 2009 (UTC)
I would like to get some comment on this discussion  with  , in which he seems to be accusing me of being the sock-puppet of a banned user, ShevaShalosh. Am I misunderstanding something?    ( ) 14:45, 3 January 2009 (UTC)
Bwilkins has put the resolved template on a discussion (above) that is not resolved. Further discussion and an answer to my question would be much appreciated.   ( ) 15:14, 3 January 2009 (UTC)
By the way, Bwilkins, this discussion between the two of us is filling up page space without going anywhere. Since you seem to have said what you have to say, why not stop now. I will be happy to wait for a reply from a user who understands the background of who ShevaShalosh is, and why Ceedjee would choose to address me as ShevaShalosh. That is what I am looking for.   ( ) 15:54, 3 January 2009 (UTC)
Unfortunately, the revert-war on Missing In Action is still alive and kicking.   has just done 4 reverts within the past 24 hrs. A very reasonable compromise was provided (i.e. a new article called Vietnam War POW/MIA issue) but it's just not acceptable to ToTheCircus. Warning or blocking him doesn't seem to have any effect. I have done 2 reverts today (to reintroduce a more balanced POV) though obviously I can't keep on doing that. I'm sailing close to the wind as it is. The   tells the full story of what's been happening. Assistance from an independent and neutral administrator is urgently required. -   ( ) 00:55, 21 January 2009 (UTC)
Twice I have asked this editor to refer to film project style guidelines, but he continues to change articles to suit his own preferences rather than the general consensus without ever acknowledging having received messages from myself or, it appears, from others. If he engaged in some sort of dialogue it would be easier to determine if his edits are sincere and simply misguided, but the fact he chooses to carry on without comment suggests he is determined to do things his way, which to date has included deleting complete plot summaries, rearranging articles into sequences that make no sense, and adding data without any references.   ( ) 17:53, 3 January 2009 (UTC)
A concern has now arisen regarding sock-puppetry ( ), which confirmed that while at RFAR, the user had begun sockpuppet activity on "year" articles similar to those he had previously edit warred:  created Jan 2 2009.  The sock use is  by behavior and checkuser. 
By itself, a single SPA sock would not warrant more than blocking and noting at RFAR. Further checkuser investigation to confirm there was no other abuse, however, shows serious concerns and irregularities on an involved IP range, that had not come to light, including suggestions of a possible nest of sleepers. Other evidence suggests a clear possibility that there is a pattern of ongoing misconduct although further analysis is needed. We also note that the user is at RFAR due to unresponsiveness in the first place, which suggests a request to stop a given problem behavior would not be sufficiently protective.
Accordingly an "emergency desysop" of the user has been requested for protective/preventative purposes, until other Arbitrators can review the evidence of the community and checkuser findings in full, and the RFAR case is concluded. An IP range that is of concern in the case was also hard-blocked short term pending the same review. Full details and checkuser data have been circulated within the Arbitration Committee.
Page has been protected (not by me). I agree with the protection. User has had enough warnings. --''' ''' (   ) 23:56, 3 January 2009 (UTC)
I just rollbacked . Um, I don't think so. --''' ''' (   ) 00:28, 4 January 2009 (UTC)
I've just come across a userpage - perfectly OK, but the user says he was born in 1997 which makes him an 11 year old. There's also a picture of him on there. See  . I think it should be removed, but don't know what the correct action is to do in this situation. Thanks,   ( ) 13:09, 4 January 2009 (UTC)
The IP of the indeffed   posted (alleged) personal information about my identity on    and on the talkpage of    (who kept it there).
The personal information on   was removed and   semi-protected the page . However,   reverted the removal , placing personal information back on the talkpage. I removed the info again  from both   and  , and left User:Barba Nane a standard WP:WARNING. Clearly warned, he promptly removed the warning and once more restored the personal information both on    and on his own talkpage .
Furthermore, there is a strong possibility he is a sockpuppet of the banned   or   (both of which are reported above ). It is likely the sock was created to avoid  's semi-protection of articles such as   (and others, listed above ). --  ( ) 12:43, 4 January 2009 (UTC)
Got off easy if you ask me... :) --  ( ) 12:57, 4 January 2009 (UTC)
We've been through this before:.
Series of userpages dedicated to creating intricate forged articles about a mythical rock tour by Jake Gyllenhaal. This time, it's on , and restricted to a single userpage.&mdash; ( ) 14:28, 4 January 2009 (UTC)
I made another report a couple of days ago, that can be viewed   in the archive. He was given another final warning, but he's still going at it.  ( | ) 14:41, 4 January 2009 (UTC)
Viewers of   will see that one particular editor   is seemingly impervious to useful suggestions from other editors about the style and content of the articles, see also Biography for Harold Pinter.  The article is becoming increasingly bogged down with minutiae and a mishmash of impenetrable citation styles making it heavy and unreadable.  That is a great pity in my opinion.  The editor in question undoubtedly has a wealth of informtion and research on the subject but does not seem to grasp that an encyclopedia article is not a thesis or article in a learned journal.  I ask here what can be done, or should I just let that editor get on with it.   ( ) 16:00, 4 January 2009 (UTC)
I removed  's curse words  but I think some admin should block the account for that. The "comment" was not made in the heat of an argument but the so far only edit of the account for quite a while, it was also left unsigned and was signed later by a bot.   ( ) 16:56, 4 January 2009 (UTC)
There seems to be an edit war, that has lasted several days now and counting, going on between  and  at the above article. Would someone who doesn't mind dealing with these things look to see if protection and or some user warnings are warranted?     19:42, 30 December 2008 (UTC)
I also endorse the expanded community topic ban. Suggest that 'related' include any person related to the 2008 campaign, to the extent of any congressional figure NOT representing the two editors' directly, Foreign personalities commenting on the matter, State races in which either candidate was endorsed by either presidential race, any article on any interaction between any candidates, and so on... Can we just ban one to articles on insects and the other to articles on french cars, ensuring ZERO communication?   ( ) 20:21, 30 December 2008 (UTC)
Expanded version based on comments:
Seem about right? //&nbsp; &nbsp;  20:33, 30 December 2008 (UTC)
At  , both editors contend the edit war is continuing. An examination of the talk page and article history shows this is not the case; in fact, the talk page shows numerous voices opposed to inclusion, and no new voices for it. As such, I've again removed the section.   ( ) 19:32, 2 January 2009 (UTC)
In lieu of any cited evidence at all presented in this case, otherwise tertiary and inconclusive evidence:
The 2:54 edit prior to Csloat's first edit (for a long time, I didn't go all the way back in the History) of 17:11 25th Oct 
18:30 edit prior to Amwestover's first edit, confirmed, on 22:56 20th Sept
John McCain presidential campaign, 2008
The article is improved since these editors began. This does not prove they contributed, but it does show that they haven't stopped the article from improving.   ( ) 01:02, 4 January 2009 (UTC)
The recently blocked IP of Simulation12 is requesting an unblock because she claims it was her "sister" who  and that the IP belongs to her whole family. Will he/she give it a rest already, i'm starting think that he/she is more than a typical troll, instead a psychotic nut who thinks he/she is a kindergartner and is using a santiarium computer. Besides that, what do you suggest? Gladys is on wiki-break and we all know that Sim12 is just going to do the same thing if he/she is unblocked.   ( ) 20:03, 4 January 2009 (UTC)
I know you are all far to busy to bother with RFPP, but could someone please do something about Iain Lee?   ( ) 23:29, 4 January 2009 (UTC)
Just out of morbid curiosity, what prompted all that nonsense?     00:18, 5 January 2009 (UTC)
I have become engaged in an edit war with an external link promoter on Apple rumor community, and any further reverts by me would violate  , so I am asking for assistance.  The user making the edits has refused to engage in discussion over the issue, despite my having left an entry on the article's talk page and requesting discussion there in the edit summaries of my reverts.  Interestingly, the user is unregistered and has used four different IP addresses in less than 48 hours, so leaving messages on user talk pages seems futile.
Any help with this situation would be greatly appreciated...thanks.   ( ) 11:23, 4 January 2009 (UTC)
Related to the   , another editor, , in recent days has been falsely accusing others of vandalism and making other inflammatory comments about other editors, in particular Teledildonix314, in talk  and , and in edit summaries  and . He has returned from a bit of a hiatus with another edit with an edit summary claiming he's fixing vandalism by other editors  when clearly that is not true. This will only serve to inflame the situation surrounding this article. 
After a series of warnings ( and ), I've final warned Manutdglory regarding his abusive comments ; in response, I received  that among other things accuses me of making threats. His sole action thus far has been ; he appears to be rather tone-deaf to Wikipedia culture and policy as well as the usual methods and procedures to deal with conflicts and vandalism, even after I've pointed them out to him. Given that we now have two editors on this article that seem to be feeding off this conflict, I would suggest that some admin action be taken.  Perhaps both these editors, who have both continued abusive behavior after final warnings, should be blocked for some period of time.   ( ) 08:11, 2 January 2009 (UTC)
The   vindicated me by posting a lengthy apology/admission of guilt on the Rick Warren discussion page (see for yourself), this after User:Mike Doughney and other editors reported him (see above). Since User:Mike Doughney's entire original reason for reporting me was because I (accurately) identified User:Teledildonix314 as someone who repeatedly vandalized the Rick Warren article (which he labelled "name-calling"), I really am curious as to what he hopes to accomplish by all of this, other than wasting administrators time.   ( ) 21:11, 3 January 2009 (UTC)
Something simply must be done about the IP socks of   and   (i.e.  ), which are stirring up trouble on ''dozens'' of articles for weeks now. User:Ragusino is indefinitely blocked for personal attacks, block evasion and violations of   .  , aka  , is also indeffed for edit-warring and personal attacks . The IPs of User:Ragusino usually start with '''191.**.**.**''', pr '''190.**.**.**''', but also sometimes with '''200.**.**.**''', while those of   start with '''151.**.**.**'''. Further information about their IP range should be readily available from their edits on the myriad articles and talkpages they've been trying to deface over the weeks. Around 15 or more articles and article talkpages have been semi-protected due to this problem, among others:
This method has been largely unsuccessful as the IPs simply move to other articles or wait until the protection expires and continue with their disruption. To top it all off, they've forced admins to semi-protect a number of article talkpages because of their new hobby: posting personal information and attacks about me all over Wikipedia (see User:Ragusino edits in article history:     , etc.,etc...). This took place all the time on my talkpage until it was semi-protected , now the personal attacks appear everywhere. With many articles protected they've even resorted to personal attacks on any article or talkpage I happen to edit, no matter how unrelated (such as   ).
Even as we speak these users continue their disruption, and do not show signs of giving up. Apparently secure in the belief that they cannot be stopped, they've made it their daily routine to disrupt articles and harass users on Wiki. In my personal opinion, something ''must'' be done, and after weeks and months of this few options remain save a range-block. I'm sure any help would be appreciated both by me, and by the increasingly large number of editors forced to revert on a daily basis. --  ( ) 15:23, 3 January 2009 (UTC)
His conduct on   is becoming unacceptable, such as , and . I particularly take offense to being called a whitewasher and a bad-faith editor, especially seeing as I am currently trying to get articles to DYK, GA, and FA. OM has a history of assuming bad faith against editors ( , while vacated, had at least one arbitrator agree he has a not-too-sparkling history), something which he , but doesn't seem to have done (funnily enough, RFAR/OM FOF#2 notes he has a history of ''that'' as well). Can someone sort him out, please? ''' ''' ( ) 17:15, 4 January 2009 (UTC)
This is just a revenge ANI for calling me .  He should be blocked.      19:09, 4 January 2009 (UTC)
Anyone who says 'we need less sources that say SF is NN' after years of requests for more cites, then says 'too many cites make it a lie', and just a couple cites will prove it's true, all in the name of making a 'bulletproof vest' style case for it, is being deceptive, disruptive, and is white-washing. In any situation where there's constant arguments about whether something is true or not, reducing citations is not the way to achieve it. And a site run by neo-Nazis, for Neo-Nazis, about Neo-nazis is a Neo Nazi website. People who self-identify as apologist,s as has happened on the SF talk page, need to be banned from editing such articles, because they are publicly disclosing a POV which prevents neutral editing.   ( ) 22:28, 4 January 2009 (UTC)
To echo comments by KillerChihuahua and ThuranX, I agree that any outlook which could be described as "neo-Nazi" is so overtly sociopathic that I'd think most of us can understand how a good faith, thoughtful editor could be set off by anyone having even the slightest go at tweaking the uncontroversial and widely supported assertion: "Stormfront is a neo-Nazi website." Even if this wording isn't wholly enyclopedic, it's spot on and the murderous pith of neo-Nazism seems to trump any worries about that for most editors. Likewise OrangeMarlin's over-the-top reaction: The topic at hand is Stormfront, not  I re-protected the page because two editors, one of them OrangeMarlin, fell back into a straightforward back-and-forth over wording in the lead. I must say however, I think OrangeMarlin was edit warring for the talk page consensus. I only wish he had waited for someone else to make the second revert, which was bound to come.   ( ) 04:10, 5 January 2009 (UTC)
Well how nice, I forgot to check ANI for a few hours and it looks like my name is prominently featured in a diff at the beginning of a thread. The more fool me for having taken notice of a previous thread, looked at an article, reviewed several dozen external sources and trying to provide clarity and an outside look.
As it seems that I am a newly-identified racist Nazi-apologist whitewashing POV-pusher (traits of which I confess I was previously unaware), could I ask for a little clarification?
So yeah, am I clean on this or what? Adding up my agreements with Sceptre gets me to about minus-seventy-six, but on this one I'm not seeing a whole lot of good faith from the "other side". If I've personally done something wrong, please someone say so. I've not seen any of the labelled racist-apologists do wrong either, other than strive for encyclopedicity. Clarification is welcomed.   ( ) 05:32, 5 January 2009 (UTC)
Despite the fact that  s are not endorsed or opposed, just qualified or not qualified,   has been editwarring to reinsert a criticism of a hook I submitted:
I would request that an uninvolved admin revert the   change to  , and counsel   that the edits are inappropriate.  (Full disclosure:   nominated for deletion the article, Robert Eric Wone, to which the hook applies, and I am the major contributor to that article)   ( ) 06:52, 5 January 2009 (UTC)
1-I'm not allowed to comment at DYK?  That seems pretty wrong.  2-Jclemens, as the person making the nomination, has a vested interest in the article and should not be the one removing my comments.  3-Whatever it is that I might be doing, it cannot be by any stretch of the imagination, vandalism, as he templated me with on my Talk page.  If anybody other than Jclemens or other people with a vested interest in that mess of an article had removed or struck out my comments, I would not have liked it, but I wouldn't have reverted, but Jclemens has no business doing it.   '' '' 07:05, 5 January 2009 (UTC)
Lulu of the Lotus-Eaters is in violation of  . See
That doesn't look like outing to me. On a different subject, I was looking over Syntacticus' contributions, and I'm starting to wonder if there's a connection to   and other sockpuppets of  .   ( ) 00:32, 4 January 2009 (UTC)
I explained the protection on the article's talk page. I think it was fully justified.   ( ) 23:12, 4 January 2009 (UTC)
OK, a little background. Months ago, I voluntarily disengaged from complaining about IDCab behavior, and I recently sent an olive branch to one of the editors, . I even disavowed this IDCab stuff when it came up in another context.
However, those editors seem unwilling to let it go. On a dispute of inclusion of rape kit billing at Sarah Palin, where most current editors had expressed a desire to remove mention of the issue, the admin  removed the text, at least temporarily. His call was overridden by . When I pointed out that she was previously involved as an editor in the content dispute, I immediately started to be attacked, including a statement by KillerChihuahua where my question was called "a line of bullshit"..
Then, in an astonishing coincidence, immediately afterwards I've got purported members of the disavowed "ID Cabal"  and ) showing up on my talk page, in the midst of a civil conversation with my (admittedly ideologically opposed) friends Baseball Bugs and MastCell, making uncivil comments. Weren't those exact two individuals called out for bad behavior in  ?
I'd like to suggest a couple of things here. One, that when an olive branch is offered, the receiving party shouldn't burn it because of a civil difference of opinion. Two, that if people don't want to be called a cabal, they shouldn't act like one. I had no interaction with Jim62sch or Orangemarlin before they showed up on my talk page. Oh, and I'm hoping some truly uninvolved admins would examine the fact that KillerChihuahua overturned SB Johnny's action at Sarah Palin, and decide whether this was justified.     23:18, 4 January 2009 (UTC)
So, this is about whitewashers VS. Gotcha politics? What a joke. stick the damn material in, write it neutrally, let readers decide. Isn't that the point? Argue about how to present, not whether or not.   ( ) 00:20, 5 January 2009 (UTC)
So far all that this thread has really brought to light is that previous personality/ideological clashes continue to exist. The rest is a content dispute. No administrative action is needed.    00:38, 5 January 2009 (UTC)
Wow, what a party I missed yesterday :-). If it makes things any clearer, I   KC to keep an eye on me, since she's got more experience with explosive BLPs, and she's given me solid advice in the past on another issue. I don't quite agree with her reading of the policies (namely, whether or not the bit of content in question is a "BLP" issue or whether that even matters), but the editors involved can try to reach consensus on it whether or not it's on the page. As far as I'm concerned, it all boils down to whether something controversial should be kept in the article until there's an agreement, or whether it should be kept out of the article until an agreement is reached. My impression (possibly mistaken) was that it should be kept out. --  |   12:11, 5 January 2009 (UTC)
The following was originally posted to  .  I'm moving it here, as this is a more appropriate venue for this discussion. ---   (       ) - 01:04, 5 January 2009 (UTC)
Blocked indef for legal threats. -''' '''  02:15, 5 January 2009 (UTC)
Looks like  may be related to this. &mdash;/ / / / 03:45, 5 January 2009 (UTC)
I would like to see how far this user would get if he did actually sue Wikipedia (assuming the user is so adamant on filing a lawsuit). But then again, there's Stella Liebeck, Mike Nifong, and Roy Pearson, so who knows?   ( ) 07:18, 5 January 2009 (UTC)
If this guy can't take criticism, why'd he become an author in the first place? He's obviously new to wiki, out of his depth and trying to regain control the only way he knows how; through legal action.   ( ) 16:49, 5 January 2009 (UTC)
I just extended the block of this IP, , to six months due to repeated legal threats. Too long?--  ( ) 15:37, 5 January 2009 (UTC)
I'm dealing with a persistent soapboxer and need some help.  Admin   has had some experience with this user, but hasn't been active lately, so I'm brining this here.   has a small sockfarm to his name, and has been attempting to add a few unsourced opinion paragraphs to various articles about how Pashtuns are neglected in Afghanistan and Pakistan, and thus US efforts there are doomed to failure  .  The material is not salvageable, and no attempts to discuss with him have been fruitful.  In addition to named accounts, he also edits from a few DSL IPs, as well as an IP that traces back to an Apple store and a Schiphol Airport wifi connection.  He's also vandalized my userpage twice  , accusing me of vandalism for removing his screed.  His primary targets are War in North-West Pakistan and War in Afghanistan (2001-present), though he's hit a couple of others as well.  I hate to request semi-protection, since both articles also get a number of good edits from IPs.  But I've run out of ideas on how to deal with this guy.  Help appreciated.  //         18:38, 4 January 2009 (UTC)
Are the user's newest socks blocked/accounts you suspect templated and reported for CU? Otherwise, its time for banning and   if you don't want to deal with semi-protection.
Is there any way to block user 70.71.243.53 from editing this page? He has made at least a half-dozen deletions of an item on the page, even though I keep reverting his edit. Thanks.    ( ) 00:46, 5 January 2009 (UTC)
This article is currently fully protected by . The only admin, it seems, that is currently willing to deal with POV-pushing and other problems at the article is . I like Puppy, but this is not an ideal situation because she had  with some of the more contentious content disputes at the article in the past. I'd like to propose  , similar to what we have at  .
On a related note, there are several  requests at that article that haven't been dealt with for a while.     19:17, 2 January 2009 (UTC)
In my opinion it would be an over-kill and too much of a bureaucracy placing her article(s) on probation since the election is over and she's not a main focus in the media (and of most editors) anymore. I'd rather would like to see tight (admin) hands dealing with disruptive and edit warring editors ''and'' have the article semi-protected till things calm down. So if let's say 2 uninvolved admins  would be willing to deal with it for a certain time it would be a better handling and choice to ease the "problem(s)".--  ( ) 22:01, 2 January 2009 (UTC)
I'm in favor of probation. Maybe one way to make the probation more palatable would be to say that the probation will only last six months at most unless there's an active decision to renew it.   ( ) 02:06, 3 January 2009 (UTC)
Based on the decision at Barack Obama, I propose the following identical proposal:
Pages related to Sarah Palin (broadly construed) are subject to the following terms of article probation:
I give never moral support to punishment; only prevention, contrition, and restitution. In lieu of a system supporting those, I support one year topic bans.
I don't recall having ever had any dealings with   before, but I am shocked at his/her comments about me at   and  .  Apparently my nomination of Robert Eric Wone for deletion, due to my concerns about BLP violations, is some sort of conspiracy to censor Wikipedia because I have an agenda to make sure that all rapes of straight men by gay men not be reported.  I didn't even know, and do not know as of this minute, that Wone was straight and the people the article is trying so very hard to accuse of his murder without saying so, are gay.   '' '' 07:59, 3 January 2009 (UTC)
I originally created a Wikiquette alert about CadenS but he removed my notification of the discussion from his Talk page without comment or going to the Wikiquette alerts page to discuss it:  .  Therefore I felt the only alternative I have is to come here.   '' '' 08:36, 3 January 2009 (UTC)
I had been under the impression that Caden was topicbanned from LGBT articles? Was I wrong? //&nbsp; &nbsp;  09:46, 3 January 2009 (UTC)
This is now '''at least''' the '''third''' ANI thread on CadenS, all of them started by different people (I started one of them ages ago). This is such a shame, CadenS has a lot of potential...if only he would stay away from sexuality articles (and stop the incivility). *Shrug*        17:30, 3 January 2009 (UTC)
Adopter here. CadenS and I entered into an adoption arrangement about half a year ago in response to a similar dispute. As his adopter, I made it clear then that I would mentor him and, if necessary, occasionally act as his advocate, but ''not'' be a "get-out-of-jail-free" card or a shield. Since then, I think there has been some slight improvement in his interactions with others. Unfortunately, though, CadenS continues to see "political correctness" and POV in other editors' actions, and is very outspoken about it. Despite my repeated advice to  , he does not heed it, or will apologize but eventually go back to the same behavior.
In light of this, I am forced to conclude that my adoption has been insufficient. While this particular recent incident doesn't seem worth a topic ban by itself, Caden's history leads me to conclude that if a topic ban on sexuality-related topics is not enforced, the same sort of incident will occur over and over, and will be a drain on the project. Don't get me wrong; Caden's work in other topics has been, on the whole, good, and we appreciate him for that. But his personal history has, not through any fault of his own, been problematic in the area of sexuality. Roux's '''option #2''' seems like the only workable solution at this point, though a combination of #1 and #2 would probably be best: actual topic ban, with Caden being able to request a trusted editor to make an edit for him. Both Banjeboi and I appear to be open to that role, but both of us would probably have a problem with many edits he suggested. -  ( ) 01:48, 4 January 2009 (UTC)
Yes/no? //&nbsp; &nbsp;  02:48, 5 January 2009 (UTC) (edited per Kotra's comments below. //&nbsp; &nbsp;  09:40, 5 January 2009 (UTC))
I think Roux has it pretty much correct, but I think an ''indefinite'' topic-ban is a little unfair; CadenS should be given a chance to prove himself.  His editing on non-problematic areas is generally OK.  Also, I don't think a strictly defined civility parole is useful here; that can be dealt with via   anyway, and it just confuses the issue.  
Unless anyone has any major objections to this, I propose to enact this later today.   15:22, 5 January 2009 (UTC)