He attended Carleton University studying Journalism, English Literature, and American Detective Fiction. He was a summer student rookie reporter at The Toronto Star, the same paper that once employed Ernest Hemingway, before embarking on a career in journalism that spanned three decades and several newsrooms. His freelance crime stories have appeared around the world in such publications as The New York Times, Reader   s Digest, Marie Claire, The South China Morning Post magazine and The Moscow Times. He   s also written for the UK   s Sunday Telegraph.
His reporting has put him face-to-face with murderers on death row in Montana and Texas. He covered a horrific serial killing case in California, an armored car heist in Las Vegas, the murders of police officers in Alberta, flown over Los Angeles with the LAPD, and gone on patrol with the Royal Canadian Mounted Police near the Arctic. He has reported from the Caribbean, Africa and the Middle East.
His first novel ''If Angels Fall'' was published in 2000 and introduced San Francisco Star crime reporter Tom Reed and San Francisco Homicide Inspector Walt Sydowski. It was a Best First Novel finalist for an Arthur Ellis Award from the Crime Writers of Canada. His second Reed-Sydowski book is ''Cold Fear''. With that book, Quill & Quire said Rick,    positions himself high in the suspense genre saddle.    It was followed by ''Blood Of Others'', which #1 New York Times bestselling author James Patterson praised as,    tense, realistic, and scary in all the right places.    The Ottawa Citizen described Rick as    a writer clearly destined for literary stardom,    while Penthouse said he was,    one of the leading thriller writers of the day.    The Globe & Mail said Rick was becoming one of Canada   s favourite crime writers. ''Blood Of Others'' won the Arthur Ellis Award for Best Novel in 2003.
After five books     and movie options on ''If Angels Fall'' and ''Cold Fear'', which have since expired     the Reed-Sydowski series went on hiatus and Rick launched a new series featuring Jason Wade, a rookie crime reporter based in Seattle, for that book he drew upon his own experiences at The Toronto Star and later, The Calgary Herald. The series debuted in the summer of 2005 with ''The Dying Hour'', which climbed to #7 on Canada   s best seller list (Quill & Quire) and hit #1 among Wal-mart Canada   s best sellers. Sandra Brown, an acclaimed international best-selling author, told Rick that she loved ''The Dying Hour''.    It starts scary and ends scary.   
The second book in the Jason Wade series is ''Every Fear'', which features a story that    Pushes crackling suspense to the breaking point and beyond,    according to New York Times bestselling author Kay Hooper. Rick   s third Jason Wade book is ''A Perfect Grave'', which New York Times bestselling author Tess Gerritsen called,    A lightning-paced thriller with lean, tense writing.   
Rick followed ''A Perfect Grave'' with his first standalone book, the global thriller ''Six Seconds''. For that book, Rick drew heavily on his international assignments as a newspaper reporter and his time as a wire service reporter. ''Six Seconds'' became a bestseller in the U.S., the UK and Canada, and has drawn praise from around the world. It will soon be published in 12 countries and 7 languages, including German, Danish, Finnish and Polish.
After ''Six Seconds'' Rick launched a new series featuring crime reporter Jack Gannon, who is introduced in ''Vengence Road''. Jack Gannon will return on July 1, 2010 with the release of ''The Panic Zone''.
The popularity of Rick   s stories continues to grow. Throughout the United Kingdom and across Australia and New Zealand and other parts of the world, readers are being introduced first-hand to the Jason Wade    trilogy    with release of The Dying Hour, Every Fear, and A Perfect Grave in those parts of the world. In Norway, where all of Rick   s books are bestsellers, his Norwegian publisher is planning to re-introduce the first two books of the Tom Reed-Walt Sydowski series, If Angels Fall and Cold Fear, in a combined special edition.
Rick is currently writing more books.
He has appeared regularly on the TV documentary series True Pulp Murder as a guest novelist.