The '''Bay Area Rapid Transit (BART) Police shooting of Oscar Grant''' refers to the fatal shooting of unarmed civilian '''Oscar Grant''' by BART Officer '''Johannes Mehserle''' in Oakland, California, United States, in the early morning hours of New Year's Day 2009. Responding to reports of a fight on a crowded Bay Area Rapid Transit  train returning from San Francisco, BART Police officers detained Oscar Grant and several other passengers on the platform at the Fruitvale BART Station. Officer Johannes Mehserle and another officer were restraining Grant, who was prostrate and allegedly resisting arrest. Officer Mehserle stood, drew his gun and shot Grant once in the back. Grant was unarmed. During his court testimony, Mehserle said that Grant then exclaimed, "You shot me!" Grant was pronounced dead the next morning at Highland Hospital in Oakland.
The events were captured on multiple digital video and cell phone cameras. The footage was disseminated to media outlets and to various websites, where it was watched hundreds of thousands of times. The following days saw both peaceful and violent protests.
The shooting has been variously labeled an involuntary manslaughter and a summary execution. On January 13, Alameda County prosecutors charged Mehserle with murder for the shooting. He resigned his position and pleaded not guilty. The trial began on June 10, 2010. Michael Rains, Mehserle's criminal defense attorney, has claimed Mehserle intended to fire his Taser, but mistakenly shot Grant with a pistol when he thought Grant was reaching for a gun. Pretrial filings argue that his client did not commit first-degree murder and asked a Los Angeles judge to instruct the jury to limit its deliberations to either second-degree murder or acquittal.
Oakland civil rights attorney John Burris filed a $25 million wrongful death claim against BART on behalf of Grant's family.
 Initial protests against the ruling were peacefully organized; looting, arson, destruction of property, and small riots broke out after dark. Nearly 80 people were eventually arrested.
On Friday, July 9, 2010, the U.S. Justice Department opened a civil rights case against Mehserle; the federal government can prosecute him independently for the same act under the separate sovereigns exception to double jeopardy.  The Department of Justice will be working with the U.S. Attorney's office in San Francisco and the FBI.
On November 5, 2010 Mehserle was sentenced to two years, minus time served. He served his time in the Los Angeles County Jail, occupying a private cell away from other prisoners.  He was released on June 13, 2011 and is now on parole.  
Oscar Grant had been celebrating New Year's Eve with his friends on the Embarcadero in San Francisco, and was returning to the East Bay in the lead car of a BART train bound for Fruitvale.  BART offered extended service and a special "Flash Pass" for the New Year's Eve holiday. At approximately 2:00 a.m. PST, BART Police responded to reports that up to 12 people were involved in a fight on an incoming train from the West Oakland BART Station and the participants were "hammered and stoned."
 According to Mehserle's motion for bail, Pirone confirmed with the train operator that the men detained were involved in the fight. When five other officers, including Johannes Mehserle, arrived at the Fruitvale station, they found the situation chaotic. Mehserle's partner on duty, Officer Jon Woffinden, said the "incident was one of the most frightening he had experienced in his 12 years as a police officer."  KCBS May 25, 2009
Mehserle's motion for bail, citing the police investigation, stated:
A cell-phone video broadcast on local television station KTVU on January 23 showed what appeared to be Pirone rushing towards Grant and punching him in the face several times two minutes before he was shot.
BART police had been on edge before the shooting because two guns had been recovered in separate incidents along the rail line over the previous hour. Immediately before he arrived at Fruitvale, Mehserle was involved in an incident at the West Oakland station where a teenage boy with a semi-automatic pistol had fled from police and jumped off the station platform, breaking several bones.
While dozens of people shouted and cursed at officers from the stopped train, Mehserle and Pirone positioned Grant face-down.  According to Pirone, Grant was disobeying instructions and cursing at officers.  Witnesses stated Grant pleaded with BART police not to shock him with a Taser.  Pirone then knelt on Grant's neck and told him that he was under arrest for resisting an officer.
Mehserle's motion for bail, citing the police investigation, stated:
Pirone did not know if Grant was armed. Mehserle had fear in his voice. Pirone had never heard Mehserle's voice with that tone. Mehserle sounded afraid.
The motion also states that the man sitting next to Grant also told police he heard Mehserle say "I'm going to taze him."
 Witnesses say Mehserle said "Oh my god!" several times after the shooting. and many saw him put his hands to his head.
The .40 caliber bullet from Mehserle's semi-automatic handgun entered Grant's back, exited through his front side and ricocheted off the concrete platform, puncturing Grant's lung. According to one witness, Grant yelled, "You shot me! I got a four-year-old daughter!" Grant died seven hours later, at 9:13 am, at Highland Hospital in Oakland.
 The attorney for Grant's family claimed that Grant's hands were restrained by Mehserle immediately prior to the shooting. The family's claim against BART alleges that Grant was handcuffed only after he was shot. The ''Los Angeles Times'' video of the shooting shows that Grant was not cuffed at 2:03 seconds into the video just 5 seconds after the shot was fired.
BART Officer Marysol Domenici was first officer on the scene with her partner, Tony Pirone.  Domenici testified at the BART incident hearing that Grant and his friends swore at her and did not obey her orders.  She is quoted as having testified that: "If they would've followed orders, this wouldn't have happened.  They probably would've just been cited and released."  She was terminated by BART on an accusation that she was untruthful in her statements to transit investigators.  On December 18, 2010, it was reported that San Francisco labor arbitrator William Riker ordered her re-instated with full back pay because there was no basis to find that Domenici was not telling the truth.  Domenici's attorney, Alison Berry Wilkinson, was quoted as saying that "She  has been vindicated." 
Oscar Juliuss Grant III, (February 27, 1986     January 1, 2009), lived in Hayward, California. Grant had worked as a butcher at Farmer Joe's Marketplace in Oakland's Dimond District after jobs at several Kentucky Fried Chicken outlets. He attended both San Lorenzo and Mount Eden High Schools in Hayward until the 10th grade and eventually earned his GED.
Grant served two state prison terms for various felonies including a conviction for drug dealing. In 2007, San Leandro police stunned him with a Taser to subdue him after a traffic stop, in which he threw the pistol into the air and ran. He was sentenced to 16 months in state prison.
Grant was released from prison on September 23, 2008, and according to the attorney for Grant's family, John Burris, "had been doing well in recent months."  Burris also stated that the criminal conviction and Tasering were "irrelevant to the BART shooting because Mehserle wasn't aware of it when he opened fire." 
In the motion for bail, Mehserle's attorney, Michael Rains, stated that toxicology testing of Grant's blood revealed the presence of alcohol (0.02%) and Fentanyl, a potent pain reliever. The coroner's bureau said the pathologist's autopsy protocol would be finalized in March 2009.
Grant's funeral was held at the Palma Ceia Baptist Church in Hayward on January 7, 2009.  Grant's mother, sister, daughter, and girlfriend (his daughter's mother) filed a wrongful death claim against BART following his death.
The oldest of three children, Johannes Sebastian Mehserle (born circa 1982) was raised in the Bay Area from the age of four.  He graduated in the class of 2000 from New Technology High School in Napa, California. He attended college in Napa, in Monterey, and at Sonoma State University, where he majored in business, and he developed an interest in police work through a friend who was a police officer. He went on to graduate from Napa Valley College Police Academy in 2006, where he placed in the top five of his class academically and placed well physically. Mehserle's girlfriend gave birth to their first child on the day after the shooting, on January 2, 2009.
Mehserle joined the Bay Area Rapid Transit (BART) Police in March 2007. During the less than two years prior to the shooting, he had not been the subject of a sustained complaint from BART's internal affairs department 
 He retained a criminal defense attorney and refused to speak to the authorities, invoking the Public Safety Officers Procedural Bill of Rights Act and the Fifth Amendment, claiming potential self-incrimination.
On January 5, 2009, Mehserle's attorney postponed a scheduled meeting by BART investigators, seeking to defer it until the following week. BART Police administration and investigators did not allow this and commanded him to attend an investigative interview on January 7. Mehserle did not attend. Instead, his attorney and his BART Police Officers Association union representative arrived and submitted his resignation letter.
Mehserle and his family received a number of death threats after videos of the shooting appeared, and he moved at least twice; his parents have also left their Napa home because of death threats to the family.
On January 12, Alameda County District Attorney Tom Orloff filed a complaint for murder and an Alameda County Superior Court Judge then signed a fugitive arrest warrant. Mehserle was arrested January 13 at a friend's home in the Zephyr Cove, Nevada, area near Lake Tahoe where his attorney said he had gone after receiving death threats in the Bay Area.  Mehserle waived extradition, and was held in protective custody at the Santa Rita jail in Dublin, California.  Mehserle pleaded not guilty at his arraignment January 15. On January 30, Alameda County Superior Court Judge Morris Jacobson set bail for Mehserle at $3 million.  A week later, with the help of fundraising from the police union, Mehserle posted bail.
Alameda County District Attorney Tom Orloff refused to speculate whether Mehserle would be charged with first or second degree murder, saying "What I feel the evidence indicates is an unlawful killing done by an intentional act and from the evidence we have there's nothing that would mitigate that to something lower than a murder." Orloff noted Mehserle's refusal to explain himself as a reason for charging him with murder, rather than manslaughter. Orloff said he would fight any motion to change venue for the trial.
Mehserle retained Pleasant Hill criminal defense attorney Michael Rains, who previously successfully represented one of the Oakland Riders. Before Mehserle retained Rains, Rains told the Associated Press that it could be difficult to prosecute Mehserle for murder because the law discourages "second-guessing and hindsighting" of police officers, who tend to be favorably viewed by juries. Mehserle's defense is paid for by a statewide fund for police officers.
At a January 30 bail hearing, Rains told the court that Mehserle had only carried a Taser for a few shifts prior to the January 1 shooting and mistakenly deployed his service weapon when he thought Grant was reaching for a gun.  Rains stated "Mr. Grant was actively, actively, actively resisting arrest"  KTVU May 20, 2009 and that some witnesses heard Mehserle say "Get back, I'm gonna taze him." Rains said he plans to call witnesses who will show "there was a level of resistance by Oscar Grant and others that will negate malice".
The prosecutors' theory of the case is that the video evidence shows that Mehserle deliberately reached for his weapon. They argued: "What we see in the video is an officer releasing his control of a suspect, standing up, drawing his weapon, with some difficulty, and shooting it." Jacobson agreed in deciding to set bail at $3 million that Mehserle's claim of Taser confusion was inconsistent with his earlier statement to a fellow officer and that Mehserle might be changing his story. He later imposed a gag order on attorneys and investigators in the case, prohibiting them from releasing future filings or otherwise commenting to the press.
Rains argued during the preliminary hearing that Mehserle lacked the malice necessary for a murder charge and that he intended to Taze Grant. A BART officer testified saying Grant and his friends yelled profanities and did not obey her orders to sit down moments before Mehserle fired at Grant. She said she was fearful when she heard taunts coming from Grant, his friends, and passengers on the train. After the seven days of  testimony, Judge C. Don Clay concluded that Mehserle had not mistakenly used his service pistol instead of his stun gun. The judge based this on Mehserle's statements to other officers that he thought Grant had a gun. He also noted that Mehserle had held his weapon with both hands when he was trained to use just his left if he was firing a Taser. Mehserle faced up to life in prison if convicted of first-degree murder.
 Rains had also failed to convince Judge Clay to remove District Attorney Tom Orloff's office from the case. Rains claimed Orloff violated his client's rights because he ordered two Oakland police officers to try to interview Mehserle after he was arrested even though Orloff knew Mehserle had an attorney. Judge Clay said Orloff's actions did not prove a bias nor did it meet the requirements necessary for him to be taken off the case.
On June 19, 2009, Mehserle pleaded not guilty, and the jury trial was scheduled to begin in October. Mehserle's attorney Michael Rains sought a change of venue of the trial on the grounds that there would not be an impartial jury in Alameda County. Citing extensive media coverage and social upheaval, the judge agreed. Rains's request was honored on October 16, and downtown Los Angeles was chosen on November 19.
 There was a hearing on February 19, 2010 to address two issues. Mehserle's bail was not reduced as requested by the defense. The judge also rejected a motion to remove Alameda County prosecutors from the case. Rains had argued that prosecutors and detectives acted inappropriately when they interviewed Mehserle earlier in the case. Another hearing was set for March 26.
Mehserle's attorney is expected to argue that his client did not commit first-degree murder and has asked the judge to instruct the jury to limit its deliberations to either second-degree murder or acquittal.  Rains wrote that Mehserle will not argue the killing was conducted in the heat of passion or in self-defense. Rains also argues that prosecutors have shown no evidence that the fatal shooting is either voluntary or involuntary manslaughter.
 Perry formally selected the jury on June 8. The 12-member jury consists of eight women and four men; of these jurors, seven were white, four Hispanic, and one Asian. Of the alternates, there were five women and one man with three Asians, two whites, and one Hispanic. It is alleged that six of the jury have law enforcement connections. Grant's family expressed outrage at the absence of blacks in the jury. The day before the trial began, Deputy District Attorney David Stein revealed a photo that Grant took of Mehserle with a cell phone camera. The photo showed Mehserle pointing a Taser at Grant.
Several experts who observed video evidence suggested Mehserle might have confused his gun for his Taser causing him to mistakenly believe he was tasering Grant. If Mehserle thought he was firing his Taser, this could provide a full or partial defense to the murder charge, depending on whether Mehserle had a legal right to use his taser at all, which was also brought into question.  Prosecutors allege that paperwork, including a blood alcohol test, completed by Mehserle after the shooting show that he has changed his story. 
  Burris responded to claims of Taser confusion by arguing that video evidence did not support the idea of Taser confusion and, in any event, Mehserle had no reason to fire his Taser. Mehserle was wearing his Taser on the left side of his body (on the opposite side from which he wore his gun) -- but set up for a cross-body, strong hand (right-hand) draw.
BART purchased the Taser X26 stun guns in September, and provided them to officers after six hours of training, which is the amount recommended by the manufacturer. 
Judge Perry offered jurors three conviction options: second-degree murder (with a sentence of 15 years to life in prison), voluntary manslaughter (3 to 11 years), or involuntary manslaughter (2 to 4 years); in addition the jury could have decided to acquit. Prosecutor Michael O'Brien said that Mehserle committed a crime inherently by shooting Grant. Intention meant murder or voluntary manslaughter, and an accident indicated recklessness on Mehserle's part and thus involuntary manslaughter. Judge Perry gave two interpretations of Mehserle's shocked reaction after shooting Grant: either Mehserle actually wanted to use his Taser or Mehserle realized that many people were witnessing his action.
Closing arguments took place on July 1. Expressing a belief that Mehserle "lost all control" the night he shot Grant and labeled the shooting as an accident to avoid liability, Deputy District Attorney David Stein asked the jury to convict Mehserle of second-degree murder. Defense attorney Rains argued that the shooting was accidental and told them not to make "some sort of commentary on the state of relations between the police and the community in this country." Jury deliberations began on Friday, July 2, and the jury had the day off on July 5 because of the Independence Day holiday. On July 6, deliberations were suspended after one juror left for vacation having notified the judge in advance, another juror went to a medical appointment, and another called in sick. One new alternate juror joined the panel. One juror submitted a question asking whether provocation by "sources other than the suspect(s)" can make one guilty of voluntary manslaughter. Stein argued that the jury should be able to consider outsiders' influence of Mehserle, but Rains disagreed.
On July 8, 2010, the jury informed the court that they had reached a verdict by 2:10 p.m.  The deliberations with this jury panel totaled six and a half hours over the course of two days.  At approximately 4 p.m., the jury found Johannes Mehserle guilty of involuntary manslaughter, and not guilty of both the second-degree murder and voluntary manslaughter charges.  The jury also found Mehserle guilty of a gun enhancement charge that could add up to ten years to his prison sentence, make him ineligible for probation, and force him to serve 85 percent of his sentence as opposed to the 50 percent most state prisoners serve.
 The next court date, when sentencing would occur, was set for November 5, 2010. 
When the time of the verdict announcement was announced, many people packed BART trains to leave Oakland, and Interstates 880 and 980 had heavy traffic. There were multiple peaceful gatherings held throughout Oakland after the verdict was announced, and sporadic conflicts were quelled quickly by the police early in the evening.  The protests became more violent as darkness fell   see "Protests and Violence" below.
A two page letter written by Mehserle was released after the verdict in which he said: "no words can express how truly sorry I am."
Mehserle was originally scheduled to be sentenced on August 6, 2010. On August 6, sentencing was rescheduled for November 5, 2010 so the judge could hear additional motions in the case.
On November 5, Mehserle was sentenced to two years with double credit for time already served, reducing his term by 292 days for the 146 days he has already spent in jail.  The judge overturned the gun enhancement, which could have added an additional 3 to 10 years to the sentence. He was released from prison at 12:01am on June 13, 2011.
The incident and subsequent direct evidence of the shooting was documented by video cameras held by passengers on the train idling next to the platform, as police detained Grant and a number of other men police suspected of being involved in the disturbance. Several witnesses testified during the preliminary hearing for Mehserle's trial that they began recording because they believed BART officers were acting too aggressively. These videos were made available through television news and internet video.
Oakland attorney John Burris says BART confiscated numerous cell phone images that he believes contains additional evidence of the killing. Alameda County District Attorney Tom Orloff said video confiscated by BART was useful in bringing the murder charge against Mehserle.
 Witnesses at the scene also claim police attempted to confiscate cameras. These claims have not been confirmed by BART police.
Orloff, the district attorney, said that several passenger videos that have not been made public were "very helpful" in the investigation.
On January 2, KTVU aired a video by an anonymous passenger who submitted a cell phone video of the actual shooting.
On January 23, KTVU aired a cell-phone video which appeared to show a second officer punching Grant in the face prior to the shooting. In late February, KRON 4 aired a clip of a video showing a different angle of this altercation. In the report, former Alameda  district attorney, Michael Cardoza, told KRON that Pirone appears to be attempting to restrain Grant by grabbing his head and pushing him down. He also said that Grant appeared to be reaching for Pirone's gun. Burris responded by calling it a "ridiculous assumption" since Grant was trying to resolve the problem.
BART spokesperson Linton Johnson described the surveillance footage from the Fruitvale platform cameras as "benign" and said the platform cameras had recorded some of the incident, but did not include the actual shooting. 
There has been varying commentary on the video evidence. After viewing the shooting from multiple angles, police use-of-force expert Roy Bedard commented: "I hate to say this, it looks like an execution to me" and "It really looks bad for the officer."  University of San Francisco law professor Robert Talbot said the videos could support a claim of an accidental shooting: "Nothing about his body looks murderous." Attorney Harland Braun, who won acquittal for an officer in the Rodney King beating, noted that video evidence can be deceptive, and doesn't show what happened before or after an incident.
Video images of the incident were widely broadcast and streamed online.  Several hundred thousand viewed the videos in the first few days after the shooting.
The case   and the overall intense community response to it   highlights the impact technology can have on news events.
On January 8, 2009, BART's elected directors offered apologies to the victim's family.
BART later filed a legal response to the lawsuit that claimed that the shooting was "a tragic accident", and that Grant contributed to the fatal incident. BART said the officers were "just defending themselves" and that "Oscar Grant willfully, wrongfully, and unlawfully made an assault upon defendants and would have beaten, bruised, and ill-treated them if defendants had not
BART has also held multiple public meetings to ease tensions.  BART board member Lynette Sweet said that "BART has not handled this  correctly," and called for the BART police chief and general manager to step down, but only one other board member, Tom Radulovich, has supported such action. The Board of Directors created a transit police department review committee to review policies and monitor "major police incidents."
An investigation was launched to determine whether any other officers should be disciplined. On January 12, investigation results were forwarded to the district attorney. The investigation, which interviewed seven police officers and 33 other witnesses, came to no conclusion and made no recommendations. The details were forwarded to Meyers Nave, an outside law firm, for an independent investigation. It was led by Jayne Williams, the former city attorney for San Leandro, and was estimated to cost $250,000. In August, the law firm provided two reports to BART but only released one publicly. The report said officers failed to follow recommended procedures, failed to work as a team, and had lapses in both tactical communication and leadership.
 On September 22, KTVU reported that Meyers Nave had recommended the termination of Tony Pirone and Marysol Domenici in its unreleased report. After being on leave since the incident, Domenici was terminated on March 24, 2010. Pirone was terminated on April 21 after an internal investigation upheld a finding of misconduct against him.
 Alice Huffman, state president of the NAACP, said there was little doubt the shooting was criminal.  Many reporters and community organizers have stated that racial issues played a role both in the killing and in the community response. Grant's family claims that officers used racial slurs during the arrest. BART Police Chief Gary Gee remarked that the BART investigation had found no "nexus to race that provoked this to happen."
There was a broad public perception that BART Police were not conducting an effective investigation.
 The film was directed and produced by Adimu Madyun and won the 2010 Rise Up Award from The Patois International Rights Film Festival in New Orleans, but Varney has also stirred controversy. "The headline for a cover story in the ''East Bay Express'' called Valrey an 'Agent Provocateur'     a term generally associated with police informants assigned to cause violence," wrote Temple University associate professor Linn Washington, Jr. after a Philadelphia screening. "That article referred to Valrey as an 'advocacy journalist' who did things 'no mainstream journalist would do,' like speaking at an anti-police brutality rally. 'They tried to get the community to turn against me but I have strong support in the community,' said Valrey, who  serves an  editor at the San Francisco Bay View, a black owned online newspaper," Washington continued. While in Washington, DC for a screening, Valrey was accompanied by Malcolm Shabazz, grandson of Malcolm X. Shabazz spoke of "his life since being released from prison for the arson of his grandmother   s house" in a joint appearance. A blogpost which reported on the screening connected the title of the film to Bob Marley's lyric "So if you are the big tree, then we are the small axe."   The post also linked to a recent annotated first-person account of the Shabazz story.
On January 7, 2009 a protest march in Oakland involving about 250 people became violent.  Demonstrators caused over $200,000 in damage while breaking shop and car windows, burning cars, setting trash bins on fire, and throwing bottles at police officers.
A January 14, 2009 demonstration briefly turned violent, and police arrested 18 people after protesters smashed car and store windows in Oakland's City Center district.  Another eight were arrested in a January 30 demonstration after Mehserle's bail hearing, causing Mayor Ron Dellums to suggest that Mehserle's right to bail should be abrogated to prevent violence in the community.
On May 18, 2009, 100 protested outside of the courthouse during the preliminary hearing and then marched to the nearby Oakland Police Department. A protest organizer was arrested after the group blocked traffic.
 An estimated 200 protesters gathered at San Francisco's Embarcadero BART station on April 8, 2010 to call for the disbanding of the transit system's police department and the firing of an officer who was on the scene when Grant was shot.
On July 8, 2010, following the verdict, protests began peacefully,  and officials commended both the protestors and the police for their demonstrated restraint. As night fell, vandals  engaged in opportunistic looting of local businesses, such as The Foot Locker, a bank, and a jewelry store. Oakland's police chief was quoted as saying that the people doing violence did not primarily seem to be Oakland residents protesting the verdict, but instead were self-styled "anarchists...who are almost professional people who go into crowds like this and cause problems."
The San Francisco Chronicle reported that many of the rioters who were most aggressive in damaging Oakland businesses and property were organized white anarchists wearing black clothing and hoods.  An anarchist slogan was painted on one wall that read "Say 'no' to work.  Say 'yes' to looting."  
Some Oakland officials objected to the "anarchist" label, commenting that the outside agitators seemed to lack any cohesive philosophy and were simply bent on making trouble.
A memorial to fallen police officers in Fresno was vandalized, causing about $3,000 in damage.
Oakland attorney John Burris filed a $25 million wrongful death claim against BART on behalf of Grant's family on January 6, 2009.  In February, he also filed claims for a total of $1.5 million on behalf of five of Grant's friends who he says were detained without cause for five hours after the shooting, alleging illegal search and seizure, false arrest, and excessive force.  Such claims are prerequisites to a civil lawsuit if BART denies the claim or fails to respond within 45 days.
Part of a $50 million federal civil rights lawsuit brought by Grant's family was closed when BART settled with the mother of Grant's daughter for $1.5 million. Grant's daughter will receive a series of payouts until her 30th birthday.