The user also sent me abusive messages, stating that it is "sickening" that I, as a user in Arizona who has never seen the series (wrong assumption on his part)(), have the galls to edit that article.
Truth is, thanks to internet technology, I was able to watch the series in question, and I have knowledge of the series in question.
Shabushabu, through edit warring and NPA violations, was banned for 3 hours yesterday (). During the first hour of the block, he posted many unblock requests, stating that I abused my powers (what powers, as an editor in good standing?), and that I prevented him from editing ().
The torrent of abuse from this user has exhausted the community's patience. I ask that an indefinite block be made to Shabushabu, who has already told us that he is unrepentant.   ( ) 14:38, 8 January 2009 (UTC)
Read those articles before judging I am in the wrong.
I have blocked Shabushabu for 28 hours (31 hours minus the three from the original block, which IMO should have been a full 24 hours) for resuming this behavior.   ( ) 19:55, 8 January 2009 (UTC)
Sorry to put a damper on your spirits, but now he's blanked the warnings on his page, and has replaced them with his version of the article, under the name: "How he stole my article". I think the block needs to be upgraded to he can't edit his own talk page.   ( ) 20:11, 8 January 2009 (UTC) 
Is  malfunctioning?  diff suggests so, and the bot hasn't then corrected itself despite several hours in which it would notice the difference between the two pages if it were a one-off.        22:08, 8 January 2009 (UTC)
I'm not going to argue strongly one way or the other, but it would be nice for someone to accept or reject the unblock request.&mdash; ( ) 21:43, 8 January 2009 (UTC)
I blocked based on the edit warring, and reverting an admin in this edit: , not for whether the sources provided in certain edits are reliable or not. As for the issue at hand, I am willing to accept an unblock on the condition that the user agree to not edit war again and in the future and make use of talk pages. -''' '''  22:38, 8 January 2009 (UTC)
I think Kww has the right nose for this(Good thing we didn't make him an admin....sigh).  The justification for the original block was proper, but some lenience is appropriate.  Hopefully any disruption has stopped and we have gained a productive user.  Remember, only a small fraction of unblocks are outright repudiations of the original block.   ( ) 23:09, 8 January 2009 (UTC)
Unblocked for reasons noted above.   ( ) 00:06, 9 January 2009 (UTC)
Is a range block hitting  and  feasible? A bit of   going on.  &nbsp;(    ) 21:47, 8 January 2009 (UTC)
Could someone please review the speedy delete at Timur Okutman. The article's creator and an anonymouse IP keep on removing the tag before an administrator comes along to review it. The article is a copyright infringement of . Thanks.  ( ) 22:57, 8 January 2009 (UTC)
All jokes aside, I'd also suggest a Keeper76 inappropriate textstring addition to the auto-reporter for WP:SSP, given the eidtor's last comment about a proposed next name.   ( ) 05:40, 8 January 2009 (UTC)
See also:  .   &#x007C;   &#x007C;   03:49, 9 January 2009 (UTC)
User continues to re-insert a phrase (in german) to wikipedias of all languages. It was already reverted twice on english wikipedia, but the nuisance will most likely persist. Please intervene or monitor the page. Thank you.   ( ) 22:35, 8 January 2009 (UTC)
Rgoodermote, that site is in English, so, there's no need to use German spelling. I mean, why not use Japanese instead, then? The Bad Boys Blue page follows a format which acknowledges all 3 current formations. It makes more sense to keep all 3 external likns to to a corresponding formation uniform, rather than all in unnecessary and arbitrarily different languages.
Caknuck - Thank you.   ( ) 22:53, 8 January 2009 (UTC)
I've been slightly involved, can someone else take a look? The long rambles on the talk page might inform or confuse. :-) Thanks.   ( ) 22:41, 8 January 2009 (UTC)
Created by , I can't label the first one because it's their monobook.js page.
Anybody else agree that perhaps this user  should be indef'd based on the very offensive talk page (deleted once already), the repeated attacks on   (deleted) and no decent edits except for a few minor ones last august--  ( ) 02:45, 9 January 2009 (UTC)
Gee,  reminds me a lot of , who was just blocked. As a note, I've indef'ed his page, after he inserted in the   bit. See also:  .   &#x007C;   &#x007C;   03:49, 9 January 2009 (UTC)
And editor,   keeps on deleting my posts, which are clearly not abusive personal attacks.  is the post he deleted (in case he deletes it again). Please, this kind of behavior can   t continue. ''' ''' ( ) 23:57, 7 January 2009 (UTC)
These IPs inserted essentially the same material that Shabushabu inserted in The Little Nyonya (), and also reverted my edits on Reunion Dinner without reason or explanation (). The user also accused me of stealing his article . 
Lately, 218.186.12.228 has resorted to vandalizing The Little Nyonya.
Violation of OWN notwithstanding, this user has severely, blatantly, and repeated violated NPA. This user is also disrupting Wikipedia to make a point, a violation of the rules as well. Also, what this user is saying is absolutely illogical. Yes, I am from Arizona, but is it a crime to edit other country's articles here, as long as I am doing it correctly, and according to the rules?
I am hereby suggesting an indefinite hard block on Shabushabu. This has got to be the last straw.  of  04:11, 9 January 2009 (UTC)
I have lengthened his block to a full week. If he continues the sockpuppetry, it gets escalated and will reach indef soon enough
I reverted a defamatory edit here  and warned the user here . Noticed on   that a user had sent them welcoming cookies. Then noticed on my watchlist that the vandal account had recently been created by  , who had then placed the welcome on the vandal's talk. Checked creation log, and Jake Wartenberg has created  in the past few weeks. Seems wrong to me, don't know if this is the right place to mention this, or what. cheers,   ( ) 14:06, 9 January 2009 (UTC)
As a note, we don't block IP addresses indefinite, as the block template states. The IP address was blocked for one year, so I amended the templates. And good riddens to Cheers Dude.   &#x007C;   &#x007C;   02:18, 8 January 2009 (UTC)
As a side note,  replied:  . Protected his talk page.   &#x007C;   &#x007C;   06:15, 8 January 2009 (UTC)
Hello, I don't know if this is the right place to talk about a complaint I have about  . He is reverting my edits Scottish Chilean , Welsh Chilean , and Basque Chilean . Those three articles were filled with original research, it had no sources, and with Scottish Chilean and Welsh Chilean the population is small and the contributions to Chilean society is also small while the Basque Chilean population is unknown. I found it appropriate to merge and redirect Welsh Chilean and Scottish Chilean to British Chilean, and merge and redirect Basque Chilean with Spanish Chilean. MacRusgail undid my edits without any explanations. I have reverted them back, but he undue them again. I gave him a message on his talk page  on why he is undoing my redirects, and he responded  with nationalistic rhetoric. I don't want conflict, but I don't know what to about him reverting my edits. I would like a solution to this problem. Thank you for reading.   ( ) 18:31, 8 January 2009 (UTC)
This editor (I assume all three are the same person) has been continually adding unsourced speculation into automotive articles.  However, as far as I can tell the accounts haven't had any edits in overlapping time periods, so I'm not sure if I should report them to  .  This user has never responded to talk page warnings or discussions.  All three accounts have edited Suzuki Kizashi, which was created by Wikipersonwiki (without any references, of course).  Please help/advise!  Thanks.    21:56, 8 January 2009 (UTC)
This IP user has been editing extensively in the area of animated films.  He has been removing notability tags, often accompanied by a snarky comment (see  and .  It would be okay (minus the snark) if the user would add information that actually establishes the notability of the film, as the template requests, but invariably leaves the article unimproved and thus as mystifying to subsequent readers and editors why the article is included in the encyclopedia.  The editor is tendentious and sarcastic  and  and has received several warnings concerning removal of the notability tags.   
Ah - since I began writing up this summary the editor is now engaged in an edit war and distinctly   behavior.  See this .  A brief block might be in order.    ( ) 14:40, 9 January 2009 (UTC)
I think this should be looked into.  A user  has appeared and his first edit was to an obscure talk page   to argue on the side of , who was previously blocked for sockpuppeteering on that very page.  It could be just a bizarre coincidence but it seems strange that this user would appear just now when Rtally3's block expired and when he began forum shopping to continue deleting the sourced material on the page that he was previously using sockpuppets to delete. (for evidence of forum shopping see his posts  ,  , and  , which are all about this same exact piece of information that he wants to delete). 
On another note, the user Rtally3 has created two pages, The Merrimack Manufacturing Company and The 1819 Strikes, which contain verbatim text copied from the book ''What Every Amercian Should Know about American History: 200 Events'', as a simple google search shows.  These pages should be deleted and the user warned about the Wikipedia policy on copyright.   ( ) 02:02, 7 January 2009 (UTC)
Well anyone who agrees with rtally3 is obviously a sockpuppet. What is referred to as "forum shopping" I think was really just using the noticeboards for what they were designed to to -- gather second opinions about an editing dispute and possible policy violations. I think the responses to those posts justify the concern, and use of the RfC's.   ( ) 16:24, 7 January 2009 (UTC)
Aaaaand who are you? Not sure why you're monitoring this all of a sudden, but csloat has enjoyed accusing me of hiding my identity by using different accounts for several months (afterall, there can't be THIS many people that disagree with him!). Anyone interested in the proliferation of the rumors surrounding Timmons over the years might become interested in the development of his WP page as his name surfaces, and in my opinion don't deserve to be "bitten"  for giving their opinions -- especially when they aren't even making edits. If a new user appeared who happened to agree with csloat, we wouldn't be having this discussion.   ( ) 17:06, 7 January 2009 (UTC)
Your points make it sound as if it's been proven that I've made attempts to hide my identity by using multiple accounts, which has never been the case. Just because other user(s) might have been blocked around D.C. does not prove that I was using those accounts. I was originally blocked for meatpuppetry, and then circumvented the enforcement of what I think is a ridiculous rule by posting twice under a new user name, but still signed under my old user name. While this is technically using a sock, I wasn't editing and it was clear who I was in those 2 posts. I wasn't hiding my identity -- which is the very reason that using a sock is a violation. Yes, a rule was broken, and I "served the time", but none of my actions belied the integrity of WP.   ( ) 18:09, 8 January 2009 (UTC)
Simply untrue. The difference is that you are accusing me of '''hiding my identity''' to make it appear as if there is a consensus, which has never been the case. Every post I have ever made has been signed "rtally3".   ( ) 21:20, 8 January 2009 (UTC)
What other identities are you accusing me of being? When did I not sign my post as rtally3? I'd like to see this.   ( ) 21:28, 9 January 2009 (UTC)
Please also note that you are required to notify someone if you are bringing up their actions here. The user has now been notified. //    03:19, 9 January 2009 (UTC)
If any background information is good, Code Lyoko has been a frequent battleground for quite a while, of which no resolution is or has been in sight. '''''   ''''' 03:53, 9 January 2009 (UTC)
To Jeremie, edit warring will get you nowhere besides another block. If you want to recreate the articles, then you must find sources on the characters that allow them to meet  . These sources have to be independent of the topic (can't be the source itself or something created by the publisher) and discuss the characters in a significant manner (beyond a name drop, a rehash of plot summary, or a throwaway statement). Then work, on the characters in your userspace and bring them forth for approval of the other editors that commonly edit the ''Code Lyoko'' articles. You will only move forward by following community consensus here and trying to change it in a method appropriate under Wikipedia's policies and guidelines. Continuing your current actions is simply going to get you blocked.       '''( )''' 06:41, 9 January 2009 (UTC)
Ok, first: the complainant should have taken this as a discussion with the editor FIRST, and then to WQA SECOND.  The last WQA report against Rogue Penguin that was related to Code Lyoko was  , which found no specific incivility against Penguin.    Any concern by anyone else that Jeremie is a sock of the blocked-because-of-socks   ???  ( '''&nbsp;Bwilkins / BMW&nbsp;''' ) 13:52, 9 January 2009 (UTC)
At   (also check the archives thereof), SaltyBoatr continuously makes accusations against fellow editors and is generally  . He has been repeatedly asked to  , but rarely does so. I request disciplinary action be taken against that editor.   ( ) 21:41, 9 January 2009 (UTC)
Re: repeated deletion of sourced material.  , , , , .  To me, it seems the user doesn't like the information in the source he is deleting.  I have suggested supplying evidence to support his position on the talk page, but that hasn't happened yet so it seems like he's pushing  .  Any advice appreciated.   ( ) 19:23, 7 January 2009 (UTC)
I posted at the bottom and it was removed by  . I undid. He re-deleted. Please would someone sort it. Thank you.     22:48, 9 January 2009 (UTC)
After his unblocking expired, he returned and is adding exactly the same material again, such as  and 
Worse still, now he's actually editing others (mine) comments on the Talk Page to the exact reverse of the posted text, such as .
As a refresher, before, he continued to add the source , which espouses the extremist fringe theory that , in violation of  .
Despite explanations to him about Wikipedia policy on the matter, he before repeatedly added it several times, for example, , , ,  , and .
He also promised to continue with this behavior, stating    Which he has now done.
In addition, he has repeatedly engaged in uncivil dialoge, such as  and 
Finally, the user admits that the reason he keeps adding information about relatives of the author Deborah Layton to the article for the book Seductive Poison (information not relevant to the book, but perhaps notable to the author's life) is that he thinks that the redirect of the author's name to the book article is some kind plot to drive book sales: 
Someone please get him under control.
For context  
Accusation of wikistalking is probably related to Roof knocking, which is indisputably related to 2008%E2%80%932009_Israel%E2%80%93Gaza_conflict, so the accusation of wikistalking is false, uncivil and ill-willed. 
I have tried multiple times to establish productive dialogue with Tundra, and he has actually at times agreed with me, but ever since he decided that 2008%E2%80%932009_Israel%E2%80%93Gaza_conflict was not about the topic it ''is'' about, he has gone the deep end in disruptness and filibustering. I didn't raise before because of overwhleming consensus opposing his views was enough, but his posting in my talk page is worrying and I wish to nip this kind of personal attacks at the bud. He must understand that an editing conflict is no reason for being uncivil and disruptive, regardless if his views are correct or not.
For your information, these articles are under discretionary sanctions from ArbCom. Thanks!--  ( ) 04:43, 10 January 2009 (UTC)
As a FYI it appears Be Unlimited and 02 are proxying again as a result of  . See:   and  . Not sure whether another one of our pages has been blocked by the IWF.... but Be Unlimited and O2 are going through one IP it appears...   ( ) 17:45, 5 January 2009 (UTC)
I'm on a Virgin Media connection, from within the UK. I just checkusered myself and I am not editing through a proxy; I've had the same IP since 5th December. For the record, the secure server was always a method of circumventing the IWF block, so it doesn't surprise me that it continues to be one now. --    19:43, 5 January 2009 (UTC)
Not much we can do until we get more info. Only one ISP so could be a technical glitch but we shall see.  20:27, 5 January 2009 (UTC)
The   hasn't edited it's own talk since 18:10, which suggests to be that the proxying was temporary, and may have stopped? Can someone check?   ( ) 20:50, 5 January 2009 (UTC)
I'd like to encourage the wp developers to get involved with this, adding code to detect this proxying and redirect all requests from IWF'd users through the secure server, including either installing a wildcard certificate on *.wikipedia.org or (if necessary, as I seem to remember there may have been a technical problem with using wildcards the obvious way) rewriting all outgoing wikipedia urls to use secure.wikimedia.org's mangled wikipedia url's.  It's not just a censorship issue, it's also a privacy one since a creepy operation like that is likely to also be monitoring people's surfing habits.     ( ) 02:40, 6 January 2009 (UTC)
Oh good, my phone is going to melt again. I've emailed a link to this thread to the Open Rights Group list and wikimediauk-l, seeing who can confirm or deny this one -   ( ) 21:22, 7 January 2009 (UTC)
Hey, here's a question: if en.wikipedia.org is being proxied ... is upload.wikimedia.org? That was the IWF's stunning incompetence last time - they blocked text pages talking about the image, but ... didn't block the image itself -   ( ) 21:50, 7 January 2009 (UTC)
Mike Godwin asked the IWF if Wikipedia was in any way being blacklisted, and the IWF representative responded by saying there is no Wikipedia entry on the IWF URL list.
Secretlondon notes above that A&A (who are ''vehemently'' anti-filtering) are seeing bad performance on Wikipedia. Secretlondon also noted on wikimediauk-l that the extreme porn law comes into force tomorrow ...
So what on earth is going on? -   ( ) 22:16, 7 January 2009 (UTC)
Since it doesn't seem to be going away, I have moved and updated  in order to make it vague enough to be used each time the ISPs start proxying again. I suggest we indef block the cleanfeed servers with it. --     14:16, 9 January 2009 (UTC)
I also agree that Wikipedia should now give strong consideration to an indefinite block on all IP addresses known to be associated with the CleanFeed system (list ). As usual with proxy IPs, it is almost impossible to stop vandalism from them. UK Wikipedians also deserve better than having their traffic rerouted without their knowledge or consent. Thoughts? --'''''   ''''' 11:52, 10 January 2009 (UTC)
One user keeps reverting my edits to the German casualty list. As you can see it is sourced, he keeps saying it isn't. The citation is from Christer Bergstrom which I put there in August. Some bright spark modified it. I changed it back inline with the cited source and this guy is now reverting my restorations! I have told him I have the book, and that I put it there and cited it. Yet he insists that it s unsourced! I don't seem to be getting through to him.   ( ) 13:05, 10 January 2009 (UTC)
To some up the intial edit stays, as this is ''exactly'' what C.Bergstrom states. Everything else, i.e the later additions is the unsourced information. All one has to do is follow the "diff" sections; it isn't that difficult.   ( ) 16:58, 10 January 2009 (UTC)
BlassFamily . The majority of the images he uploads are completely not needed and unsupported by his fair use claim. These are usually "Special edition" album covers (even when they look identical to the standard version) and images of music video stills with insufficient fair use. He's already had one block but simply won't learn. He is becoming disruptive.        22:10, 9 January 2009 (UTC)
On 9 January I noticed the article about footballer Taiwo Atieno had shrunk rather . Turned out that   had tidied the article, removing some rubbish but also removing clubs from the infobox and sourced content from the article and adding unsourced content relating to person's ethnic origin; no edit summaries. I restored sourceable content, added references and removed unsourced BLP stuff . The user cut even more . I restored the sourced version w/o BLP violations , and dropped a note to   asking them to stop deleting sourced content and referring them to   re the unsourced stuff. The user again removed some sourced content and reintroduced unsourced personal info . An unsigned reply on their talk page suggested Mr Atieno thought "parts of the information inappropriate and uncreative" and said "if you persist in removing personal information about Mr Atieno, I and Mr Atieno will make a formal complaint. And will take such actions as impeachments of Atieno's privacy." I restored the sourced version again, and replied on  . Then on 10 January a   reverted to the unsourced version of Taiwo Atieno, I reverted and added a  to  , but they've now reverted again.
While looking for diffs for this report, I noticed that the unsigned reply on   was added in two parts, once by the user and once by an anon. Obviously I can't tell if the anon was the user editing not-logged-in or whether it's a third party messing us both about for some reason.
Anyway, I'm out of my depth, so please could someone take a look. I've left a note on   and   pointing them to this discussion. Thanks.   ( ) 17:47, 10 January 2009 (UTC)
I'd really rather not make a fuss about this, but this talk page has inappropriately been deleted. Talk pages are specifically not covered in U1, and are almost always kept as some sort of record. Unless the user has a really good reason to delete it, it should be restored. I also don't consider someone with admin rights as someone who has "left". If he has really left, he would have handed them in. ''' '''   18:35, 10 January 2009 (UTC)
Hello, I would rather not have to report this but I think I am being unfairly treated by said user. I took objection to their perceived deletionist attitude to a number of articles and there is currently a discussion here: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Articles_for_deletion/Willy_Armitage Now you would think that would be the end of the matter but I have received a number of messages on my talk page  ,   and  . I made it clear I didn't want to discuss this on my talk page as I find the tone rather uncivil and slightly threatening. Normally that would be the end of things however my objection is to this addition on their user page: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=User:EEMIV&diff=prev&oldid=263204821 It did feel like stalking by the way and quite insulting. Is there anything you can do to help. Thanks   ( ) 19:39, 10 January 2009 (UTC)
I'm not sure if this belongs here, but here goes. It started on the Space Buddies page where i noticed that an IP was adding a section. Intigued, i checked the other Buddies pages, where i discovered that the other pages were being edited by different IPs all in the same range (adding the same info). The first thing that popped to my mind was sockpuppetry, but since the IPs aren't editing disruptivley, it's not blockable. I suggest we keep an eye on them maybe?   ( ) 22:32, 10 January 2009 (UTC)
The user has been blocked for a month. All clear.
This editor has been accused numerous times of being an IP sock of   or  . This IP's sole contributions (with only one exception, where he blanked the IP sock tags on his talk page) have been reverting edits by  . I will also file a   ASAP.     22:33, 10 January 2009 (UTC)
User 67.169.4.255 broke 3 revert rule on this page  
I noticed this editor when he removed the MfD tag for a page I'd nominated. Happened to check his contributions, and his conduct over the last few months hasn't been great. Perhaps mentorship by an admin, or a series of stern warnings and some closer scrutiny, is in order. See the following:
Userspace page:  ,  
I appreciate the consideration, and I have read, adhered, and removed the comments on my talk page from the users here regarding my heated comments. While I realize that my recent comments on Wikipedia have not been wholly  , I would advise you to further investigate the source of the heated comments,  's edits. I would not make such comments if it weren't after having seen the edits made by the mentioned user that violate both   and  , since guideline violations are the topic here.
I won't start a South Park discussion here as this thread is for my comments in response to the edits in question, but please consider it as (believe it or not) I'm really not the kind of person who would say such things without being either provoked, or challenged on a subject I feel fairly well-informed about (regarding South Park's unique format and in-jokes as opposed to most TV shows). 
Please put yourself in   if only for a moment and review the edits made by   after researching South Park's format (and cultural references). I am not saying I was wrong in my comments (I really went off the edge there as the discussion continued and crossed a few too many lines), I am merely asking for a view on my (and several other SP fans) perspectives on the subject, and a brief research and review of the edits I got so heated about. I would really appreciate this, and doing so with an actual conclusion that gives SP articles the respect they deserve here on WP would give me a new hope in the project. 
I thank you for all of you have done here. Just as a notice, I am in the process of removing my real-world name from WP for more anonymity (hence the username change), and I have done so in the edit above, if you don't mind. I ask that you respect this decision, in addition to the request/plea I have made above. Thank you,   ( ) 03:32, 10 January 2009 (UTC)
Hi,
Such as this edit: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Jew%27s_harp&diff=prev&oldid=256302558
The last vandalization by this user may have been five days ago. 
However, I feel the anti-semitic and racist nature of this anon user's vandalism warrants action of some kind. Based on this anon user's history, I am sure they will be back for more of the same behaviour. Thank you.   ( ) 04:50, 10 January 2009 (UTC)
Similar problems arise with other IP's, such as  who keeps trying to post false information about Barack Obama, but who only edits intermittently, so we have to keep watching him, because, ironically, he won't engage in an edit war so we could zap him.   '' '' 16:17, 10 January 2009 (UTC)
Would an Admin be so kind as to remove the full page protection on this subject (currently a redirect). I would like to start a stub article on this notable topic. Gracias.   ( ) 19:57, 10 January 2009 (UTC)
Re: 
Twice I have reverted this user adding an "article" about themselves to their own user talk page.  My first question is, am I doing the right thing reverting these edits and warning the user even though a certain amount of self-promotion is ok on user pages, and my second question is, is there any way of actually stopping him from doing it? --    23:37, 10 January 2009 (UTC
This user has continued to add information to the lead of California Musical Theatre against consensus. Has accused me of vandalism for reverting his edit when the information was originaly placed in the article by myself with references in a complete section within the article. He has been warned by admin already and keeps reverting without gaining consensus, but more importantly he continues to accuse me of being the vandal in all his talk page contributions and edit summeries. According to Wikipedia definition of a Vandal he is the one conituing to add text over and over that goes against consensus. It appears he is editing with an agenda.--  ( ) 05:17, 11 January 2009 (UTC)
Alright this has gotten to the point where I can't handle this on my own.   is continuing to make unilateral edits without consensus on the article Hispanic and Latino Americans. Myself and another user ( ) have objected to some of the content placed in the article largely due to the POV tone of the content and the sources used (ex. Mexica Movement sources). Rather than try to work this issue out by discussion the user has continued to revert war in order to place this content on the article.           He has also created what is essentially a   article in order to try and place similar edits (see ). I am an administrator on Wikipedia so yes I know all about  . The issue to deal with now however is putting an end to this disruptive editing behavior. I would do it myself but seeing as I am directly involved in this dispute and I have been regularly editing that article myself I feel it would be inappropriate for me to take any direct administrative action. Thank you.--  ( ) 05:47, 11 January 2009 (UTC)
The article Stefan Molyneux has had at least two AfD's that I am aware of and needs someone familiar with the process to take a look and add the appropriate  details to the talkpage. I'm not sure if this is controversial, but I recall the previously deleted versions of the article as being reasonably well-written     is there any chance, now that the subject has been deemed notable, that an admin could restore all deleted revisions to the article so that the useful content can be retrieved from the history? Thanks,   20:35, 10 January 2009 (UTC)
A quick look at the deleted revisions reveals some content that was removed on policy grounds.  (It was basically soapboxing by critics of this person, not very well concealed beneath a veneer of citing chat rooms where everyone uses pseudonyms as sources.)  The rest of the content that the new article doesn't already cover is an unsourced analysis of the themes of this person's publications, which readers had no way of checking the accuracy of, and which is better started from scratch working from actual published analyses of this person's writings; a short list of books written and (in at least one case) published by this person that can be easily re-created; and a 2-sentence list of the degrees that this person holds, sourced (it seems) solely to this person's autobiography and press releases, which can ''already'' be found in the prior versions of the ''new'' article ''in a longer form''.I think that you're better off continuing to write in the way that the new article is now written, working from sources, rather than retrieving content from the deleted revisions.   ( ) 08:37, 11 January 2009 (UTC)
I have a puzzler here; either something beyond-weird is happening, or I have just AGF-ed myself into a corner. Yesterday, I blocked   for 55 hours due to  which was occurring at that moment (which was why I didn't go through all 4 warn levels, in case that's a question.) I left an admittedly-not-overly-polite message informing the user of the block; the edits were such that I concluded this wasn't a hapless edit-testing n00b, so I was maybe BITEy-er than I needed to be (I admit it). Shortly thereafter, the person behind the IP  about the block, and my allegations, on my talk page, saying that the IP was a static IP accessible only to him. However, his post was made under , which was . The user later  that the ID belonged to "a friend" of his, for whose username he could not be held responsible. All this was communicated via another IP-- --which he is using to discuss his objections to the block because (he says) the original IP is talkpage-blocked. I didn't block his talkpage, but I'm not really worried about the 2nd IP because it's not editing disruptively.
What I am worried about, though, is the fairly-byzantine string of explanations. If the facts are as the user says they are, I'm willing to reduce the block to "time served" for the original IP--BUT before I do, I want to make sure that I'm not being a total dupe. Just for a start, I don't understand how edits made over a "static IP"--which he says the original IP most definitely is--can belong to anyone other than the owner of that IP.  There are a few other little questionmarks, too, but I'm reluctant to list them because I really want an objective look at what's going on here.
The conversation is spread among the following talkpages:  ;  ;  ;     ;  ; and     . I would appreciate someone with extensive admin experience and a superabundance of clue to tell me their take on this situation, start to finish. (And yes, I know--I can't believe it myself, that I'm making all this fuss about a 55-hour block--but I am still fairly-new to this admin thing, and in my RfA I promised to ASK if I wasn't 100% sure about something. When I made the block I was 100% sure; now I don't know if I am or not. So the help of my more-experienced colleagues would be appreciated greatly.)   01:18, 11 January 2009 (UTC)
I reviewed it some time ago.  As I told the I.P. then, I saw nothing wrong with the block.   ( ) 14:03, 11 January 2009 (UTC)
History:
Can someone block this guy? Thanks...   (       ) 08:41, 11 January 2009 (UTC)
Yeah, I also thought a warning would be sufficient, but I didn't think it should just go unnoticed like that (maybe others would disagree). Hopefully he won't ignore the warning. --  ( ) 09:55, 11 January 2009 (UTC)
On 31 December,  concerning an addition that   was re-adding to the   guideline despite ongoing resistance to its implementation on another article that she or he is involved in a dispute over (Glider, a dispute that I am also involved in, on the opposite side to Wolfkeeper). 
Wolfkeeper has now re-added the section, dismissing my concerns as "". There are a couple of other troubling things in the same message, including what appears to be an attempt at extortion (a bizarre one, since the discussion on "Glider" is still on-going anyway...) and a boast about prevailing "both there and here" (ie, Glider and Naming conflict) which I can only understand as a   statement. 
I'm not prepared to revert again. Could somebody else please take a look? --  ( ) 13:09, 11 January 2009 (UTC)
I have asked the editor to stop posting on my talk page in general, and specifically to quit posting personal attacks.  This behavior, as I pointed out to him before this last edit, violates   (specifically, see the fourth bullet item in this section) as well as  .  
The editor is an   (standing up straight cures disease, and now Da Costa's syndrome is a type of Chronic fatigue syndrome because someone that runs an iguana website said so), and we've already been down the   over personal attacks, with no apparent improvement.  He's effectively  from editing the article, and all the editor has done this month is complain that he's not getting his way because I don't agree that a 1951 book or www.anapsid.org are  .  His last mainspace edits were in July 2008 (and nearly all of them were reverted as biased, incorrect and/or outdated), so we're not talking about a particularly valuable editor here.
He does not seem to mind that I object to his ongoing personal attacks.  Would someone please consider whether a block is appropriate?  I don't really want to come back to Wikipedia in a few hours and find another attack on my user talk page.    ( ) 02:42, 11 January 2009 (UTC)
Someone may want to look at   on en.wiki, and someone at commons may want to look at        12:10, 11 January 2009 (UTC)
There's a vandalism I couldn't revert on the page:
After:
I can't find it when I edit the page; I can't find it on the templates. So I went to the Wikipedia:Vandalism page and ended up here. I wish I had it reverted, but this vandalism is beyond my counter-vandalism knowledge. :-)
Sorry if this is not the right place to put this. I'm not sure if it is. If it is not, please move it to the right place.     Preceding   comment added by   ( ) 15:17, 11 January 2009 (UTC) 
There are persistent issues with the astrological signs (esp Scorpio (astrology) and Aquarius (astrology)) that defy resolution. Users insist on adding material that is incongruent with Wikipedia core policies. I have tried to ameliorate the state of the articles  , but my edits keep getting reverted and I am afraid of getting into edit wars. I have already addressed ,  about it, and the main offending user  by a third party, to no avail. Please have a look at it. Thanks,   ( ) 15:46, 11 January 2009 (UTC)
I just noticed  adding   to loads of article about various companies. Most of these aren't related to Viacom in any way, and his edit summaries are usually some variation of "Does Viacom own that?". See   for diffs, as he has no otehr edits except these. Could someone please look into this?--  /  16:34, 11 January 2009 (UTC)
Please do something about this article,   has made 6-7 reverts causing an . No other person shares his opinion so far (as per talk page) and he refuses to be polite and stop reverting the article.--  ( ) 17:55, 11 January 2009 (UTC)
User Teledildonix, who was recently warned by several editors and administrators (see discussion board history) about repeatedly vandalizing the Rick Warren article and nearly blocked for his actions (he avoided this by publicly apologizing on the Warren discussion page and promising to desist), is back at it. He recently posted another inappropriate blog-sourced edit that was removed by another editor. Please investigate and warn him that any further action will result in a block. Thanks.   ( ) 22:09, 9 January 2009 (UTC)
The issue seems to be whether or not to include Warren's alleged involvement in the right-wing approach to dealing with the AIDS epidemic in Africa.   '' '' 18:56, 10 January 2009 (UTC)
I'm not sure how to solve this problem - unless the three of you can spend time working out a solution on the talk page whilst the article is locked down by SoWhy.  From my perspective I will be interested to see the language, co-operation (or lack thereof) etc that ensues there because that will further assist to see who and what exactly is the problem.--    01:07, 11 January 2009 (UTC)
I have blocked  indefinitely for multiple reasons including malicious page moves: , posting fake warnings to my talk page: , and thinly-veiled personal attacks  through the use of a barnstar. While I realize that this may be a bit harsh for a first block, I feel looking at this user's prior behavior that he is not here to build an encyclopedia. I welcome a review of this block and am open to an unblock if the user realizes why his behavior is inappropriate. -''' '''  19:07, 11 January 2009 (UTC)
He's now logged out:  and is trying to get an unblock on his IP, which I declined and pointed him to the unblock mailing list, sorry to the admin who will have to deal with him there. -''' '''  21:01, 11 January 2009 (UTC)
I am not harassing anyone. I simply want the ISP banner removed for privacy concerns. Also Ronz who is NOT an administrator has taken it upon himself to attempt to enact a vendetta against me. I've asked him repeatedly to leave me alone and he refuses. Please stop Ronz from commenting on my talk page and I will in turn leave him alone. Also, the ISP banner will be removed.  ( ) 20:14, 11 January 2009 (UTC)
Oh really? How come other ISP addresses don't have that banner? This is simply a revenge tactic by Ronz.   ( ) 20:18, 11 January 2009 (UTC)
First off, it's not fishy, it's what I was doing. Secondly, do ALL ISP addresses have the banner? Thirdly, I won't be doing anymore disruptions, I've gotten what I needed. Thanks.   ( ) 20:32, 11 January 2009 (UTC)
What is geolocate?   ( ) 20:33, 11 January 2009 (UTC)
Why would you do that Baseball? I told you I'M DONE!   ( ) 20:39, 11 January 2009 (UTC)
Look people just leave me alone, I told you I'm done ok? Baseball, you're not accomplishing anything worthwhile with snarky remarks.   ( ) 20:42, 11 January 2009 (UTC)
I've scythed the weed.   ( ) 20:51, 11 January 2009 (UTC)
There are issues with the ClueBot false positives URL (http://24.40.131.153/cluebot.php) today. Anyone else experiencing issues connecting to the site? Thanks,   ( ) 15:45, 11 January 2009 (UTC)
Could one of you helpful folks with the bit tell me which editors have created
The constant recreation has necessitated salting, and I suspect disruptive sockpuppetry as well. I'll do the report formatting if someone can provide the editor names.&mdash; ( ) 20:57, 11 January 2009 (UTC)
Recently, I've had a number of messages posted in a number of places that make highly offensive and clearly abusive comments about me because of legitimate actions I have taken in anon-blocking an abusive IP editor. I may have missed some of these messages, but the ones I have identified are the last three contributions from ip editor   (including one on a sub-page of   dealing with the 2008 IWF actions). The nature of the actions they seem to have an issue about is stated incorrectly, as the initial block seems to be , where I was responding to abuse that a different editor was a nazi, for which I blocked the anon IP address concerned. The editing history of  contains list of a number of such edits which were reversed, and for which a block was issued, and this has prompted another incident today  Since I find the accusations particularly offensive, I would like some other administrator now to look into this, as being repeatedly called an "Officious busybody" or an "editing nazi" in articles across wikipedia is not something I think anyone one shoul tolerate. Note that any blocks that I did carry out were all anon-only blocks in accordance with advice, and in light of the action TalkTalk is currently taking with respect to wikipedia. I do know that an editor appears to be "stalking me" because of comments I made when that editor tried to instruct a new editor to include old, now incorrect informtion about defunct boundaries of UK counties to an article (see  ), and I also know that abusive IP editors who are active on  Ireland-related articles and British Isles related articles resent me monitoring those articles and talk pages for inflammatory messages (which do not conform with   for the case of talk pages), but I am not sure who or why may have initiated this appearnt campaign against me.  &nbsp;  00:06, 12 January 2009 (UTC)
I think that SSP is still hopelessly broken, so I'm bringing this here.
PopSinger623 has been the topic of ANI threads. In a nutshell: he continuously recreated articles about imaginary albums by Matthew Parker, and blanked any articles that he didn't like. He and  shared a computer, and .  He was indefinitely blocked for this behaviour.
Today, I noticed  from . The name is suspicious, so, looking into Mparker623's history, I see that he has been , and, judging from the bot messages on his talk page, has been creating imaginary albums by Matthew Parker again, as in .&mdash; ( ) 00:22, 12 January 2009 (UTC)
Hello, this user has been   , and he has outright    attempts at communication.
The signature in question uses a font size much larger than what the  tag outputs, and has long been consensus that  tags are not to be used in signatures.
I and several others have requested he shrink it down, and, as said, he has rudely just deleted the messages off his talk page with not even an attempt at discussion.  I hereby ask that an admin tell him to do so.  It is way to big than what is allowed.    '''    '''Respond on my talk please 09:15, 10 January 2009 (UTC)
Followup: I just indef blocked  - '''note the missing "c"''' - for . Suspect it's an unrelated troll trying to create more dramaz.     12:58, 11 January 2009 (UTC)
He says he's retired now. Let it go.                   14:51, 11 January 2009 (UTC)
This is an example of busybodies, many of whom don't edit themselves, chasing others away from Wikipedia.  People who chase away editors are sneaky vandals, in spite of their title of administrator (if they are an administrator).  Let's focus on the edits.  Let's encourage good edits and stop being Wikifacebook.
This admin blocked   when he shouldn't have. He  Alonzo for breaking the 3 revert rule before . Also, he told Alonzo , and when Alonzo asked why it wasn't a reliable source . Orange Mike also nominted an article of mine for   and I asked him why he thought that the article wasn't notable, but he didn't reply. The prod that he put on the article before I contested it also didn't explain why it was non-notable. He really needs to stop doing this stuff. I could have discussed it with him on his talk page, but he probably wouldn't have replied to me.   ( ) 05:04, 11 January 2009 (UTC)
More telling is that after 'never editing here' and 'not writing his own entry', alan cabal shows up and starts defending his own page? I think this is the DUCK test pass that proves MS is AC. Big deal, block his IP, block his account, and ignore his antics.   ( ) 01:19, 12 January 2009 (UTC)
Also, is Smith Jones requesting a CU be performed on MS and the IP?   ( ) 01:20, 12 January 2009 (UTC)
No comment on MS, but Smith Jones has a habit of being, to charitably describe it, wildly out of step when it comes to ANI issues.  Check his contribs, and take it with a grain of salt.    ( ) 01:39, 12 January 2009 (UTC)
Checkuser suggests strongly it's not Manhattan Samurai.   ( ) 08:56, 12 January 2009 (UTC)
Once again, the situation is getting out of hand at Ayn Rand and  . I am too involved to do anything other than comment, but I do think there is an  on the article after a badly worded RfC (see  , , and  ) was treated as a  , closed after effectively one day by a clearly heavily-involved editor ( ) who has a past history of edit-warring for which a block was issued, though not recently, and on a different article. A thorough look at the history of Ayn Rand does suggest he has been edit-warring again, but I felt unable to take action on those matters. I have commented as best I can on the current problems, but can clearly not take any action; even now, my act of making comments and giving advice have drawn criticism from Kjaer. I think there is urgent action required to put a stop to this by some uninvolved administrators.  &nbsp;  02:05, 12 January 2009 (UTC)
I think we can say "that's enough" here, and close the case by banning Shabushabu for eternity.  of  09:23, 12 January 2009 (UTC)
I noticed that a couple of the pages mentioned at   have come back, and I'm not referring to the undeleted ones. Specifically   and  . Could someone look into this? Sorry if this didn't merit a new post here, but I wasn't sure where else to bring it up. &mdash;/ / / / 22:51, 10 January 2009 (UTC)
Alright this has gotten to the point where I can't handle this on my own.   is continuing to make unilateral edits without consensus on the article Hispanic and Latino Americans. Myself and another user ( ) have objected to some of the content placed in the article largely due to the POV tone of the content and the sources used (ex. Mexica Movement sources). Rather than try to work this issue out by discussion the user has continued to revert war in order to place this content on the article.           He has also created what is essentially a   article in order to try and place similar edits (see ). I am an administrator on Wikipedia so yes I know all about  . The issue to deal with now however is putting an end to this disruptive editing behavior. I would do it myself but seeing as I am directly involved in this dispute and I have been regularly editing that article myself I feel it would be inappropriate for me to take any direct administrative action. Thank you.--  ( ) 05:47, 11 January 2009 (UTC)
This is going to be bad; evidence of vandalism is already showing up  and at  . I suggest we protect that article for the next couple days. &ndash;      17:49, 12 January 2009 (UTC)
Took me a while to catch up:      ( ) 18:02, 12 January 2009 (UTC)
Can someone purge the history of this (it now contains major copyvios) and recreate as a redirect to Megadeth#New_album_.282008.E2.80.93present.29 to stop the rampant crystal ballery?   ( ) 17:46, 11 January 2009 (UTC)
BlassFamily . The majority of the images he uploads are completely not needed and unsupported by his fair use claim. These are usually "Special edition" album covers (even when they look identical to the standard version) and images of music video stills with insufficient fair use. He's already had one block but simply won't learn. He is becoming disruptive.        22:10, 9 January 2009 (UTC)
Worse still, he has given no reason, other than on the talk page, citing an overtly political (and odd and frankly incorrect) intention with  (as an aside, he couldn't be more off base with his political speculation), and incorrectly suggesting bias in other edtirs with odd rants such as  and   (the Stalin-hating charge being both incorrect and another obvious violation of WP: Civility)
In the process, his massive reversion has wiped out the addition of numerous sources by multiple editors, including much text discussed by numerous editors on the Talk Page, representing numerous hours of time by several editors and substantially worsening the article.
Three different editors (Kurzon, Silly Rabbit and myself) have attempted to reverse his mass deletion, but he continues to repeat it -- now 5 times in a day.  
I also warned him on the Talk Page twice before taking this to ANI,  and .
The user has a very limited number of edits on Wikipedia and does not seem to undestand the process.  The first time he did it, he might have thought he was just reverting the intro (not clear, as it's hard to discern what he means in statements).
Please help.
I don't wish to get into an edit war, but I and other editors can't even really effectively edit the page with new sources from books as it is now because he has wiped out so much.   ( ) 03:50, 12 January 2009 (UTC)
On top of the numerous violations and edits, this user has now bizarrely declared that it is the .
Not only is such a unilateral requirement for all editing an example of an overt violation of  , but he bizarrely seems to think he speaks for the "Marxist-Lenninst community" and that they own this right.
Any help would be greatly appreciated.  The   rule was obviously violated -- in fact doubled up (6x)-- in addition to all of the other conduct.  I'm not sure what else to do at this point.  ( ) 04:58, 12 January 2009 (UTC)
Another violation of   with the allegation that Wikipedia editors are lying (while he admits he can't actually identify such lies).  ( ) 05:27, 12 January 2009 (UTC)
If I'm not mistaken Admins have already seen this, the reality is I'm interested in reaching a consensus reguarding an article, and have presented genuine NPOV concerns, wheras it appears some users APPEAR to be more interested in just blocking those who disagree with them. Also if I am not mistaken it takes 2 (or more) to make an edit war.   ( ) 19:59, 12 January 2009 (UTC)
There is a bit of an issue on 2008   2009 Israel   Gaza conflict where the title "Massacre" is described by a few editors as "just a name" and is pursued in the first paragraph. Several other editors have noted the problem with this suggestive terminology -- often used as doublespeech propaganda by Arabs when Israel is involved alongside "divine victory " rhetorics -- and suggested the best way of handling the situation is to move this allegation into the body of the article. However,   concluded that this will be in the lead and pursue censorship of the "we desire death/Israel is making hoocaust" portions of the Arab narrative. This situation needs some major admitrative intervention; perhaps even a full lockdown on this article if editors are incapable of working within wikipedia's porpose of information and neutrality.
Sample diff where reference content is removed under the claim of "unilaterality":
To remind, I believe the "Massacre" terminology should be moved to the body of the article but if there is a   who insist on keeping it, then it should be given it's full context. Thoughts/Suggestion?  '' '' 14:26, 12 January 2009 (UTC) clarify 14:27, 12 January 2009 (UTC)
I'd like to suggest that rather than locking the article down, Jaakobou be counselled to avoid editing of this article, due to his inability to edit collaboratively. Since his arrival at the page two days ago, he has done nothing but make inflammatory comments, editing with little regard to core policies, including  . His efforts to censor out the view of most Arabs, Muslims (and I might mention, many other people) around the world that what is a happening in Gaza is a "massacre" go against  . His repeated assertions that Palestinians desire death, based on his taking comments out of context, are deeply offensive, particularly at a time when Palestinians are being actively slaughtered.    15:04, 12 January 2009 (UTC)
Adding "Arabs call it massacre" has little "long research" and "wide consensus" behind it for the first paragraph as it is a very controversial allegation and there is a good number of editors against the current   version.
Sadly, some editors refuse to adjust to the core ideas of Wikipedia and suggest that adding the "we perfected martyrdom/desire death" and "Gaza Holocaust" (both with citations) are somehow ''"efforts to censor out"'' the Arab voice. To the contrary, the "Gaza Massacre" allegation is half the narrative and should not be written without the complete narative, certainly not in the lead where it's suggestive that a massacre/slaughter of supposdly innocent people is occuring. This dispute as a good chunk of propaganda and the lead of the article is not a place to promote it unilateraly. It's a shame that some editors have fogotten the purpose of the project and this leads to the neccesity of administrative intervention.
Cordially,  '' '' 15:56, 12 January 2009 (UTC)
The talk archives for the page under discussion here already run to over a dozen pages. However, here is a quick summary of this debate for uninvolved editors. The lead contains the line " conflict has been described as the Gaza Massacre (Arabic:                     ) in much of the Arab World.". This line is backed by 10 references and I invite external editors to check these references that come from diverse sources including French, German, American and Arab news sources. In addition, I invite external editors to do a Google news search for the term "Gaza Massacre" (within quotes to force results where these two words are used together). When I did this , I found about 45,000 relevant hits. I think it is beyond reasonable doubt that this conflict is being '''called''' the Gaza massacre in some parts of the world. Note, that the issue here is not at all about whether this is, in actuality, a massacre or not; merely that in the Arab world (and even elsewhere) this is being referred to as the Gaza massacre. Those, in a nutshell are the arguments for the first line of the lead.
A couple of editors are uncomfortable with this phrasing because, as far as I can understand, in their opinion it is very unfair to call this a massacre. The point that several editors have been trying to make is that the sole relevant question is: "what are people in the Arab world calling this event?". 
Finally, if you look through the talk page archives, an overwhelming majority of editors agree that the phrasing should stay. Unfortunately, in response to this, this minority of editors has started surreptitiously editing the article against explicit talk page consensus. See . Some of these edits include the addition of poorly sourced material like the example above.   ( ) 18:25, 12 January 2009 (UTC)
The above file is hosted at Wikimedia Commons with the following description: ''The logo of the account, , which is a universal account for Users  ,  , and  . Used not for , but primarily as a station for all three established users.''
These users appear to have created the account in good faith, unaware of the role account clause in the policy.  BjrTriad is an English Wikipedia account, though, so it should probably be blocked anyway.  I'll be notifying all three users of this situation.  '' '' 16:31, 12 January 2009 (UTC)
1. Role accounts must be pre-approved by the Foundation.  This one is not.
2. The role account is active only on English Wikipedia, not Commons.  That is why I came here.  I am a Commmons administrator and cannot solve it at that end.
Hi, there has been some content inserted on Michael Brandon (porn star) that violates BLP. There has been some edit-warring to re-introduce the content with myself and another editor removing it and trying to dialog about why it's problematic with those who have been re-adding it. The article has just been protected but, unfortunately, we have indeed had "the wrong version" protected in place with the BLP problematic version. Could someone please revert to one of the non-violating versions?   23:56, 12 January 2009 (UTC)
This editor,  , appears to be methodically creating many tens of thousands of articles that contain minimal or no content. They are simply stubs for place names. 
Take here for example  - it is one of the several hundred settlements in the Lachin region of Azerbaijan that he has recently created articles for. Click onto any of the other place names listed for Lachin to see that the vast majority are empty articles containing nothing more than a single sentence. It is the same for tens of thousands of similar articles on settlements in Azerbaijan and Armenia that he has recently created. He appears to be using country gazetteers containing lists of settlements to create articles for every place-name in existence, without any thought about whether a Wikipedia article is really required for those places - the vast majority of them are (and always will be) without any notability. 
The editor mentioned is not alone in doing this, but he may be the most prolific and he appears to be going through every country in alphabetical order (he has already done all the "A"s and most of the "B"s). Is it correct that Wikipedia should become an A-Z gazetteer containing an entry for every single village or hamlet in the World?   21:29, 3 January 2009 (UTC)
If we can have entries for places like Holder, Illinois, and Bill, Wyoming, then pretty much anyplace having a structure with a roof on it is fair game.   '' '' 21:37, 3 January 2009 (UTC)
Try   more like. Permastubs are the future.   ( ) 21:49, 3 January 2009 (UTC)
The biggest bummer is that this is being done in a manual and more or less haphazard manner, with no community control over the information in the stubs. Had we allowed Fritpoll's bot to do its work, we would have much more useful examples of all of these same stubs. There is a lesson there, perhaps - when we as a community turn down a relatively reasonable request to simply allow good work to move forward, someone will later choose to do it anyway and without the same deference.    22:39, 3 January 2009 (UTC)
I'm sorry, but since when does an editor need the ''permission'' of anybody, WikiProject or not, to create an article?  Every inhabited place in the world needs an article, as has been clearly stated over and over again, for years now.   '' '' 02:25, 4 January 2009 (UTC)
It would be nice if we could get rid of these somehow, but it's historically been rather difficult. I wonder, though, why we can't have a solution much as we did for schools or fictional elements which are not individually notable&mdash;a "list of places in" by administrative division. In many areas, this would be the county or its appropriate local equivalent.     03:38, 4 January 2009 (UTC)
Some of the stubs get minimal data from the World Gazetteer website, and another user linked the site on   as a suggested place for that user to go. I decided to check a couple cities . Our  article lists a population of 3.5M, but Gazetteer gives about 600K. Our  lists 6M, but Gazetteer gives about 580K. Our  article currently lists 1.7M, but Gazetteer gives about 310K. Our  article lists 5.4M/1.1M, but Gazetteer gives about 770M. Why the consistent difference? Should we be using Gazetteer?   04:06, 4 January 2009 (UTC)
Wikipedia is a human edited encyclopedia and large-scale bot editing should always need consensus even if any of the individual edits that the bot does would be perfectly fine for a human to do.  Look at all the Betacommand dramas for endless examples.  WP:BOLD does NOT apply to bot editing, since bots (because of their scale of editing) are much harder to revert, breaking the concept of "bold-revert-discuss".  If this bot has been approved, it should be operating under a bot flag.  If not, it should be blocked until consensus emerges to let it continue.    ( ) 04:36, 6 January 2009 (UTC)
I'll float my perennial proposal: create a bot that deletes all articles that have only been edited by bots. If no human has ever shown an interest in the article, there's no reason to have it. I'll buy the notability argument for places to the extent that if someone has found enough data about a location to create a full article about it, I would never be inclined to take it to AFD on the grounds that it was too puny or insignificant to warrant an article. That's a long way from believing that a speck in an atlas and a line item in a census warrants creating a stub that nobody ever finds enough data to expand.&mdash; ( ) 00:23, 7 January 2009 (UTC)
I'm reading and re-reading the thread, and still don't see the issue. No policy or guidelines has been brought to bear to make the claim that these kind of stubs should not be created. Dragging down the quality of the project? That statement is laughable. All you need to do is look at Pokemon to get an idea of the crap that's out there already. Unless there is some formalized guideline developed, the   types of argument won't weigh much.       17:46, 7 January 2009 (UTC)
What bugs me about this thread is user Meowy's gross violation of  . Requesting a ban on a user for performing actions that are within a standing consensus is remarkably asinine. --   19:43, 7 January 2009 (UTC)
Not to mention done in bad faith that this editor is actually trying hard to improve the coverage of wikipedia in the long term.         13:27, 8 January 2009 (UTC)
I've had to reread this several times before commenting here, because to be honest in all my time on Wikipedia I've never read anything quite so ridiculous. Let's get this straight - Meowy wants to ban Carlossuarez46's article-creation because it's somehow damaging to Wikipedia to add information that increases this encyclopedia's coverage - information which should be easily verifiable. If the suggestion wasn't so pitiful it would be hilarious. Hasn't anyone anything better to do here than start coming up with spurious concerns like this? Sure, we end up with tens of thousands of tiny articles. But what harm does it do? All it does is increase Wikipedia's scope. And is there any guarantee that those articles - or a significant proportion of them - won't grow into far larger articles? Or any guarantee that - if Carlossuarez46 was stopped - someone else might not add any specific article manually that would otherwise have been handily bot-created (thereby saving a lot of work)? All that Carlossuarez46 seems to be doing is adding encyclopedic information to an encyclopedia. it's not as though we've a shortage of space - we're   to get this information down - it's basically being given to us for free. Sure, a lot of them are likely to remain stubs for a long time, but that's true with a lot of articles - and stubs do provide a basis from which to expand. I'd wager that a large number of  and grown from there than began as fully formed large articles - .   ...'' '' 22:31, 8 January 2009 (UTC)
I undid Gwen Gale's closure since this bot appears to definitely be breaking policy, namely  , which states:
I searched for evidence that Carlossuarez46's bot had been approved, and didn't find any, though maybe I missed it.  (Per the italicized provision of WP:BOT that higher speed processes can sometimes effectively be considered bots, I am going to refer to this operation as a bot despite Carlossuarez46's annoying coyness about whether it actually is one).  If there is an approval for the bot then I'd appreciate a diff.  I don't think this bot should be approved.  If it has created 100k articles and is still in the A's, it will have made at least a million articles when it's done, quite a substantial fraction of all the articles in enwiki.  That degrades the quality of the encyclopedia all by itself (lowers the average quality of articles), and maybe more importantly, these articles are unlikely to be watchlisted by anyone, making them vandal magnets.  We are long past the point where Wikipedia benefits from growth of sheer numbers of articles like this.  Unenrolled (IP address) editors can no longer create articles directly, and there is a ''reason'' for that. The crap and spam potential is just too large despite the efforts of the RC patrol (look at some submissions to   for a while if you're not sure of this).
The argument that individual articles about habitations usually survive AFD and therefore this bot is ok is a non-sequitur.  The first part is like saying that editors usually don't have it in them to kill a living baby after it is born--ok, fine.  It is quite a different thing to conclude that it's appropriate to launch a bot with the intention of causing millions of teenage pregnancies and no plan whatsoever to care for the offspring.  The argument that any such stub is a potential FA is also unimpressive.  No evidence is given that the presence of the automated stub has non-negligible chance of giving rise to an FA that wouldn't be created anyway if the stub weren't there; it's far more likely that the authors of any such FA will create the article themselves if there isn't already a stub for it.  For that matter, an editor creating a stub about his or her hometown is also different than a bot doing it, since the human editor will likely watchlist and care for the article.  Will Carlossuarez46 maintain these millions of stubs that his bot is spewing?  
Carlossuarez46 has taken quite a belligerent attitude about this in the past, as well: ''"If you think that there is a consensus somewhere that settlements not be added to the WP, show me where and we can go ahead and delete all of them in accordance with such a fouled up consensus or maybe we'll just   and say that consensus smells like what it's full of..."''.  The consensus is not about adding settlements, it's about rampant bot sprees that are not supported by consensus (think of Betacommand, who this incident reminds me of).  There are some other such incidents that I don't feel like digging up but can be found if necessary if (say) we end up with an RFC about this.    seems very clear to me, WP:BOLD does not apply to bot edits.  The requirement is to get consensus first, ''then'' launch the bot, not the other way around.  
For the reasons I've stated, I think this bot is a bad idea and I urge Carlossuarez46 to stop it himself, and for admins to intervene against it if he doesn't.  
I see nothing wrong with the creation of Agalarusagi. Stubs are useful to Wikipedia. It is that simple.   ( ) 19:09, 12 January 2009 (UTC)
After a recent interaction with .  has been babbling on about a case, presecution, and defense.  I beleving he was confused, asked him for more information.  He has made severl very supicious comments that lead me to believe he is being coerced by an ooutside source that he believes may be an official wikipedia sources.  Comments such as, "I'm afraid that this case is still ongoing. I have yet to receive word that it is over from the proper channels. Now, if you'll excuse me, I have work to do. Sincerely, Manhattan Samurai (talk) 12:10, 9 January 2009 " and "I have been told to cease interacting with you. I don't want to but unfortunately this will be my final comment on this matter as far as concerns you. I hope you understand. Sincerely,Manhattan Samurai (talk) 14:55, 9 January 2009 (UTC)"  I have reviewed his edit history and he is not in any way involved with any forms of formal dispute resolution.  When I asked him about it he became very dodgy and suspicious, again babbling about some, "case." he is working.  I am mainly concerned for his sake that he is being duped.  Perhaps somebody else can stop by his page and support this.      15:08, 9 January 2009 (UTC)
On what grounds is this editor blocked? Someone "suspects" something odd is afoot     ''this'' is your idea of respectful and responsible use of administrator tools? The editor has been actively contributing top-quality article content at Is Google Making Us Stupid?, which is the middle of a GA review you have now disrupted. If I am not mistaken, they have contributed multiple items of featured content over the past few years under a previous account in good standing. The attitude here seems to be "guilty until proven innocent of a crime we are not going to bother to mention". Can someone please explain how this is in line with our blocking policy and in the interests of the encyclopaedia?   19:56, 9 January 2009 (UTC)
Really silly block. Especially for "trolling" - he is doing splendid work on articles (such as "Is Google Making Us Stupid?") and deserves more than what he's been given. ''' ''' ( ) 20:38, 9 January 2009 (UTC)
Dunno whether anyone noticed, but .   ( ) 18:36, 10 January 2009 (UTC)
MS emailed me again. He requested that he be allowed to resume editing on the Is Google Making Us Stupid? article, and promised that he'll behave. What do you guys think about allowing him back to edit on a probationary basis. In other words, he's unblocked, but he's only permitted to edit his own talk page, and Is Google Making Us Stupid? (and  , and the GA and FA subpages of it). If he edits on any other article, the full community ban kicks back in. Thoughts?   ( ) 00:53, 12 January 2009 (UTC)
I've issued a probationary unblock to MS. I've outlined the terms on his talk page.   ( ) 08:31, 12 January 2009 (UTC)
This probation is ridiculous.  If he's the kind of editor we want around, why are we restricting him to a certain set of pages?  If he's ''not'' the kind of editor we want around, why the unblock?  When I see cases like this, I see only one reasonable justification for it: ego.  An individual steps up and says "Do what I say.  I am in control of the situation; look how important I am."  I suppose there's no harm letting this unblock continue until he goes off the rails again, but this sort of thing should not be done in the future.      17:35, 12 January 2009 (UTC)
I'm against an unblock. MS can add good content to Wikipedia. But so can hundreds of other people without being anti-social and devious. Whoever MS is can come back to the project under a new account and keep that account clean. He has demonstrated anti-community and anti-project activity and a devious manner in attempting to hide it. Just the sort of account we don't want. The effort to keep people like MS in line requires too much time, effort and good will that exhausts and demoralises people. He is, quite simply, not worth that. And we need to send a clear message to every user who feels that producing a bit of good allows them to also produce a bit of bad - as though that is what we have to pay for their bit of good - that we will not accept it. If an account blanks pages with rude comments and engages in provocative and time-consuming behaviour, we don't want that account - regardless of what else they do. Block the account,  and the person behind the account can come back and try again with better behaviour in a new account. If they can't, we block that account as well. And we carry on until the immature dork behind the accounts gets the message that bad behaviour will not be tolerated. That will save us a lot of time, effort and energy we can then spend on building the project. ''' ''' *  08:17, 13 January 2009 (UTC)
Hi, I have a complaint about a  . In the past, this user used a genetic study that said 56% of Argentines have at least 1 Amerindian ancestor. This user has used this source to claim that "Argentines are Mestizo and Castizo" . Which is not true, the genetic study just say most have at least 1 Amerindian ancestor, and it does not classify them as Mestizo. This user was told by an admin to stop claiming that most Argentines are Mestizo . Cali567 has stop for a while, but the user return again yesterday an continued his/her disruptive edits . I have removed her manipulation of the genetic study, but the user keeps putting it back.
Cali567 is also know for being a bad-faith editor. Cali567 is rude, he/she falsely accused me a sockpuppet just because I remove the manipulation of the genetic study. I need help here. Thank you for reading.
Cali567, go to   and follow the steps there, for each article you are disputing.  People told you what to do and if you continue to fight the same way, you will get blocked.  This is a content dispute at the end of the day and really doesn't belong here.  If there is no change in editing strategy, then inform me and I'll block myself.  --   ( ) 09:43, 12 January 2009 (UTC)
I'm concerned about this user.  I believe he either joined this morning, or the day before, either way, he has all of four contributions, yet, already seems to know quite a bit more about wikipedia than normal new users do, and even more so, quite a bit more about me.
This leads me to believe that this user is someone else's sock.  I am posting this here in case anyone might recognize him.  At this moment, he has been blocked indefinitely because of his username, but his behavior is just too suspicious.  Also, in case it matters, he nominated me for adminship, and I declined because, as said, it is just too suspicious.
Please weigh in if you share my suspicions, or this is similar to someone you've seen.
Also, of notable mention, I should note, is that I have not been participating in editing the mainspace for quite some time, I have been mainly dealing with socks and things I've found on this board.  To the point, of new editors who randomly nominate people for adminship, I do not believe I could fall into the same group who new editors usually select from: the history tab of articles.
Too many things don't add up.    '''    '''||Respond&nbsp;on&nbsp;my&nbsp;talk&nbsp;please}} 06:57, 12 January 2009 (UTC)
See .    ( ) 03:09, 13 January 2009 (UTC)
Please see  and .  See also  .  Is there anything you folks can do about this person? -   ( ) 22:24, 12 January 2009 (UTC)
I'm heading to sleep now but could someone inform   and the IP addresses there not to use his userpage as a way to avoid blocks on Facebook and Myspace?  See also the deleted edits at Stephen is in the middle east where they were before.  --   ( ) 10:23, 13 January 2009 (UTC)
Hello all. I need to get this out of my system. It has caused me so much wikistress and causes me, oftentimes, not even the ability to keep the will to edit. This is my problem &ndash; . I have tried to be kind and civil to him, for example, , but he has pushed this way to far and I need comment.
When I first met him, he hasn't a big deal to me. He  templates Todd Friel, followed by proposing it for deletion  . That is not in itself wrong, and it caused the article to, over time, become better. However, he quickly continued doing a similar thing to Adventures in Odyssey &ndash; he followed me from one article to the next. All through this time, he continued to ''' ''', when I haven't once done anything in  . Here are ''some'' diffs of this: , , , , .
Also, he said that I was unwelcome on his talk page, because all I did was in bad faith, but it is not. However, I have done what he asked, and have not edited his talk page once (even though I needed to). Within hours of doing some work to Paws & Tales and Down Gilead Lane (which I am planning on working on), he ''' ''', proposed one for deletion and added  tags to the other.
And finally, he  he will be doing this to articles I try to edit from now on (in context: AllNight with Jason Smith). I have gone through lots of stressing things and plenty of disputes/debates, but I cannot handle him any longer. I really needed to explain this. ''Please'' end it for me, I don't even feel like contributing anymore, as he will be close behind me. Thank you. ''' '''  /  20:38, 11 January 2009 (UTC)
Yes, I have been checking  's contributions. That user had  a redirect that I had put in place as a result of the consensus of a recent AfD, and then , rendering keeping a watch legitimate. As I was checking anyway, and as AE appeared to be a regular on a number of articles lacking   &  , I checked out a few articles on his contributions history. The Huckabee Report (which he had recently created) was sourced only to that program's own website, so I contemplated tagging it. However I suspected that Huckabee's name would make some editors consider it to be notable (along a flimsy line of reasoning that anything a former presidential candidate would do would be notable) and that a primarysources-tag without a notability-tag to back it up was unlikely to force improvements. I thereafter Articleissued Paws & Tales and Down Gilead Lane (and also prodded the former, as it seemed to be particularly insubstantial) also from his contributions list (I also noticed that AllNight with Jason Smith was likewise unverifiable). At about the same time, I also tagged articles in   &   that demonstrated similar problems but (as far as I know) were unedited by AE. This area of religious broadcasting suffers from a 'can't see the wood for the trees' syndrome -- an enormous amount of effort is spent creating unsourced (or solely primary-sourced) articles on individual programs of (at best) questionable notability, while neglecting to improve and expand articles that might provide a ''useful'' overview (e.g. Religious broadcasting).
I would further note that AE has a habit of  (as you can see at the bottom of the dif, this article had only a single citation at the time -- to the show's official website), and  (whereas the AfD close explicitly explicitely stated "Disagreement over notability and whether sources are sufficient to establish notability" as part of a non-consensus keep). ''   '' 01:57, 12 January 2009 (UTC)