In August 1958, a group of Christian men and women began meeting regularly with the establishment of a Lutheran high school in Orange County as their purpose. With no campus, no buildings, and no staff, the school was only a vision of its founders. But at the end of each meeting, one of those founders would pass around his hat, and all would offer whatever change was in their pockets.
Finally, in 1973, Lutheran High School of Orange County opened its doors to students. In those early days, the campus was modest: just nine academic classrooms, a library, a couple laboratories, and a few ancillary facilities. But the founders and families were energized by the prospect of this new school. Lutheran High School graduated its first class, numbering fifteen, in June of 1976.
Throughout the past thirty-five years, our family has certainly grown. Enrollment that first year was just shy of 100 students; today we welcome over 1,300 young men and women every day.  With 19 athletic teams, a 300-person choir, marching, jazz and concert bands, and over 30 clubs and activities (including Missions and Student Leadership), these students have countless opportunities for involvement.
Facilities have indeed grown as well. In 1973, the building consisted of two hallways and a small front entrance. Later years saw the addition of two more hallways; creating a perfect square embracing first a patio, then a gymnasium.
In 2000, the God   s Plan     Our Future construction campaign increased the size and scope once again. Thanks to the generous support of donors, parents & alumni, the campus once again grew in size with the addition of new faculty offices, an expanded parking lot, landscaping, and five new classrooms. The next year added more enhancements: a second story addition, ten new classrooms, including biology labs and a greenhouse, a multi-media resource center & an entirely football/soccer field with state-of the-art artificial turf and an all-weather track.
In 2002, the gym that had previously been in the center of the school was moved to a freestanding "field house." The 1,400 seat gym rests at the top of the building, while the lower level is home to a 3,400 square foot weight room, a wrestling room, a state-of-the-art team room, offices, and a training room.
In the Fall of 2003, the Alexandra Nechita Center for the Arts opened in the space once occupied by the old gym     the heart of the school. The new 720-seat performance hall is home to drama, dance, instrumental and vocal music productions, guest speakers and special chapel services.
In 2005, the school expanded once again, but ironically, not in facilities     in fact, the exact opposite.  With the addition of Orange Lutheran Online, students could customize their own schedules to include on- and off- campus course work.  The only difference in the two was the delivery of the subject matter.  The same high quality, high touch experience had a new classroom     the virtual classroom.
Advances in the sciences have lead to success in the ever-growing STEM program (Science, Technology, Engineering and Math).  Which allows students real world access to these high-demand fields.
Thanks to a capital campaign begun in 2008, additional improvements are planned to upgrade technology school-wide, add more classrooms, expand athletic and artistic venues, and enhance structural features of the school, including a more open entrance and peaceful courtyard. 
Our Purpose: To help students internalize the Gospel Message of Salvation in Christ Jesus.
Our Values: Lutheran High School is focused on providing for excellence in Christian Character Development, Academics, and Competition and Performance.
Founded: 1973
Tuition: $9,080 annually for members of association churches; $12,160 annually  for non-members (2009/2010 tuition)
Enrollment: 1,150 (full-time equivalent); 1,290 total (includes students taking a combination of onground and online classes)
Faculty & Staff size: 163
Highest degree attained by staff members: 1 doctorate, 1 master of divinity (Reverend), 46 masters, 43 bachelors
At Orange Lutheran, we value and know our students to:
1. Be loved and cared for in a safe and Christ-focused environment.
2. Realize that life is full of challenges, but that we are dedicated to
3. Be expected to place academic excellence as a priority - using a wide
4. Be confident in the use and applications of multiple technological
5. Find passion and energy through engagement and contribution in
6. Be surprised by the path that God has for them and embrace the fact
7. Be intellectually, spiritually, and emotionally ready for the post high
8. Serve the community, being aware of their impact on it and active in
9. Navigate the world around them with confidence as a global citizen,
10. Know that they are    Lancers for Life.   
Orange Lutheran High School's nationally-recognized athletics program is a vital part of the school's emphasis on excellence in Competition and Performance. Through their athletic pursuits, Orange Lutheran students learn responsible work habits, time management, teamwork, and the value of Christian sportsmanship.
The athletic program at Orange Lutheran is committed to instilling in our athletes the core values of Christian character development, academic excellence and athletic performance. Our athletic program strives to provide an avenue for all of our student-athletes to bring glory to God in all that they do.
Football     2006
Girls Cross Country - 2007
Women   s Track & Field - 1978
Women   s Basketball     1981
Women   s Track & Field     1991
Men   s Cross Country     1996
Women   s Cross Country     1996
Men   s Soccer - 1999
Women   s Soccer     1999
Softball     2001
Softball     2002
Football     2004
Men   s Cross Country     2004
Women   s Cross Country     2004
Women   s Track & Field     2004
Women   s Cross Country     2005
Men   s Volleyball     2005
Football     2006
Women   s Soccer     2006
Women   s Cross Country     2009
Men's Basketball - 2011
Women's Basketball - 2011
Basketball
Cross Country
Golf
Soccer
Softball
Tennis
Track
Volleyball
Baseball
Basketball
Cross Country
Football
Golf
Soccer
Track
Volleyball