In the TV series the family tree is mostly clear.  Frank and Helen are the parents of Tom and Lucy, Grandpa is the father of Helen, and Dinky is a cousin (presumed first cousin) of Tom and Lucy. In the books the family tree is never explicitly identified. Occasional references to relationships indicate a family tree, but the references are conflicting.
Besides the family tree, other notable differences between the TV series and the books included:
During the first two seasons, many of the episodes contained moral lessons or addressed specific issues, such as running away from home ("The Little Fairy Tale"), drug abuse ("Prescription for Disaster") and jealousy ("Lights, Camera, Littles" and "Twins").
The first two seasons also featured simple arts and crafts at the end of each episode ("Little Ideas for Big People"), with the second season using suggestions sent in by viewers.  During the third season, a segment called "A Little Known Fact" highlighted historical or geographic trivia that was related to the episode.
Along with ''Inspector Gadget'' and ''Heathcliff and the Catillac Cats'', ''The Littles'' was one of the first cartoons produced by DIC Entertainment for American television, and was the only one of the three to air on a network, rather than in syndication.
The first two seasons of shows feature The Littles around the Bigg household, but to improve the show's popularity the final season features the Littles traveling around the world.
During the production run of the show, the Littles were also popular enough to warrant two movie tie-ins:
The Littles also aired in a number of oversea countries including:
On November 13, 2007, S'more Entertainment released ''The Littles - The Complete Unedited Series'' on DVD in Region 1 for the very first time.  The 5-disc set features all 29 episodes of the series as well as several bonus features including the TV Movie ''Liberty and the Littles''.  As of 2011, this release has been discontinued and is out of print as S'More Entertainment no longer has the distribution rights to the series.
On July 19, 2011, Mill Creek Entertainment will re-release the entire series on DVD in a 3-disc set entitled ''The Littles: The Complete Series''.  It will also contain the two Animated movies ''Here Comes the Littles'' and ''Liberty and the Littles''.
Some of the merchandise that was released during the series run included: tie-in story books, a Milton-Bradley board game, stickers and greeting cards. Foreign merchandise included many more items such as Halloween Masks, a set of figures, card game, vhs, records, and more.