Samples was a stock car racing driver who went on the radio at the age of 40 and told a story about catching the largest fish ever seen in his hometown. The story was a humorous tall tale, and the recording of this radio story became a best-selling novelty record.
He was asked to become part of the 1969 cast of ''Hee Haw'', and created a bumbling personality, often slurring his way through delivery, messing up jokes and forgetting lines. One of his most famous blunders was from "The Cornfield" sketch...
In this way, Samples did much to contribute to the post-''Laugh In'' surrealist comedy of the show, with its strange combination of absurdist kitsch and down-home non sequiturs. He was known for being one of the foursome (the others were Gordie Tapp; Grandpa Jones and Lulu Roman) that made up the eponymous family of the skit called "The Culhanes of Cornfield County".
However, his most famous bit was as a used car salesman, inviting callers to call an older 5-digit phone number, BR-549 (in the show's later years, the number was changed to BR-1Z1Z). When ''Hee Haw'' episodes were later sold to the public through a TV ad, the initial 800 number was a takeoff of Samples' comedy bit.The rela story of BR-549  
In 1993 BR5-49 was also taken as a name by an American country music band.BR549 The Group The number also appears as a cell phone number on  signs at Wishard Memorial Hospital in Indianapolis, Indiana cautioning against the use of cell phones.  In the animated film ''Heavy Metal 2000'', a destination for the mining spaceship is Asteroid BR-549.  The origin of the number was "Boat Ramp 549," where Samples kept his boat moored on Lake Lanier near his home, Cumming, Georgia.
In 1974, Samples announced that he was "seriously considering" running for lieutenant governor of Georgia on a Republican ticket with then-mayor Ronnie Thompson, who was seeking the party's gubernatorial nomination. The media at first presented Samples' announcement as a political story. However, Samples was pulling a practical joke for publicity purposes. Thompson remained in the race and was defeated in the general election by the Democrat George D. Busbee.
Samples, whose weight sometimes neared four hundred pounds, was on ''Hee Haw'' for 14 years, until he died of a heart attack at the age of 57 in 1983. His funeral was officiated by close friend, Rev.Douglas Collins.Junior SamplesObit
Throughout the years Samples recorded several albums. Although he was known for his television appearances on Hee Haw, he was well received by radio. His first break came in 1966 with the recording of "The Whopper."Dicography of Junior Samples He was nominated for two Comedian of the Year Awards from the Country Music Awards in 1969 and 1970, and released a number of other comedy albums.1969 Samples Nominated for Comedy Award1970 Comedy nomination
1977 Junior Samples and Archie Campbell
1970 That's a Hee Haw
1968 Bull Session at Bull's Gap
1967 World of Junior Samples