 It consists of a stylized stencil portrait of Obama in solid red, beige and (pastel and dark) blue, with the word "progress", "hope", or "change" below (and other things in some versions).
The design was created in one day and printed first as a poster. Fairey sold 350 of the posters on the street immediately after printing them. It was then more widely distributed&mdash;both as a digital image and other paraphernalia&mdash;during the 2008 election season, initially independently but with the approval of the official Obama campaign.  The image became one of the most widely recognized symbols of Obama's campaign message, spawning many variations and imitations, including some commissioned by the Obama campaign. This led ''The Guardian's'' Laura Barton to proclaim that the image "acquired the kind of instant recognition of Jim Fitzpatrick's Che Guevara poster, and is surely set to grace T-shirts, coffee mugs and the walls of student bedrooms in the years to come."
In January 2009, after Obama had won the election, Fairey's mixed-media stenciled portrait version of the image was acquired by the Smithsonian Institution for its National Portrait Gallery.  Later in January 2009, the photograph on which Fairey based the poster was revealed: an April 2006 shot by former Associated Press freelance photographer Mannie Garcia.  In response to claims by the Associated Press for compensation, Fairey sued for a declaratory judgment that his poster was a fair use of the original photograph. The parties settled out of court in January 2011, with details of the settlement remaining confidential.
Shepard Fairey, who had created earlier political street art critical of government and of George W. Bush, discussed the nascent Obama campaign with publicist Yosi Sergant in late October 2007.  Sergant suggested Fairey create some art in support of Obama.  Sergant contacted the Obama campaign to seek its permission for Fairey to design an Obama poster, which was granted a few weeks before Super Tuesday.  Fairey found a photograph of Obama using Google Image Search (eventually revealed to be an April 2006 photo by freelancer Mannie Garcia for The Associated Press) and created the original poster design in a single day.  The original image had the word "" and featured Fairey's signature OBEY star&mdash;a symbol associated with his Andre the Giant Has a Posse street art campaign&mdash;embedded in the Obama campaign's sunrise logo.Ben Arnon, "", ''The Huffington Post'', October 13, 2009.  Accessed January 17, 2009.
According to design writer Steven Heller, the poster was inspired by Social Realism and, while widely praised as original and unique, can be seen as part of a long tradition of contemporary artists drawing inspiration from political candidates and producing "posters that break the mold not only in terms of color and style but also in message and tone."
Fairey began screen-printing posters soon after completing the design and showing it to Yosi Sergant. Initially, he sold 350 and put 350 more up in public. Beginning with that sale and continuing throughout the campaign, Fairey used proceeds from selling the image to produce more of it; after first printing, he made 4,000 more that were distributed at Obama rallies before Super Tuesday. He also put a printable digital version on his website. As Fairey explained in an October 2008 interview, the image quickly went viral, spreading spontaneously through social media and word of mouth.
After the initial 700 posters, the Obama campaign conveyed through Sergant that they wanted to promote the theme of ''hope'', and most of the posters sold by Fairey subsequently had the word "" and later "" instead of ""; the  star was also absent from later versions. By October 2008, Fairey and Sergant claimed to have printed 300,000 posters (with less than 2,000 sold and the rest given away or displayed) and 1,000,000 stickers, as well as clothing and other items with the image sold through Fairey's website, in addition to copies printed by others.  According to Fairey and Sergant, proceeds from sales of the image were used to produce more posters and other merchandise in support of the Obama campaign, rather than direct profit for Fairey.
As the campaign progressed, many parodies and imitations of Fairey's design appeared.  For example, one anti-Obama version replaced the word "" with "", while parody posters featuring opponents Sarah Palin and John McCain had the word "".  In January 2009 ''Paste'' magazine launched a site allowing users to create their own versions of the poster.  More than 70,000 images were uploaded to the site in its first two weeks.
Fairey himself was commissioned to create a number of works in the same style.  He produced two other versions, based on different photographs, officially on behalf of the Obama campaign, and another to serve as the cover of the Person of the Year issue of ''Time''.  He also created a portrait of comedian Stephen Colbert in the same style, which appeared in an issue of ''Entertainment Weekly'' honoring Colbert's television show ''The Colbert Report''.
Firas Alkhateeb, the student who designed the controversial Obama "Joker" image, cited Fairey as being his greatest influence.  Alkhateeb described the "Joker" image as a corrective to Fairey's glowing portrayal of Obama.  Fairey has both criticized and praised the "Joker" poster, stating "The artwork is great in that it gets a point across really quickly", but that "I don't agree with the political content of the poster".
The September 2009 issue of ''The Advocate'', America's oldest-continuing LGBT publication, featured a cover image that was similar to Fairey's design.  The blue and red coloring was replaced with pink and purple, but instead of "", the caption was "".  Jon Barrett, the magazine's editor-in-chief, said the cover symbolized frustration among some Democratic members of the LGBT community.
On January 7, 2009, the Smithsonian Institution's National Portrait Gallery announced it had acquired Fairey's hand-finished collage (stencil and acrylic on paper) version of the image (with the word ""), which the gallery said would go on display shortly before Obama's inauguration on January 20, 2009.  The work was commissioned and later donated by art collectors Heather and Tony Podesta (Tony is the brother of Obama's transition co-chairman John Podesta). It is an unusual acquisition, in that the National Portrait Gallery normally collects official portraits as presidents are leaving office rather than before they take office.
The original source photograph Fairey based the poster on was not publicly known until after Obama had won the election.  After a mistaken attribution to Reuters photographer Jim Young for a similar-looking January 2007 photograph, in January 2009 photographer and blogger Tom Gralish discovered that the poster was based on an Associated Press photograph by freelance photographer Mannie Garcia.  It was taken at a 2006 media event with Kansas Senator Sam Brownback, where the actor George Clooney was raising awareness of the War in Darfur after a trip to Sudan he had taken with his father.Randy Kennedy, "", ''New York Times'', February 9, 2009.  Accessed February 21, 2009.
  Fairey is being represented by Anthony Falzone, executive director of the Fair Use Project at Stanford University.  Falzone is quoted in the press release, "We believe fair use protects Shepard's right to do what he did here."  Fairey subsequently filed a federal lawsuit against the Associated Press, seeking a declaratory judgment that his use of the AP photograph was protected by the fair use doctrine and so did not infringe their copyright.
On October 16, 2009, Fairey admitted that he had based the poster on the AP photograph and had fabricated and destroyed evidence to hide the fact.
Photographer Mannie Garcia contended that he retained copyright to the photo according to his AP contract.  He said that he was "so proud of the photograph and that Fairey did what he did artistically with it, and the effect it   s had," but that he did not "condone people taking things, just because they can, off the Internet."
The AP and Shepard Fairey settled out of court in January 2011. In a press release, the AP announced that the AP and Fairey "agreed to work together going forward with the Hope image and share the rights to make the posters and merchandise bearing the Hope image and to collaborate on a series of images that Fairey will create based on AP photographs. The parties have agreed to additional financial terms that will remain confidential."