The '''SMX Convention Center''' is the largest private venue in the Philippines for trade events, industry conventions, corporate functions, and international exhibitions. Its building is located in Pasay City, right beside the Mall of Asia (the fourth largest shopping mall in the world), and is considered an important part of the Mall of Asia Complex (a 60-hectare business and leisure park). The SMX is owned by the SM Group of SM Prime Holdings.
The SMX Convention Center consists of four Exhibit Halls with a total floor area of 9,130 square meters. With the ceiling clearance of nine meters and a floor load capacity of 250 pounds per square foot, the halls are strategically designed to accommodate multi-level booths and heavy machinery. The Function Rooms on the Third Level, which can seat anywhere from 500 to 7,000 guests, are adaptable to any setup that an event may require. The twelve Meeting Rooms are intended for board meetings, seminars and even break-out rooms for plenaries in the Function Rooms.
Since its opening last November 2007, SMX has successfully handled some of the largest trade events in the country, like CITEM's Manila FAME International, International Food and Beverage Expo, Global Link MP'stiting galit China Products Exhibition, and Manufacturing Technology World Series, and Primetrade Asia's Manila International Book Fair. The ASEAN Tourism Investment Forum 2008 and the 8th International Conference of Asian Clinical Oncology Society were also held in the SMX Convention Center.
Medical groups in the country such as the Philippine Dental Association, Philippine Dermatological Society and the Philippine College of Physicians, as well as event management firms and production groups have made the Convention Center their    New Home.    Local industry associations have quipped that they are more confident to bid for international gatherings now that the Philippines has the SMX Convention Center, a world-class facility at par with rival venues anywhere in Asia. More than the structure, which was designed by Miami-based firm Arquitectonica, SMX boasts of the extraordinary service from highly-trained professional staff. Furthermore, its close proximity to the Mall of Asia, international airport, key seaports, first-class hotels and major commercial districts ensures the convenience of all delegates.
The purpose-built design of the SMX Convention Center not only makes it adaptable for all kinds of exhibitions and conventions, it also allows the venue to accommodate major events and even concerts.
In August 2008, international musician Alicia Keys' As I Am Tour, and the grand finale of GMA Network's ''Pinoy Idol'', were held in SMX. An estimated 12,000 and 7,000 people attended the aforementioned events, respectively.