The Minnesota-based company called Reside helped develop the functionality, using technology from Salesforce.com. Co-chair of the Obama-Biden Transition Team, Valerie Jarrett, stated that the ''Citizen's Briefing Book'' was a way for the Obama transition process to remain open and transparent. Popular recommendations included ending the prohibition on marijuana use in the United States and the legalization of online poker. ''Citizen's Briefing Book'' received positive comments from writers for the ''Christian Science Monitor'' and ''Business Week'', and criticism from writers for ''Chicago Tribune'' and ''Indianapolis Business Journal''.
The web function was developed for the Obama transition team by the Minnesota-based company called Reside, and utilizes technology from Salesforce.com. Co-chair of the Obama-Biden Transition Team, Valerie Jarret, stated: "The Citizen's Briefing Book will come directly from the American people.  It is yet another way that we will ensure that this transition is the most open and transparent one in history." Members of Obama's transition team interacted with users and responded to the voting. Beth Noveck, a law professor at NYU Law School and a member of the Obama Administration's "Technology, Innovation and Government Reform Team", stated that the book would help the government "get the best ideas for the beginning of the administration".
 As of January 17, 2009 the most popular suggestion, with 70,520 points, advocated ending the prohibition on marijuana use in the United States. By January 19, 2009, over 500,000 people had voted on thousands of suggestions posted by 70,000 individuals. In total over 44,000 suggestions were submitted, with over 1.4 million votes cast for the various recommendations.
The Obama Administration released the ''Citizen's Briefing Book'' to the public on May 11, 2009, the same day that President Obama announced the renaming of the White House Office of Public Liaison to  the Office of Public Engagement. "Many of the ideas you offer, from improving light rail transit to modernizing our energy grid to creating a new service corps, have been embraced by my administration," said President Obama in a video released along with the briefing book.
Writing for the ''Christian Science Monitor'', David Peck described the initiative as part of "a good foundation" of reaching out to individuals. Douglas MacMillan of ''Business Week'' noted that the Obama transition site Change.gov "won praise for its clean look and Citizen's Briefing Book feature". Joel Hood of the ''Chicago Tribune'' highlighted some of the more eccentric suggestions posted, commenting: "As if President Barack Obama doesn't have enough on his plate, he's about to hear the voice of the people, in all its eccentric glory."
Morton Marcus commented in the ''Indianapolis Business Journal'': "I see the virtue of being open to the public   s concern. I cannot imagine that the president will give attention to issues based on their popularity." In noting that the first and third-most popular items voted upon involved the legalization of marijuana, Andy Sullivan of Reuters commented on President Obama's efforts to solicit opinions from citizens on legislation: "That approach can deliver unexpected results."