This song received favorable critical reviews. After being announced as the third single, a music video was also announced; however, this never materialized and instead the song was featured in a film directed by Warren Miller.
Rick Rubin produced "The Greatest Man That Ever Lived" with the band between April 2007 and February 2008.''Weezer (The Red Album) Deluxe Edition'' album notes. In the liner notes of the deluxe edition of ''The Red Album'', Cuomo stated that the song did not originally have the subtitle "Variations on a Shaker Hymn", but when guitarist Brian Bell's mother came into the studio to see them, she mentioned that the melody from the song sounded similar to a Shaker hymn that the choir sang in her church. Cuomo, writing the liner notes, realised that people might notice the resemblance; "I knew people were going to come at us after and say 'Hey, you guys ripped off that hymn.' So I put the credit in there off the bat." As a result the band looked up the hymn and indeed the melody was so similar to Joseph Brackett's "Simple Gifts" that they credited the hymn with the subtitle.
The song was originally recorded in a room that the band nicknamed "The War Room." Bell states that "The Greatest Man That Ever Lived" took a long time to record; "I think the song 'The Greatest Man That Ever Lived' used about 20 feet of butcher paper and we discussed how we were going to successfully record it almost as long as actually recording it."
In an interview with KROQ, Rivers Cuomo talked extensively about the concept behind the song. The song was originally titled "The Ballad of Oswaldo Sanchez", inspired by Sanchez playing in the 2006 World Cup after the death of his father. He mentioned the influence for each section, including the Baroque counterpoint vocal style which inspired the final 'Bach' & 'Beethoven' sections. In a January 21, 2009, interview on the NPR program Fresh Air, Cuomo stated that "The Greatest Man That Ever Lived (Variations on a Shaker Hymn)" is his favorite Weezer song.
The song includes piano, police sirens, and Rivers Cuomo singing in falsetto, and it contains 11 segued verses in total. In an interview with ''Rolling Stone'' Cuomo, when questioned about how practising Vipassana affects his music, says that the song is a lot different from any song he has previously written: "It's the most ambitious song I've ever attempted. It took me a few weeks of writing. And lyrically, it's a huge departure for me. I have a long history of writing songs from a victim type of place, and in this, I'm bragging."
In order, the themes are:
Not all reviews were entirely positive. Jeffrey Canino of Tiny Mix Tapes criticized the introductory rap section of the song, " brings forth an unpleasant memory of Fred Durst. All throughout, the band is experimenting with disparaging sounds, and the only thing that ties them together is Rick Rubin and Jacknife Lee's glossy production." Despite this, Canino still rates the song highly, "The bulk of the middle portion is really pretty okay, so we'll concede this one as a success." Similarly, Ira Robbins and Pete Crigler of TrouserPress.com said, "Despite that success, rap is not an advisable direction for Weezer." Alan Shulman of ''No Ripcord'' commented that the song did not have much lasting appeal: "The novelty begins to wear after the 4th or 5th listen," and Leah Greenblatt of ''Entertainment Weekly'' labelled the song a "Bombastic mini-rock opera" but also said the "remedial rhymes" marred an "otherwise intriguing musical experiment."
This song had been announced as the third single off of ''The Red Album''. Spike Jonze was said to be directing a video for the song. In the end, the video was not filmed and instead skiing and snowboarding film director Warren Miller used the song in a film called ''Children of Winter''. The Weezer blog stated that it should not be considered official: "Note that while this  'THE' music video for 'Greatest Man' - it's 'a' music video -  nonetheless very cool indeed!" However, Weezer did film a video for the song through MTV, when they were selected as the MTV Artist of the Week. The video has the band sitting on a park bench lip syncing to their song playing through a boom box. 
Professional wrestler Austin Aries, a Ring of Honor World Champion, used the song as his ring entrance music for two months. The song was released as a downloadable song for the game ''Rock Band'' on June 26, 2008, along with "Dreamin'" and "Troublemaker".