Various depictions of a '''black president''' have been part of pop-culture in the United States (US). More recently the terminology African American was adopted. 
Before the election of Barack Obama in 2008, the idea of a black president was explored by various writers in novels (including science fiction), movies and television. Numerous actors, comedians and celebrities portrayed a black president. Comedic parodies of a black president have been popular, used to explore the culture gap, and what US life would be like under a black president and for a black president. 
As writers and directors cast blacks as president in several memorable portrayals, depictions of fictional black presidents may have accustomed Americans to accept a black man as president.
  Actor Dennis Haysbert who played a black president on the hit show 24, said the portrayal    may have opened the eyes, the minds and the hearts of people because the character was so well liked." The show also raised the issue of whether television series "like political trial ballons, can ready the populace for change." 
After Barack Obama's election, the television show the ''Cosby Show'' was cited for what has been termed the    Huxtable effect    for the influence of its "warmhearted" portrayal, "free of street conflicts and ghetto stereotypes - that broke ground for its depiction of an upwardly mobile black family." The show has even been cited by some observers as a factor in Obama's victory.
In 1964 Irving Wallace published ''The Man'', a popular novel addressing the idea of a black president, named Douglas Dillman in the book.  Recently a critic described it as a window into "Kennedy-era racial pathologies", despite the author's liberal attitude. It included the portrayal of attractive mulatto women who could pass for white, as does the hero Dillman's own light-skinned daughter.  ''The Man'' noted factors against a black president's being elected in America, and Dillman's coming to power through an unlikely series of circumstances of succession.
Other novels featuring a first black president include Philip K. Dick's ''The Crack in Space'' (1966), T. Ernesto Bethancourt's young adult novel ''The Tomorrow Connection'' (1984) and T.D. Walters' self-published thriller ''The Race'' (2007).
In 1983 at age 22, Eddie Murphy (who was born the same year as Obama)  enacted a parody of a black president in one of his stand-up routines, ''Eddie Murphy Delirious'', filmed in Washington, D.C..
Writers and directors have featured a black man as president in several memorable portrayals.  There have been film and television proposals based on the idea, as well.
The first movie portrayal of a black American president was probably that of Sammy Davis Jr. in the 1933 film ''Rufus Jones for President''. In this short musical comedy, the 7-year-old Davis is told by his mother, portrayed by Ethel Waters, that anyone can become president, and later dreams of his own inauguration.  Outside the dreams, the film reflects contemporary racist attitudes.
The 1941 musical movie ''Babes on Broadway'' included Judy Garland in black male drag singing a song "Franklin Delano Jones", about the first black president of the United States.
In 1977 comedian Richard Pryor portrayed the first black president of the United States in a skit on ''The Richard Pryor Show'', his short-lived foray on NBC television.
The 1987 animated series ''Spiral Zone'' is the first television show in history to show a serious depiction of an African-American president of the United States in the episode .
In the 1997 science fantasy film ''The Fifth Element'', Tom Lister, Jr. portrayed President Lindberg, a character who was the World President, rather than simply a U.S. President.
A generation after ''The Man'', the 1998 science fiction film ''Deep Impact'' featured black actor Morgan Freeman as president Tom Beck.  Freeman portrayed his role with such commanding authority that it probably contributed to his coming in second in Moviefone's poll of "Best Movie Presidents".  The question was whether a black man indeed had to be this superior to be elected.  Critic Louis Bayard noticed that Dennis Haysbert seemed to adopt Freeman's cadences for his own role as president.  
 After the show portrayed the assassination of Palmer, his brother Wayne, played by D.B. Woodside, was also elected president. The ''Jerusalem Post'' speculated in June 2008 that television ratings "may have predicted Obama's primary victory over Hillary Clinton, as the most recent female television president appears to have been less popular than the black leaders of 24."  
In 2000, Chris Tucker planned on writing, directing, producing and starring in a movie about the first black president of the United States.
Chris Rock wrote, directed, and starred as presidential candidate Mays Gilliam in the 2003 comedy ''Head of State'', described as "undernourished." The movie's tagline was "The only thing white is the house".  Another critic described Rock as in way over his head, and found it "depressing to see Rock pander to the most reactionary elements of the black audience."  He also was surprised at some of the settings.  "Rock doesn't seem to know much about contemporary America; when his character travels to Memphis (a majority-black city with a black mayor) we see only white people."
In 2004, a sketch on Chappelle's Show called "Black Bush" featured Dave Chappelle as an African-American "interpretation" of then President George W. Bush and his administration. It was controversial due to its set-up segment (which had Chappelle mocking fellow comedian Dennis Miller over the comedian's infamous "free pass" comment regarding not saying anything bad about George W. Bush) and its overall theme that if Bush and his top aides were black, that the public would be more willing to be critical of the President and his decisions. The sketch also features cameo appearances by actor Jamie Foxx, who appears as "Black Tony Blair" and Mos Def as "Black Head of the CIA" holding "Yellowcake from Africa (Anthony Berry's character warns the other not to "drop that shit", though it is clearly just yellow cake).
In CBS's 2004 TV series ''Century City'''s fictional timeline, Oprah Winfrey is the US President.
Mike Judge's 2006 ''Idiocracy'' featured President Dwayne Elizondo Mountain Dew Herbert Camacho as a former porn star and champion wrestler played by erstwhile NFL defensive end Terry Alan Crews. Critic Bayard thought it odd that the lead character seemed so little advanced from earlier 20th century caricatures. The "joke is essentially unchanged from the days of Rufus Jones: These are the last guys in the world -- or any world -- you'd want to vote for."
In ABC's 2008 series ''Life on Mars'' (a remake of BBC's series of the same name), it is hinted that Malia Obama, the daughter of then-candidate Barack Obama, is the President in 2035. This and the 2004 CBS series depicted an African-American president who was female.
NBC's 2010 series "The Event" features Blair Underwood in a starring role as President Elias Martinez.
In 1983, R&B artist Blowfly released a track entitled "The first black president", a conversation between ''President Blowfly'' and his assistant over hip hop music.
Rap artist Young Jeezy, also inspired by the Obama campaign, wrote a song entitled "My President", which also featured Nas, and featured the chorus "My President Is Black ..."
When he appeared in speaking roles on Snoop Dogg's album ''No Limit Top Dogg'', actor Rudy Ray Moore joked that he would run for president with two priorities- painting the White House black and legalizing just about everything.
In 2009, athlete Gilbert Arenas portrayed a black president in an ad marketing an Adidas sneaker he designed, which was called the "Black President."
An unnamed black president played a major role in the 2000 first-person shooter Nintendo 64 video game ''Perfect Dark''.  The player must prevent his assassination and lead him to the escape pod on a futuristic rendition of Air Force One.
The Obama presidency has potential to affect television shows, but people have differing reactions to that.  The comedian and actor Bill Cosby said he is "not all that optimistic that Obama   s presidency will make a major difference in terms of onscreen diversity," saying "they would die before putting another show on about a black family and black pride." "Some believe that impact (of having a black president and first family) will take on additional power as the nation - including Hollywood - is exposed to countless images of Obama along with wife Michelle and daughters Malia and Sasha as they hold court in the White House." Chuck Barney, "Will the    Obama effect' bring change to TV?" 26 January 2009, ''Contra Costa Times''
Pastor T.D. Jakes noted the portrayal on television of "middle-class African-Americans who are articulate, intelligent and thoughtful." He hoped the new president would make a difference in encouraging those types of depictions.   "The Obama effect might even go beyond bolstering the presence of blacks on television and actually bring about a tonal change in programming," according to Brok Akil.  She wrote a script based on a book called ''Making Friends With Black People'', a buddy comedy that focuses on the state of race relations in the U.S.Chuck Barney, "Will the    Obama effect' bring change to TV?" 26 January 2009, ''Contra Costa Times'' She added that, "In our pitch to NBC, we referenced Obama." She also said, "We talked about how he has gotten us to the table to talk about race in a meaningful way and it   s time to continue the discussion. So our new president has already had an impact." 