There are a total of 35 fire stations across Suffolk, four whole time, three day crewed and 28 On Call.  All whole time/day crewed stations also have a On Call section.
A PFI project is currently underway to replace/refurbish fire stations within Suffolk. 
A new station was built in 2009 on Stradbroke Road in South Lowestoft to replace the On Call station at Clifton Road and the wholetime station at Normanshurst. Normanshurst is now purely a On Call station, whilst Lowestoft South is Wholetime/On Call.  
New stations have also been built or in the process of being built for Needham Market, Nayland, Hadleigh, and Lowestoft North.  These will all be single bay stations, and all except Hadleigh are on the existing site.
In addition, certain stations are being refurbished, such as Haverhill, Bury St Edmunds, Felixstowe and Sudbury.
In late 2009, it was announced that the Fire Station at Colchester Road in Ipswich (also known as Headquarters) is to be sold and a new station built on the Ransomes Europark Industrial Estate in South East Ipswich.  Workshops have moved to Phoenix House with SCC Highways, whilst Control will also be moving (see below).
A new Training Centre has been built at Wattisham Airfield for Service use, including a "hot fire" training facility and various RTC scenarios.
Suffolk Fire and Rescue Service publish most incidents on their Facebook page. Fire Control update the incidents as they progress. In addition, safety messages, public meeting notifications and some photos can be found on the page. Go to 
Suffolk's Fire Control Centre is currently based at Colchester Road Fire Station in Ipswich.  However, due to delays in the Regional Control Centre project, the Service has recommended moving Control to the Cambridgeshire Fire & Rescue Service facility in Huntingdon.  This will result in Cambridgeshire control staff taking 999 calls and mobilising Suffolk resources.  This will leave Suffolk without its own Fire Control, one of only a handful of Services in the country without this vital facility.
Following the introduction of Gallet F1 helmets in 2009, the Service will change over to Cosalt PBI Gold firefighting kit in May 2011.
1948-1952                       Francis Winteringham
1952- March 1974                Howard F. Griffiths
April 1974 - November 1981      Melville Willis
December 1981 - November 1991   Terry Miles
December 1991 - 1993            Tony Baker
1993-2004                       Malcolm Alcock
2004-2009                       Lee Howell
2009   present                    Andy Fry
Suffolk Fire & Rescue Service have a varied fleet of appliances serving the county.
Frontline pumping appliances are known as Rescue Water Ladders.  These are all Volvo FL6 or FLL chassis with either Excalibur, Saxon Sanbec, John Dennis Coachworks or Emergency One bodywork.
Similar to Rescue Water Ladders, these appliances differ by not having a 135 ladder on the appliance.
Again similar to Rescue Water Ladders, these appliances carry extra RTC equipment and have less hoses. PRTs are stationed at Leiston, Newmarket, Stradbroke, Stowmarket, and Sudbury.
New in 2009, there are 3 ERTs within the county which respond to incidents in their own areas and support PRT's in their areas.  At any LGV/PSV collision, two ERTs are dispatched. ERT's carry additional equipment to that of PRT's including extra 90 tonne cutters and other heavy duty equipment for use at LGV collisons. The three ERT's are stationed at Princes Street, Bury St Edmunds and Lowestoft South.  These are all Volvo FLLs with JDC bodywork.
Suffolk have two Turntable Ladders, based at Headquarters and Bury St Edmunds.  Both are on Mercedes chassis with one Metz and one Magirus ladder.  Bury's TTL is due to be replaced by a Combined Arial Rescue Pump (CARP).
There are 3 Water Carriers within the county, based at Leiston, Newmarket and Sudbury.  Leiston and Sudbury's appliances are Mercedes vehicles bought from Dairy Crest, whilst Newmarket's is a 1994 Volvo with a Crossland Tankers body built in 2006.
For command and control, Suffolk have Command Support Vehicles. Based at Woodbridge (Vauxhall Movano), Beccles (Fiat Ducato) and Ixworth (Citroen Relay).  These vehicles attend incidents of 4 pumps or more, or on request of the Incident Commander.
Two Operational Support Units cover Suffolk, these being based at Headquarters and Haverhill.  Both are Volvo FL6s with James Newell curtainside bodywork and a Moffatt Mounty forklift attached to the rear.  The OSUs carry a variety of equipment such as salvage structures, foam stocks, chemical spill packs - all palletted to be removed/replaced by the fork lift.
There are 3 Water Rescue Units based on Vauxhall Movano vans.  These are based at Princes Street, Bury St Edmunds and Lowestoft South.  Two WRU's normally respond to water based incidents. An exception to this is when attending animal rescues. In this case, they attend with a fire appliance and/or a Unimog. WRU's can also be used for incidents involving mud etc. as crews wear drysuits which makes decontamination easier.
Suffolk bought 3 Mercedes Unimog vehicles in 1994 to provide off-road capability for the county.  They also used to tow the Service's two fireboats.  Two remain in service one each at Bury and Normanshurst.  The third was written off in service by a mishap in Felixstowe.
Suffolk have an Incident Response Unit plus the Derobe/Rerobe modules and Prime Movers as part of the New Dimensions programme.  One of the Enhanced Command Support vehicles is due to be allocated to Suffolk.
Suffolk are one of a number of Fire & Rescue Services around the country which respond to maritime incidents.  Suffolk often use RAF Sea King helicopters from RAF Wattisham to respond to ships in distress.  Suffolk cover a wide area of coastline from Norfolk to Essex, boundaring with Lincolnshire MIRG to the north and Kent MIRG to the South.
Firefighting in Suffolk, Saward G., Lavenham Press, 1998