Could somebody please take a look at , whose listing was removed from   without any action.  The editor has a huge page of warnings for vandalizing wrestling related articles, has been blocked twice in the last two months, continues to vandalize this evening, but apparently nothing is to be done?    ( ) 03:51, 26 January 2009 (UTC)
IPv6Gate uses both  /  and  /  at the moment. Please *PERMANENTLY* block both 213.197.27.252 and 94.75.219.73 from editing anything unless the user has taken the time to login with a real account. Clearly people are too childish to abuse the feature provided by IPv6Gate. Users who are using IPv6Gate and want to contribute meaningful items will register/login and provide their contributions that way. Basically IPv6Gate is an Open Proxy, especially as the Wikimedia software doesn't support XFF for IPv6. See IPv6Gate and   for other details. Blocking those two IPs avoids work for you and it is just the sane thing to do at the moment. 213.197.27.252 is blocked at the moment already because of this, thus make that one, and the other one permanent please. (/me is jeroen@sixxs.net and responsible for IPv6Gate)   ( ) 12:54, 26 January 2009 (UTC)
He is continuously blaming me of vandalism, as I cleaned up an article Brahmi script. Doesn't assume good faith. --  ( ) 18:32, 26 January 2009 (UTC)
There's an edit war currently going on on  over the use of book cover images. Some help could be good. --  19:38, 26 January 2009 (UTC)
I've just blocked indefinitely  for evading his block for the second time in less than 2 days (  and  )    . Historian19 has created havoc in every article he edited (mainly copyright violations or very disruptive editing) and     and . --   -   22:27, 26 January 2009 (UTC)
Yep, that's from Alice's Restaurant as quoted by  . He does that. It's for the children, you know.   ( ) 10:53, 26 January 2009 (UTC)
While   appears to be willing to follow the procedures at  , he has insisted on pasting in the text from Serenity (franchise) into Firefly (franchise) twice more, before any page move goes ahead.  I'd rather not go to three reverts on this thing if, instead, anyone can possibly get through to the editor over his actions.
Sorry if this is the wrong place, but there doesn't seem to be a noticeboard specific to this.       21:21, 26 January 2009 (UTC)
See  and . Oh, and a Commons admin may be interested in  . Thanks,    01:43, 27 January 2009 (UTC)
The Rick Warren article was recently unprotected after being under full protection for a couple weeks. A new contributor to the article,  , who from his contribution history and user page appears to be an activist similar to   (who caused the article to be protected), immediately began making wholesale changes to the article without any consensus on the discussion board and started edit-warring with another editor. Clearly, with an article that was just under full protection as a result of a very similar situation, User:Phoenix of9 should have at the very least discussed his ideas on the discussion page before he made changes - he didn't. I politely asked him to follow User:Teledildonix314's lead and walk away from an article he is clearly very biased against, but he rudely refused. Please keep an eye on him and the article - hopefully it won't need to be protected again. Thanks.   ( ) 01:17, 26 January 2009 (UTC)
Why do we need to keep a dead link since ? If a replacement hasn't been located yet, perhaps, it's because no reliable source ever wished to get engaged in publishing such an illogical figure for Cher's single "Believe".   seems to have covered everything that   speaks of except for the three final key-lines which clearly explain what needs to be done in case a substitute source is not found: ''If a dead link cannot be repaired or replaced, consider reworking the article section so that it no longer relies on the dead link. Whether a dead link can or cannot be repaired or replaced, remember that Wikipedia policy (including policy on   and  ) still applies.  Consider doing further edits of the citation and cited material, if appropriate, to improve the article''. In addition, the original article which supposedly came from  cannot even be regarded as reliable as alike sources are known for inflating record-sales to draw the attention of readers.--  ( ) 03:19, 27 January 2009 (UTC)
An editor who may be the subject of the Thom Hatch article has used 5 IPs and one new named account to revert to a spammy version of the article 8 times in the past 24 hours (against 5 6 other editors).  They will not discuss or use edit summaries, and   and then vandalized that user's page.  Could someone semi-protect the page and try to talk some sence into this person?    ( ) 00:31, 27 January 2009 (UTC)
There was no admin response to  , so I did a little more digging with regard to what's been going on:
I notified the relevant Wikiproject of this vandalism in September and was informed that this vandal is also active on the Tagalog Wikipedia ( ). The IP addresses were traced to New Zealand.
As this is an ongoing and serious problem and the abuse request has gone nowhere, I would like to request that anonymous editing from IP addresses starting with 202.37.68.x be blocked for at least a few weeks to stop this vandal. I have not seen any legitimate IP edits from these addresses, so there's no real likelihood of legitimate editors being blocked. I am an admin, and would do this myself if I knew how.   ( ) 07:56, 27 January 2009 (UTC)
Hello, I do not want to get into an edit war, so I would like some admin help here.  A few months ago,   was blocked for Sockpuppeting in the only article he ever edits, which is the article on Nicaraguan ex-president Arnoldo Aleman.  Now he is back.  This is because Arnoldo Aleman was acquitted from his 20 year prison sentence, but there has been much controversy surrounding this decision, and many reputable sources (see   for more info) discuss this controversy.  What I did given the delicate nature of the situation was to take a paragraph from the NYT discussing the events and quoting almost word for word.  I believe this is to be an unbiased review of events citing both, what the opposition had to say, and what Dr. Aleman had to say.    however, insists on adding an un-sourced one-sided paragraph essentially removing all the well sourced controversy.  I would be extremely thankful if someone here could take a look at his last edit on the page after reading what some of the sources have to say.  I personally like the NYT entry because there is no reason to suspect bias, it is in English and it is well-known.  Finally, please note the language use by the source the user provides and the language the user actually uses, "innocent" never found.  Thank you very much and have a great day,   ( ) 08:52, 27 January 2009 (UTC)
Meanwhile, a discussion is still on in  .
The user appears to be acting in good faith, maintaining civility, but still he is removing content, in fact deleting a page, denying the tag for merger suggestion at another, because he thinks that another course of action was necessary (a move proposal instead of a merge proposal).--  ( ) 03:15, 26 January 2009 (UTC)
About the time he filed this, I had taken  to AIV, and noted that if that wasn't an appropriate shortcut for his persistence past final warning in trying to do an improper move via a content fork and re-merge proposal, that I would come here next.  He came here first, obviously.  Anyway, I hope someone will let him know that move proposal process is not all that hard, and that trying to circumvent it this way is very disruptive.    ( ) 04:35, 26 January 2009 (UTC)
On Kevin's advice, as a show of good faith, I've gone ahead and started a move request for FocalPoint's intended move; of course, I also explained that I oppose it.  See  .    ( ) 05:37, 26 January 2009 (UTC)
I have not been involved in any of the edits, but I happened upon this dispute by accident. As I see it, this is really an   dispute. The article has carried its present title since it was created 21/2 years ago. The article was written in American English, and ''excelsior'' appears to be the most common American English term for the material that is the subject of the article. The controversy and edit war started when someone ( ?) created a new article named '''Wood wool''', which began move and merge warring. The creation of the '''Wood wool''' article was a clear violation of   and apparently a violation of  . It does not appear that   and his or her supporters preceded their actions by Talk page discussion, so it does not seem fair to criticize   for acting unilaterally to restore the long established status quo. Usability, or the ease of finding the article, really has nothing to do with the dispute, because the article is easily found by either name; at present, Wood wool redirects to Excelsior (wood wool), so changing the article's name wouldn't really help anyone. In my opinion, the dispute is an overblown power struggle that has nothing to do with making Wikipedia better, and everything to do with egos,   warring, and  . Both sides would be well advised to be more civil and collaborative, but no one has been sufficiently uncivil to warrant action by an admin. Similarly, in my opinion, it would be a waste of time for an admin to get involved in this fairly trivial conflict whose outcome is unimportant to Wikipedia.     13:53, 27 January 2009 (UTC)
Can an anyone give me some feedback on the block of   please? They sent me an email with the following text:
Clearly, this user is confused as to what constitutes censorship and vandalism, but there may be some underlying valid points.    &#124;    04:51, 26 January 2009 (UTC)
I would think his books are decent as sources, but he would need to understand ''how'' to contribute if he wanted to stick around. The way he did, it seems like he just wanted his name out there, in which case it's a good block. '''  ''' 05:07, 26 January 2009 (UTC)
Looks like he also used , worth keeping an eye on. '''  ''' 05:17, 26 January 2009 (UTC)
I've snipped out the email pending confirmation that there is permission to publish this email here.  Generally it is not allowed to post private emails to Wikipedia without the author's permission.     05:20, 26 January 2009 (UTC)
Good block, Tan.  Protonk's points are bang-on.    definitely holds here, and screaming censorship if the material in question is removed is certainly disruptive.  Not criticizing Dr. Joseph's ideas but I think that they are certainly apart from mainstream academic views on panspermia, and should not be over-represented in the article. --   05:48, 26 January 2009 (UTC)
Just a note, but whois confirms  that universitypress.info was registered to the same person as Brain-Mind.com,and that Brain-Mind.com was registered to Dr. Joseph . Anything Dr. Joseph published through University Press probably ought to be regarded as self-published.       ( ) 06:05, 26 January 2009 (UTC)
Only now have I taken a look at his website. So far, his edits look like original research to me, along with coatracking to sell books/publications.   ( ) 06:39, 26 January 2009 (UTC)
I left a message to suggest some reading while he's blocked.    16:19, 26 January 2009 (UTC)
These edits seem to be tag-team interleaved with those of , who is the subject of the article, and has just been blocked for COI edit warring.  Between them, they seem to be attempting to push me beyond 3RR to clear up their mess.  I've already informed him that this behaviour isn't appropriate (e.g. ), and an admin has suspicisons that he may be a sock/meat ( - the "O" he refers to his Octogenarian).
Disclaimer: it's arguable that I'm only prolonging the edit warring with my participation, but at least I'm justifying my every move on the article's talk page!   ( | ) 00:01, 27 January 2009 (UTC)
A user created some pages for radio station KORB and kinda went overboard in creations.  If an admin would be so kind, could they delete the follow as they are just redirects to the main KORB parent page.
Please delete the following:
Thanks in advance. -             January 27, 2009 @ 00:45
There is a current AfD running at  . An IP editor has placed  ''keep'' comment; note the edit summary of *keep* (with the stars).   has  with ''Okay, let's cut the crap. Out this IP's vote goes.'' He then immediately leaves a  further down the page; note the edit summary of *delete* (again with the stars). Given the   IP's contributions and they are all things on which   is involved, there is a great chance that Digwuren has used the IP as a   to be disruptive. Another IP that this user has used is  ; note , and compare it to the first diff above, and one can notice the way that ''encyclopaedic'' is spelt. The articles edited by the 2nd IP are also articles on which Digwuren has edited. It should be noted that Digwuren was   to have engaged in disruptive behaviour such as this, which resulting  , from which he has only just returned, and he is aware there are   in place. Additionally, Digwuren has himself recalled that Arbcom in this very AfD, when he . I think there is more than enough evidence for a checkuser to be done into Digwuren's sockpuppetry and action taken for his disruptive editing.   has also . --    07:58, 27 January 2009 (UTC)
It is a common mis-understanding that IP's aren't permitted to vote in AfD, I confused it with votes in RFA. I made a similar mistake when I , but somebody informed me that . I've informed Digwuren now, so it's no longer an issue. Russavia's report here is totally unwarranted as a message or email to Digwuren would have been sufficient. However, this report appears to be a blatant case of block shopping and an unprovoked attack on Digwuren. Note that an admin has warned Russiavia first not to , then warned again not to persist with this  . Could somebody please explain to Russavia that Eastern Europe topic area is subject to discretionary sanctions and thus he should refrain from turning it into a battleground.   ( ) 08:53, 27 January 2009 (UTC)
You're grasping at straws.  See .  There's nothing in   that would support claims of abusive sockpuppetry.    10:33, 27 January 2009 (UTC)
Something strange had occurred at  . Three three obvious socks and IP were blocked, but  was also implicated in the sockpuppetry and likewise indefed. However, it is suspected that the IP covers multiple locations as Terrakyte and that the block of this user may have been made in error and as collateral damage due to the blocking of the other three accounts and IP mentioned in the checkuser report at SPI. Discussion is currently going on at   but would like to get more views from other admins on this. Thank you,   17:10, 27 January 2009 (UTC)
RFPP is not loading on the computer.  Please protect Stephanie Adams for edit warring.    ( ) 18:26, 27 January 2009 (UTC)
I am just a simple Wikipedia user so I am sorry if this is the wrong place to address this.  But in doing some research I was on the Wikipedia page on Revenge and found the following line of offensive text embedded in the text of the page under the section on Function in Society: "two wrongs make a right." I don't know if this is the result of a hacker or what, but I thought someone might want to remove it and update the page.  Thanks.
I had been attempting to resolve a conflict over a deletion with Hardy, but he insisted on calling my comments , I don't think one on one discussion would work with him. I had deleted , without any description page; instead, it had a redirect to a non-existent page, which I proceeded to delete. He proceeds to inform of his  , also  an unnecessary inflammatory note on my talk. I revert the note, and   to explain why I deleted the image, but the discussion ends in the bullshit comments. I'm at a loss as to how I can further explain, and hopefully someone can help me out. On a tangential note, I've looked through Michael Hardy's deletion log and it seems he likes unilaterally reversing other admin's actions, for example , , , . '''  ''' 23:18, 24 January 2009 (UTC)
Here is what happened:
I don't know what he means above when he says "instead, it had a redirect to a non-existent page".  That is nonsense.  There was nothing resembling a redirect; there was only a picture, with my comments about who had uploaded it first.
Is there REALLY something wrong with my restoring Poisson hidden markov model?  That restoration has already been discussed at great length.  Someone deleted it on the grounds that it was "patent nonsense" and the subject could not be identified.  That is absurd.  Just because an article is clumsily written and an admin doesn't understand it because he lacks familiarity with the field, is no reason to call something "patent nonsense" when 10 seconds with Google would have identified the subject.   Speedy deletions are not for disputed cases; restoring after a thoughtless speedy deletion is proper.  If someone thinks Poisson hidden Markov model should be deleted, they should take it to AfD (I don't think anyone will do that; I don't think anyone thinks an AfD could succeed).
It is nonsense to say that the image that got speedily deleted "had a redirect to a non-existent page".  There was nothing remotely resembling a redirect in it.  .   ( ) 23:55, 24 January 2009 (UTC)
With the exception of copyvio in Robert Denno, the other restores all look legitimate.    is very useful in dealing with speedy deletions done by users who have no idea what they are doing.  No idea why the situation with Maxim got so heated over the Ladakh Monastery image, as both users were trying to do the right thing --   00:11, 25 January 2009 (UTC)
Moonreddengirl: I have no idea how you got those two links both dated 17:23 whose content is different.  Can someone explain what those are?
My descriptions of Maxim's comments as "BULLSHIT" were certainly thoroughly deserved by Maxim.  Those of his comments that don't deserve that epithet remain cryptic at best.   ( ) 04:16, 25 January 2009 (UTC)
Maxim: What appears to merit the term "bullshit" is your repeated assertion that you attempted to explain what you were doing.  You did not and I don't see how it could be maintained that you did.  You say it was a copyright violation because it was not attributed.  That is false: when I re-uploaded the image, I included a statement of who uploaded it first, when that happened, and under what title it was uploaded, and I also commented that it ought to be made possible to move images to preserve the history.
Several people here have referred to "description pages".  I have no idea what those are.
Discussing with the deleting admin is something that I take to apply to things other than "speedy" deletions, in which discussion preceded the deletion.  No discussion precedes a speedy deletion.  With something like Poisson hidden markov model, in which the grounds for speedy is that the article is "patent nonsense" and gives insufficient context to identify the subject, when in fact the subject is crystal-clear and the only way it could have appeared to be nonsense is the deleter's ignorance and the lack of ten seconds of googling, can anyone object to speedy restoration?   ( ) 15:40, 25 January 2009 (UTC)
Dcoetzee: You say no one is contesting my restorations.  But the initial posting that started this thread contested my restorations and cited in particular Poisson hidden Markov model.
VirtualSteve: The initial posting that started this thread contested my restorations and cited in particular Poisson hidden Markov model, so you're statement to the contrary is mistaken.   ( ) 20:46, 25 January 2009 (UTC)
He wrote an enormous number of words, of which he later said they were an attempt to explain what he did.  I don't see that they amount to an attempt to explain.
I do wonder if he looked at the image before deleting.  He says his grounds were a redirect to a non-existent page.  But if you find that or anything else that plainly matches a criterion for speedy deletion, you're not supposed to delete at that point; you're supposed to look into the matter and find out what's going on at that point.  (Same thing with pages that you find incomprehensible and contextless.  Usually a google search can settle that very fast and tell you that it's actually a badly written page but capable of being cleaned up; clicking on "what links here" and finding a thousand respectable internal links would also indicate something, etc.)  To say that he tried to explain is a considerable exaggeration.   ( ) 03:52, 26 January 2009 (UTC)
Is there some reason you don't thread your comments?   ( ) 04:24, 26 January 2009 (UTC)
As an outside observer, it's clear to me that some pride & self-respect has been infinged on here. I believe this dispute would be an excellent case for the MedCom/MedCab/mediation. (I wish my interpersonal skills were better & I had much more free time, so I could take this on.) If this is not handled carefully, we may end up losing either one or two veteran contributors to Wikipedia, & the project will be that much poorer for that. --   ( ) 19:47, 27 January 2009 (UTC)
Michael, given your wikipedia requirement to be civil and assume good faith even in the face of provokation, how exactly did you feel justified in writing bold allcaps 'bullshit' several times?  And how exactly did you feel this help the matter instead of making it worse?   ( ) 22:39, 27 January 2009 (UTC)
I'm concerned with Gimmetrow - I know that he's been a valuable contributor in the past, and I'm somewhat reluctant to bring this here, but his recent conduct, particularly with regards to  strikes me as rather short of the bar for an admin. See also  , unilateral changes to a  to support his edit war POV without any discussion on the template's talk page, and a particularly       which, to the best of my knowledge, seems to amount to "how dare you use infoboxes and project banners?" I'm genuinely mystified as to where this is all coming from, particularly as this user is a well-known and otherwise respected admin, and has no prior bad blood (AFAIK) with any of these issues or editors. Any thoughts would be appreciated. Thanks,   ( ) 20:54, 25 January 2009 (UTC)
Personally, I think that repeated, uncalled-for personal attacks ( ) warrant a block, but at the very least I ask that a neutral admin warn Sephiroth that any future violations of WP:NPA will resuilt in Sephiroth being blocked for at least 24 hours. Sephiroth has certainly shown poor conflict resolution skills and should, as an administrator, know that personal attacks like this not only do not help, but completely undermine any respect that might have been due. Yet more personal attacks and insults from the so-called "coordinators" of FILMS project lead to be believe that all the coordinators there probably need to be removed.   17:01, 26 January 2009 (UTC)
This is getting out of hand. Rather than disengaging from the dispute, having failed to get his way on the infobox Gimmetrow has decided to remove the poster image from it that I recently sourced, uploaded and added to the moved infobox - there is a widespread consensus that film posters fall under   - this is perilously close to a   disruption. Can we get some help here please? Or are admins above the law?   ( ) 00:30, 27 January 2009 (UTC)
Help.  is now deleting an RfC on WT:MOSNUM  This is intolerable. He is arguing about what old RfCs say in a fashion that misrepresents what editors understood and were voicing their opinions about, and then, when I try to clarify maters with a clear-as-glass RfC, he    archives    it. This is disruptive and '''''must''''' end. ''' ''' ( ) 02:10, 27 January 2009 (UTC)
Would someone have a quick look at  especially the history. Probably a quick block/protect and delete is needed. Thanks --  ( ) 13:51, 27 January 2009 (UTC)
Uhh, why does this bother you?  What do you care if someone speaks Dutch?  Posting a xenophobic warning tag on that editor's talk page was rude but then to follow it up with a complaint at this page is the height of ''chutzpah''.   ( ) 14:10, 27 January 2009 (UTC)
I'm not sure how to handle this. 
I nominated Contrarian Journalism for deletion. One editor supported the nomination, followed by a Keep vote from   who seems to have been stalking him. But it looks like   may be the same person as the article's author, who is an SPA - see . 
The evidence is possibly not strong enough for a sockpuppet tag or a checkuser, but it smells very fishy. So, what should I do?    ( ) 00:34, 25 January 2009 (UTC)
Question to Cameron Scott: what is the evidence that DasV is really my sock puppet.  This is my first venture into Wiki world and I have to say it's quite surreal. Can't someone see that I'm probably in a completely diferent part of the world to DasV? Is someone going to adjudicate this by looking at some facts?   
Also cameron: does your suggestion that the article should be flushed down the shitter, conform to Wiki rules regarding civility?
As to my losing the plot, I make no claims to ever having had the plot.  I really am feeling my way around in the dark and I'm somewhat stunned by the level of suspicion and hostility I'm encountering.  If Administrators are watching this, as you imply, I would be grateful if they could verify that I am NOT DasV.  I feel the hostility and suspicion has made civil discussion of the issues of my modest paper almost impossible.  I made some changes in response to what I slowly understood to be the point of the critical remarks and then floated the possibility of more changes, only to be told that it was all gone, dead and buried, by a process that I still don't quite understand. Speaking as an outsider who has ventured into Wiki, this is not a good advertisement for Wiki.
After I indicated on a talk page that I am a colleague of one of the people whom I cited on the main page:
After an uninvolved editor asked Dicklyon's what information he was trying to gain from his RfC on that page:
After the near-unanimous defeat of the AfD that ''he himself proposed'' for the page::
Although Dicklyon will sometimes apologize for his behavior, the clear lack of change after such apologies does not suggest sincerity.  Any assistance would be greatly appreciated.
To repeat my earlier point about  's clear lack of intent to change his behavior, after notified him on his talk about that I made the above incident report (using the ANI template), he repeated his behavior on the same page:
Permitting such behavior is never in the best interests of WP.
I've asked over at   for long term semi-protection of this article due to some persistent IP-initiated BLP violations.  I'm cross-posting here because the matter has been on AN/I at least twice, and may be too compicated for a simple RFP request.  Thanks,    ( ) 02:15, 28 January 2009 (UTC)
How about a block on this editor? Thanks. --  ( ) 04:26, 28 January 2009 (UTC)
In Aspartame controversy a newly arrived editor   made in the past 2 days 32 edits and or deletions without debate or any consensus from other editors who worked for many weeks on it. On some occasions 2 serious edits within one minute were made, which indicates not much reasoning lies behind it. So far me and another regular editor already contested on Talk a few of his edits, but at the rate he's working, it puts us back many weeks. Can some administrator tell him to keep calm and to respect the consensus among contributing editors.   ( ) 22:28, 27 January 2009 (UTC)
As per   and  deserves an immediate block, IMHO.  ( '''&nbsp;Bwilkins / BMW&nbsp;''' ) 16:04, 28 January 2009 (UTC)
Hi, I created the account  , but I don't like this username and want to choose a shorter one. So I want this account to be blocked indefinitely so that I can create a new username which will be my permanent account from now. Thanks.   ( ) 16:59, 28 January 2009 (UTC)
There's ongoing vandalism at  , in frequent edits similar to . I've reverted this vandalism four times (confessing to a 3RR violation) on Jimbo's userpage, so as much as I want to go further in fighting this vandalism, I can go no further. And here's another element: sockpuppetry. Over five accounts &ndash; , , , , and  among at least two others &ndash; have performed this vandalism on the same page. I think Shakira 68 plus one is the sockmaster because it was the account that performed the vandalism first. --    18:22, 28 January 2009 (UTC)
Just like block for his wikistalking Korean editors one by one, I noticed that he suddenly followed  to SeeYa and then deleted info regaring the singers' naming. Historiographer retored it with Korean news sources, but Sennen blanked the whole Korean sources as repeatedly insisting that only English sources should be used. This is not only contradictory to his insertion of Korean sources to other articles but also trying to make a  . Another user came with the correct policy on sourcing, he inserted his own "though" with no soruce. His such insertion is also contradictory to his deletion of unsourced/sourced. 
It hardly seems worth responding, but I guess that someone might assume that silence equals acceptance, so here goes...
1. Caspian Blue is an editor who spends about half his time on wikipedia attempting to promote his own nation (South Korea) at the expense of Japan - numerous edits on ww2 related articles and removal of the Japanese influence on Korean culture - as much as I would call an editor with a pro-life agenda, an anti-abortion - I would call him anti-Japanese, in the same way that he calls me pro-Japanese. If his edits were only promoting his own nations, I might call him pro-Korean, but the great interest he takes in articles relating to Japanese war criminals, comfort women and the ww2 actions of Japan, not only in Korea, but also in other nations seems to point towards being anti Japanese.
2. I find it ironic that he would complain about such a comment, when so many of his edit summaries consist of comments such as '''rvv by Eichikiyama vandalism by anti-Korean propagandic vandal blanked the sourced material about the assassine of "Empress Myeongseon''' and '''rv by Bukubku (talk) whitewash by a Newbie with Pro-Japanese angenda''' here are some diffs         
3. Perhaps comments such as the following can shed a little light on what has been said between the two of us in the past
I can' tolerate your impudence any more. You keep insulting me with your dirty mean tongue. Stupid? I think you can't see any context in my comments. You are the meanest and pathetic person in the world I've encountered in my life. I pity you. If you have graduated from any university in the US, you would be required to take several humanistic and social science classes. Did you ever take any class in which Japanese war crimes would be understood among the international society? haha, even students from Japan said they felt shame of their ancestors because they didn't know and just learned with hugely edited textbooks. But you keep denying your origin and then that's making to look you stupid. You might be a Japanese-somewhere citizen. So what? You've produced offensive destructions on Korean-related articles and overly defended cruel Japanese war crime. In addition, you don't have any plausible arguments, then you choose to attack me with personal abuse that shows your true nature. Your English have been not near eloquence but close silliness and shallowness. So dream on! '''
Again a comment that I find ironic, especially seeing the article given as an example.
I edited the article and was in a content dispute with other editors - no edit warring, constructive comments made by all involved.
Then Caspian Blue decided to participate and reverted me - fair enough, he is entitled to do so.
I do take offence to the accusation of harassment, considering that he had never edited that article before, however within about 30mins of me editing it for the first time, he has decided he wishes not only to edit the article, but to revert me.
I don't really mind this, if someone wants to take interest in my edit history, then fine - but for an editor to do so, and then to use that article as an example of harassment seems rather strange.
I made it clear that I considered certain accounts to be sock-puppets - I do not have extensive experience filing sock puppet reports, my only prior reports were rather lacking in evidence/diffs, so I thought if I voiced my suspicions that they might cease their actions without me having to go to the trouble of filing a report.
I did not make personal attacks against these accounts, even when I was sure they were sock-puppets.
To say that I made these comments to remove opponents is absurd - I made these comments and finally made a sock puppet report because these accounts were being used to bypass editing blocks, obtaining false consensus, making personal attacks against me (quote '''Sennen goroshi FUCK OFF you stinking JAPANESE, u have broken the 3-revert rule TWICE already and VANDALIZING Korean related articles for NO REASON. You are the BIGGEST VANDALIST I HAVE EVER SEEN''') and most importantly these accounts were blatant sock-puppets.
For the record because of my report Lakshmix, Wondergirls and Kingka625 have all been indef blocked - these were no innocent victims that I attacked, these were abusive sock accounts, that got indef blocked for their actions.
Telling sock-puppets that socks are not allowed is not what I consider bullying.
I used an accurate term to refer to an editors bias, I voiced my suspicions about sock-puppets who got themselves indef blocked for sock-puppetry, I tske offence to Caspian Blue acting like a wounded victim, when he has done all of the above on so many occasions - when he accuses someone of sock-puppetry or bias he is the victim, when I accuse someone of the same, I get an ANI report against me. 
This report is originally about Sennen goroshi's ongoing harassments and verbal attacks. I gave him several oppotunities for him to apologize his attacks, but he never did. Although Sennen goroshi tries to divert his behaviors from the main topic, I reply to his answers.
1.'''Regarding your excuse for the calling'''
You just did not called me an ''anti-Japanese editor'' but ''vandalism by known anti-Japanese troll'' and ''troll motivated by anti-Japanese sentiment'' after I removed your original reserach without source. 
How is my removal of this that makes me "anti-Japanese troll"? I've never heard of such attacks except banned users. However, you instead lectured me about "my manners". Unlike your accusation,  . Not only Korean/Japan-related articles, but also I've created/edited France/Germany/USA/China/Vietnam related artices while you've created 0 articles. Most of your edits are testing Wikipedia and blanked out contents with uncivil edit summaries (crappy, vandal, WTF, bullshit etc). And you pick up on Korean editors. Regarding my nationality (not ethnicity), have ever I said that I   m South Korean? You   re basically wrong on the assumption. Your accusation of me promoting for one side is just your diversion from the main topic; your disruption. You intentionally picked the word, troll and I wanted your apology.
2.'''Your support for sockpuppeters'''
You   re intentionally picked "my following responses to them only". Why didn   t you show the previous and preceding diffs? Bukubku called me doing "vandalism", and the others first attacked me more than that. Except, Bukubku, you have sided the mentioned sockpuppeter. You first deleted massive citations without proper reasons and then Amazonfire suddenly appeared to meatpuppet you (in fact, he is a sock of Azukimonka who was blocked one year ago and has been block-evading) Then he later admitted he self-reverted his edits after I pointed out to him.
3.'''Harassment'''
Since you brought up my comment after your various attacks '''one year and three months ago''', I fresh up your memory. As soon as you created your account, you harassed people just like mentioned in your first ANI report. You violated   as exposing personal information about your real life enemy for a month. (the article and contributions were deleted) 
There were clearly edit warring at SeeYa because you first blanked out information on their naming with the reason that the removed one is unsourced and non-notable. Since it was referenced, you blanked out twice. That practice is very contradictory because you   ve used Korean sources many times to back your claims promoting your POV or reverted for other editors (generally proven as sockpuppeters) in dispute with me. You even admitted many times that you did not check Korean sources when reverting. Then, your deletions of the Korean sources from Historiographer's edits are all ironic of your own. Then after your attempts were failed by, you inserted unsourced original research. I   ve editing all Korean-related articles (including pop stars) while you don   t edit Korean entertainers. How could you explain your sudden edits to the article right after Historiographer significantly expand the article? This practice is just same as when you were wikistalking Kuebie.
4.'''Your lying regarding filing sock reports'''
I   m curious as to why you lied to an admin that you have no experience of filling it and then exchanged secret emails? Nobody agrees using sockpuppetry abusively. I even reverted to your edit on South Korea. Then all you gotta do is accusing me of assuming bad faith? Even though you   ve had suspicion on them for a month, you had not report him and has been exploiting your "just suspicion" all over the place for one month. You have enough experience with SSP reports (4 cases). Whenever I feel someone is abusing multiple accounts, I gather as much information/diffs as I can, hen file to RFCU or SSP. I wait until the result comes out. If they   re evading after the final confirm and blocks, then re-report to admins. That   s a common course as others do. I   ve seen you've been teasing other users (someone even accused of sockpuppetry). You wait until the accused users lose their temper, then you victimize yourself from verbal attacks. I suggested you to report SPI, and then you followed it. I   m criticizing your lying and behaviros against alleged sockpuppeters. Your way is just simply bullying.
5.'''Your usage of sock IPs'''
I'm just amazed at your behaviros towoard the sockpuppeter becuase you even '''violated 3RR with sock IP to evade block sanction'''.  and . I see another irony of your comment.
6.'''Rape is a surprise sex'''
I don't think you should not edit only all Korea and Japan related articles but also even Wikipedia because of your titled view. You said Comfort women are Chon prostitutes that should be casually used and popularized. (Chon is a racial slur used only in Japan) You said Korean eating cute puppy flesh is barbaric. You even said "Rape is a surprise sex". At that time, you also gave me following comments like a "wish for me to die" and "mocking my English and intellect".
As soon as I spot "your sockpuppetry" and said to you don   t blindly blanking cited information, you gave me the slur. I   m bemused at your ability to divert attention from your verbal attacks and to be out of any charge for them even though you report your opponents blocked with similar degree of insulting. 
I don't believe your so-call contribution with    blanking   /   wikistalking   /harassment are improving Wikipedia. All of your contributions are just    disruption   .--  00:12, 27 January 2009 (UTC)
Wow... I mean... 'Rape is a suprise sex'?  I just... I don't even know where to begin...  That is so wrong from any angle.. I think that needs to be on a t-shirt.   ( ) 23:10, 27 January 2009 (UTC)
I'm guessing we're all sick of the Sennen/Caspian show, and various attempts at dispute resolution seem to have been fruitless. But my understanding is that both do contribute useful edits. So I'm proposing that for six months:
Thoughts? //    05:12, 26 January 2009 (UTC)
This is not a mutual conflict and Caspian and Sennen are not on equal footing here. I know that for the admins here this KOrea/Japan bickering is exhausting but please take a closer look. Both editors have been involved in these Korea/Japan disputes. That is true.  However, Caspian does not stalk others' edits and engage in POV disputes on Japan related articles! Sennen Goroshi on the other hand systematically engages in injecting Japan POV in more than a dozen Korea related articles constantly instigating revert wars and POV wars on a regular basis. Sennen Goroshi's contribution are almost exclusively on fighting POV battles on Korea related articles. Caspian's contributions are far more diverse.
Instead of trying to dismiss this conflict with a broad brush and banning both editors, please take a look at the claims reported above. Unfairly banning editors for fighting without hashing through the details of the conflict will discourage good faith editing and punishes those who try to follow the rules while incentivising those who are engaging in gamesmanship and POV pushing. That's just poor wiki policy.  ( ) 22:17, 27 January 2009 (UTC)
My eyes burn, but I've read through more of this nonsense enough to see this is an intractable personal conduct dispute where both main parties have shown their inability to "get it." The generation of material here is enough to show the larger interest in arguing rather than any sort of peace. We (the larger community) are not your battleground and we (the administrators on behalf of the larger community) are mandated to control the behavior. These I think, are the options:
It should be said, before anyone tries, I am unlikely to be convinced that only one of these editors is disruptive - and I do not care which one is more disruptive - both are past the threshold.--  ( ) 15:08, 28 January 2009 (UTC)
I respectfully disagree with this proposal to topic ban Caspian and Sennen. While I fully understand the annoyance that their constant bickering has caused, there needs to be a clearer violation of rules or warned misbehavior. You can't just ban them because they argue a lot and annoyingly make reports on these boards. Please consider the possibility that Sennen and Caspian have genuine and good faith disagreements with each other on these issues. You shouldn't punish editors for good faith disagreements, only the manner of their disagreement. That is why we have rules and principles that editors have to follow in engaging in good faith disagreements. 
In this case, Caspian has filed a report. If his report is invalid, then his report should be thrown out. I don't see how an editor who files a report can be blocked even if the report is seen as being invalid by the admins here. How is filing a report on this board punishable behavior? I'm sorry but constant fighting or constant bickering is not punishable behavior in and of itself. The real issue should be whether rules have been violated in the process of their constant conflicts.
Please take the time to do this right instead of topic banning Caspian for filing an incidents report and Sennen for being reported.  ( ) 17:39, 28 January 2009 (UTC)
Six months will pass and other editors besides Caspian or Sennen will come and go. The best way to discourage these inane disputes is to objectively enforce the rules consistently and fairly. Getting frustrated and topic banning out of personal frustration is poor policy and will only incentivize gaming and trolling from bad editors and punishes editors who make the effort to follow the rules. Proper distinctions have to be made. I don't mean to engage in sarcasm and frustrations with you. We're all here voluntarily right? Thanks for reading.  ( ) 19:54, 28 January 2009 (UTC)
The final nail in the coffin is Caspian blue spending his time attacking roux instead of anything productive, or even an affirmative defense. Request for topic ban , Caspian Blue and Sennen goroshi are restricted as described by the above topic ban for the duration of six months.--  ( ) 21:27, 28 January 2009 (UTC)
PLEASE take a look at this latest spat which has culminated in this report. It's an obscure article about a Korean pop group SeeYa. Sennen shadowed  's edits to this article and started deleting Historiographer's edits removing and undoing a lot of uncontroversial edits that Historiographer had worked on for some time. If this isn't harassment by Sennen, I don't know what is.
This triggered a revert war as you can see here  with Sennen injecting POV such as "but unlike some other Asian musicians such as Ayumi Hamasaki they have had no success outside of their own country."  and reverting Historiographer's references . This in turn caused Caspian and others to revert Sennen which culminated in this report and our current situation.
Sennen engages in this type of behavior chronically. If you look at his contributions history , you'll see that Sennen systematically goes through Korea related articles doing this. Caspian does engage Sennen in a lot of these conflicts but he DOES NOT systemically go through Japan related articles instigating these edit wars as Sennen does . The nature of their involvement in these disputes is fundamentally different and they should not be treated the same.  ( ) 19:17, 28 January 2009 (UTC)
I'm not ignoring your point. And I think this incident clearly shows the anatomy of how these disputes are fueled. As annoying as it is, someone has to step in and figure out the substance of these disputes and enforce the rules. Objectivity and impartiality will kill the constant bickering. Ignoring the substance of these disputes and only seeing this in ad hominem terms will exacerbates the problem in the long run.  ( ) 19:59, 28 January 2009 (UTC)
Hi,
With reference to this  edit, the editor claims to be doing is illegal (and as its an IP edit, it would be theoretically possible to inform the "victim")?
Cheers,    /  23:08, 27 January 2009 (UTC)
P.S. Very sorry if this is the wrong place to mention this, but seeing this edit just made me a wee bit concerned
Hi. It's standard practice to inform a user if they are the subject of an AN/I thread, just an FYI for next time. Secondly, the technical legality of my internet connections is frankly  , and certainly not an issue that requires administrative attention; it's not Wikipedia's job to ensure people are abiding to the laws of whatever country they happen to be in. Indeed, there have been several cases where users committing possibly illegal activities have even been  .   ( ) 19:57, 28 January 2009 (UTC)
I'm having trouble working out what the "official" site is for dubious-legality codec packs including the following:
Anonymous contributors keep changing the official URL from codecguide.com to codecnews.com, and I can't find any definitive statement as to the actual creator of the codecs. Any insight would be most appreciated. -   01:24, 28 January 2009 (UTC)
There is currently a problem at The King's Consort involving an edit war surrounding the dismissal of Robert King as music director (a high profile pedophilia case resulted in his removal).    ( ) has reverted at least four editors within a 24 hour period at least six times after being warned repeatedly about the 3RR rule. I would have just reported it to the 3RR board if this case also didn't potentially involve sockpuppets and/or COI. The following IPs,   and  , have made similar reversions and both trace back to Dusseldorf. Given the situation I thought it best to get help here. Thanks.  ( ) 20:50, 28 January 2009 (UTC)
EstherLois is a sockpuppet of indef community banned   and is rapidly creating fresh categories.     12:00, 28 January 2009 (UTC)
What does this mean?    ( ) 16:24, 28 January 2009 (UTC)
I have indefblocked and sockpuppet tagged EstherLois.  The duck quacked, and floats.
Please note any other new accounts on ANI and I or other admins can respond...    ( ) 22:47, 28 January 2009 (UTC)
After having been warned on Jan 25,  continues to edit war on that article, including  most recent edit in which he threatens to retaliate in another article if he doesn't get his way.  I believe this calls for, perhaps not yet a block, but at least intervention.   ( ) 02:59, 29 January 2009 (UTC)
I present, for your reading pleasure, perhaps the latest chapter in a story long since commenced:
Personally, I'm unwilling to recommend for unbanning someone who claims to have been simply blocked, when it appears to have been, based on my perusal of the boards, a community ban. I seem to be  approached on this topic.
On the other hand,  appears to have some reasonable contributions over more than a year and has stayed under the radar.
I really don't care about the outcome, but I'm certainly not going to act unilaterally.  Perhaps some folks who were around for the previous discussions regarding Wiarthurhu could chime in?   ( ) 05:30, 28 January 2009 (UTC)
I think that those posting above have pretty much summed it up accurately.  I'm not seeing anyone either arguing for an unblock, or rushing to block the admitted sock account.  So... is this a "don't ask, don't tell" consensus?   ( ) 08:08, 29 January 2009 (UTC)
Banned user  has returned and continued disruption. Seeking independent review and action with the latest incarnation, .
He shows up with various sock accounts to the   article Project Chanology and/or its talk page with the exact same disruptive behavior each time, changing "ongoing" to "was", and other obviously disruptive edits - . 
Prior actions by other administrators: , ,  
Most recent diff by  - . 
I think   is the best way to go here. ''' ''' ( ) 19:48, 28 January 2009 (UTC)
Too much IP vandalism, and a lot of edits that need to be removed from the edit history, too many edit conflicts because of the vandalism.    ( ) 05:49, 29 January 2009 (UTC)
Teledildonix314 made this highly inappropriate personal comment about me (below). Also see his above comments on the Rick Warren link. Oh yeah, he's also caused the Rick Warren article to be fully protected not once, but twice.   ( ) 06:02, 29 January 2009 (UTC)
Outdented - I propose at this time to block Manutdglory for 3RR violations and should he return with edits in breach of COI to instigate a further block or alternatively a topic ban discussion. I will welcome other thoughts for the next little while please?--    07:05, 29 January 2009 (UTC)
No reason except gut feel, but we have a set of users Dukeclass1 to at least 6 (eg  ). Is this normal username proliferation or silly sockpuppetry?    ( ) 07:57, 29 January 2009 (UTC)
I've dealt with  , and would rather not go down this road again.  The desired outcome here is not punitive, but rather that NoCal100 simply be admonished that following the edits of users with whom he has disagreements with and reverting them on subject matters in complete left field from where one normally encounters them is unacceptable behavior.  Obviously everyone is allowed to edit anywhere in the project, but the possibility that another I-P editor just happens to find the same article of a TV show that I am editing on by chance is rather improbable.   was clearly the road oft-taken here.   ( ) 06:18, 27 January 2009 (UTC)
I am currently involved in a content dispute with    at Mohammad Amin al-Husayni , where he is removing material sourced to a book published by a mainstream press and authored by two academics, claiming it is non-notable "cruft" -  and    by calling those two academic "quacks".   is very explicit that "Proper use of an editor's history includes (but is not limited to) fixing errors or violations of Wikipedia policy or correcting related problems on multiple articles." Given the seriousness of the BLP violations, I had a look at Tarc's contribution history to see if he is repeating these BLP violations elsewhere, and found The Serenity Now article, where surprisingly, Tarc is inserting true fancruft, sourced to a Youtube video into an unrelated article, against the consensus of multiple editors - a problem which I fixed.   ( ) 16:09, 27 January 2009 (UTC)
Let's not turn this into another   row (which I refrained from weighting in on) where all the usual I-P ducks get in their respective rows and poo-fling, please.  I have had a history with Canadian Monkey, dating back to the Rachel Corrie stuff from last summer.  These attempts to get me warned, or worse, are appearing to be a bit petty.
I reverted 3 times, which I have rarely, if ever, done previously, due to the egregiously bad faith that NoCal100 was displaying by even being at The Serenity Now in the first place, as detailed here.  Obviously there's never a ''good'' excuse for revert multiple times except to protect BLP or remove vandalism (which this was not), but it is nonetheless the reason that I did it, and stopped at 3.   ( ) 20:02, 27 January 2009 (UTC)
As for the rest, nothing short of a steel-cage match is likely to resolve it, so I'd suggest it be ignored. Serenity now, people. ''' '''&nbsp;  20:18, 27 January 2009 (UTC)
Per   and 
I'm half of the mind to ignore, but this IP has been warned by an admin already   and he's wading into an area that already has some small amount of drama; if this stuff is allowed to fly, others might start taking their cues from this user.  ( ) 14:21, 29 January 2009 (UTC)
This user continues to attack other editors on his talk page, even while blocked.. He already has several last warnings and one admin who is supporting an indef block. --  ( ) 16:00, 28 January 2009 (UTC)
Sorry I came here, but it's the best place to get the most replies. What's wrong with the watchlists? It's showing every edit made to pages. It used to show the last edit made to a page. Now it shows all of the last edits made. Also, is there a way to get rid of the rollback button on the watchlist? I'm afraid I'll click it accidentally a lot. :-P '''  //  ''' //  16:15, 28 January 2009 (UTC)
SA is taking a break "Until 15 February 2009 due to being tired of one-sided enforcement and wikistalkers," so let's drop this now, let the arbitration finish, and see how he acts when he returns.    ( ) 02:02, 29 January 2009 (UTC)
There is an  ongoing arb case. Evidence is best presented there.                   03:35, 29 January 2009 (UTC)
It's like socks are all given pitchforks for mob behavior, but try to create a mob by stirring the manure piles ,to dig up old crap. BOR-ing. I think the most interesting thing here is the zealotry with which some people try to defend bizarre fringe theories and defend their honor on the internet. It's like arguing with pigs, but they keep on screaming nonsense.   ( ) 04:40, 29 January 2009 (UTC)
ScienceApologist contacted me this evening to inform me of the intended wikibreak, although not its exact duration.  Time off seems like a very good idea for him right now.  A few suggestions: information relevant to any ongoing arbitration is best submitted at that arbitration, or via email to the Committee (which anyone can do and is the appropriate route for blocked/banned users or editors in good standing who wish to avoid associating themselves with the dispute).  Sockpuppet suspicions are best routed through CU and/or SSP rather than upfront attempts to guess a username.  SA was quite helpful via chat this evening researching historic astronomy data for potential featured picture candidates.  A change of pace to low stress content work can be refreshing; might be a good idea on all sides.  With respect,  '' '' 09:04, 29 January 2009 (UTC)
See  . User has created two articles (Paul Callan (attorney) and just today Devon reiff), both of which are blatant-self promotions of non-notable injury lawyers. I tagged the second one as per   (which he later removed). I think the first article should be up for   as well.     18:36, 29 January 2009 (UTC)
There's an edit war in progress at Rick Warren over - believe it or not - the inclusion, or not, of the origin of the term saddlebacking in the article. Multiple editors have now violated 3RR on the supposed basis that this is a   issue, but the validity of that claim is not clear. Anyhow, I've requested temporary full protection over at   but that board is backlogged some hours and I thought I should bring it to admin attention here.   ( ) 05:16, 29 January 2009 (UTC)
I would appreciate a second pair of eyes on this. Editors keep adding an allegation that Falk suffers from Alzheimer's on the basis of allegations contained in an court affidavit filed by his wife. For various reasons, I do not regard this as a reliable source. Even if false, the allegations would appear to breach   and  . Until this is resolved I have reverted those edits and fully protected the article. Any Admin is free to undo this if they feel I am incorrect. --   19:51, 29 January 2009 (UTC)
I didn't know Falk was sick.  If true, this is a worthy addition to WP.  We should be sure it's true, first.   ( ) 21:23, 29 January 2009 (UTC)
I'm concerned by this editor's contributions. They seem to have gone to a fair bit of trouble to get this complicated URL exactly right before posting it at Barack Obama. Harmless hijinks, routine spam/SEO efforts, or something more sinister? I can't tell. Posting here for some more tech-savvy opinions.    21:21, 29 January 2009 (UTC)
We've got people edit-warring and announcing that they will violate  .  Mayday, mayday!   ( ) 05:01, 29 January 2009 (UTC)
So anyways, Anyone else have any comments on the actual case presented?   ( ) 03:09, 30 January 2009 (UTC)
This recently created account has been used exclusively to remove  templates from articles, usually leaving nothing more than a boilerplate edit summary like "not uncontroversial" or "_____ is notable" if an edit summary is left at all. This user makes no attempt to improve these articles or explain his/her reasoning on the talk page. Several editors have kindly and not so kindly informed this user that his/her approach is problematic and needs to change, but there has yet be an improvement. It may turn out that ''some'' of the de-PRODed articles are salvageable (though most are most definitely not, IMHO), but the issue here is this user's approach.
I also note the this editor's contribution history has several hallmarks of an abusive sock puppet: the first two edits are to create a user page and talk page, and before s/he's made even 50 contributions s/he's already referring to AFD discussions. Doesn't look like a "new" user to me.     05:27, 30 January 2009 (UTC)
I've placed a  to User:Bittergrey on the talk page of Diaper fetishism (including suggestions a topic ban was possible) after he restored  geocities link as a source.  However as I'm the one who removed the link this is a content dispute.
Nor is it a ''new'' content dispute.  While I had no real recollection of this editor, in January 2006 his  was reverted by me .
So, Admin Corps, I'd like a quick sanity check on my conduct.  Thank you.
Snowspinner/Sandifer appears to have some problems with my recent edits to Tori Amos and  .  In short order I've been blindly reverted, called a "blatant lie", accused or personal attacks, and told that he'll not discuss his edits on the talk page and that any ''further'' edits by my he'll consider personal attacks.
Given that Snowspinner has in the past both blocked me without warning over a content dispute and brought arbitration against me without any previous attempts at dispute resolution, I feel placing a notice here is appropiate.
I'd appreciate an objective set of eyes (or six) on the situation, as well as welcoming any input on my conduct. (As always.)
From an uninvolved admin - Phil, Aaron, all I see here are wrongs.  I've full protected the article for 3 days to end this back and forth (though Aaron already stated he was done reverting).  I can see no logical reason not to formally warn both of you - everyone involved has enough experience to know not to edit war, and yet you clearly did, up to and including stopping use of the talk page and sterile reverts recently.    ( ) 01:21, 30 January 2009 (UTC)
Can someone please at least unprotact the page for the courtesy of other editors? -   05:41, 30 January 2009 (UTC)
The above thread was getting into back and forth a bit much and beyond the scope of simple matters for the   board. Posting it here for additional eyes. ''' ''' ( ) 00:55, 30 January 2009 (UTC)