Nelson Searcy grew up in North Carolina.  He started a computer programming business at age 13 and was selected as one of the nation's Top Ten Young Entrepreneurs while in high school.
Searcy met his wife, Kelley, on a blind date while they were in college and the two were married in 1994.  They have lived in North Carolina, Southern California, and currently reside in Manhattan.  They have one son and are long time bulldog owners.
Searcy received a Bachelor of Science degree in Psychology and a Bachelor of Arts  degree from Gardner-Webb University in Boiling Springs, North Carolina.  He received his Master of Divinity (M.Div.) from Duke University and has pursued additional study at North Carolina State University, , and Southern Baptist Theological Seminary.
After becoming a Christian while in college, Searcy entered full time ministry in 1990
Searcy served with the Baptist State Convention of North Carolina and pastored churches in North Carolina from 1990 to 1999.
Searcy went on staff with Rick Warren in 1999.  There he was the founding director of the Purpose Driven Community at Saddleback Church, with more than 5,000 member churches, and a key architect for Warren's .
Searcy and his wife, Kelley, moved to New York City in late 2001 to start The Journey Church of the City.  
On Easter Sunday of 2002 a handful of people gathered in two Manhattan locations as The Journey launched weekly services. From the very beginning, The Journey was '''one church that met in multiple locations''' - on the Upper West Side on Sunday mornings and in the East Village on Sunday evenings. 
From there, The Journey has steadily grown in numbers and ministries . Over the years the church has met in comedy clubs, church basements, off-Broadway theaters, public schools, hotel ballrooms and even in larger concert venues. As of March, 2011, The Journey meets in four locations in the Metro New York area.
Most recently, The Journey launched a new campus in Boca Raton, Florida, on February 13, 2011.
The Journey has always been a diverse group of people united by their desire '''to give people the best opportunity to become fully developing followers of Jesus'''.
Over 1,200 people attend services each Sunday and over 1,400 people get plugged into a Journey Growth Group each semester.
Searcy is the founder of '''''' (CLI), an organization that provides training and resources to pastors and church leaders.  His bi-weekly Church Leader Insights newsletter (formerly known as Evangelism Online) is distributed to more than 46,000 pastors each month.  Searcy has personally trained more than a thousand church planters through his seminars.
CLI hosts live training events throughout the United States and online through webinars, and offers resources for pastors in the following areas: