Uncivil communication .
Thank you to all who have participated in this discussion. I would like to point out that my insistance on the talk page to continue arguing was not for arguments sake. It was because, like Thuranx, many did not seem to understand what exactly I was trying to point out. Almost everyone continued to argue very valid points, but the incorrect way. Its like if I was arguing on point A, and someone rebutted on Point B. It wasn't making sense to me, that is why I continued to try and rephrase the question, hoping that someone might actually make a rebutal on the actual point I was trying to argue. All I got were illogical statments and accusations of racism.--  ( ) 04:05, 23 January 2009 (UTC)
FurryMUCK?   --  06:27, 23 January 2009 (UTC)
The post was very far from civil, and this is user who has a  of not playing well with others.   01:17, 25 January 2009 (UTC)
Clearly stirring up anti-semitic statements on http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talk:American_Jews and more importantly, see this diff on Talk:Zoophilia: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Talk:Zoophilia&diff=prev&oldid=265770955. I think this IP address should be blocked.   ( ) 03:30, 23 January 2009 (UTC)
Garden variety troll. Very worth blocking now, certainly if edits continue.   01:20, 25 January 2009 (UTC)
I believe this complaint is  as an admin has has acted to fix the problem. Thanks!  ( ) 03:56, 28 January 2009 (UTC)
There are nine issues.
The links and sections I provide above are not merely proof that I warned the user against certain behaviors they contain the diffs exhibiting the behavior. Context counts.  For example, if you click above and go to the very first link and click on it you are presented with a diff that says:  ''Hi Hapsala, Please do not Remove Unresolved Disputes from Article Talk pages . Please see . Thanks, Doright (talk) 04:02, 23 January 2009 (UTC)      
When you click on that diff you are taken to the diff that says:  '' , Please stop reverting the archive bot setting as you did  without first addressing the above identified issues associated with such short deletion intervals. And please stop marking the edit as minor. There is nothing minor about removing content, ongoing discussions and unresolved disputes from the talk page. Thank you.  ( ) 03:48, 23 January 2009 (UTC)''
Dear editors seeking to assist in this matter, obviously, you would then have to click that  link. 
Dear editors, by setting the bot value to 9 hours all talk section that have not received comment for the last 9 hours are removed from that Article Talk page.  This results in disputes that have not been resolved being removed while people sleep.  It further prevents other editors that are not on here 24/7 from participating in the discussion.  It is highly disruptive.  It serves those that don't want changes to be made to the article.  Context counts.  Sincerely,   ( ) 23:43, 23 January 2009 (UTC)
Please do not attempt to help if you have less than 1 year WP experience or equivalent. :)
The links and sections I provide above are not merely proof that I warned the user against certain behavior they actually contain the diffs exhibiting the behavior in question.  Context counts.    ( ) 23:43, 23 January 2009 (UTC)
Here is some relevant background which may save other editors  some work in replying to Doright's complaint.  The   talk page apparently receives a very high volume of traffic. Consequently, a bot,  , is used to archive it regularly (once a day, as I understand it).  Apparently some editors of the page believe that if a thread has not been contributed to for some fairly small number of hours, then the bot should archive it on its next run.  There has been some disagreement, however, on precisely what that number of hours should be.
Thus, over the week from January 12th to January 20th, the thread archive idle time used by the bot was ''never greater than 9 hours''.  Timekeer had complained that 4 hours was too short in his edits of January 14th and 15th, but was apparently content to settle for 8 hours on the 14th, and 6 hours on the 15th.  Apart from that, there appears to have been no other complaints during that period about the shortness of the thread idle time being used by the bot to archive threads. Note also that it was ''Hapsala'' who ''extended'' the time to 9 hours, the longest it had been for the whole week.
On the following day, January 21st, Doright apparently noticed that a thread to which he had wanted to make further contributions had been archived, and made  to the talk page, which falsely categorised the setting of the archive idle time to 9 hours as "vandalism".
At 1030 on January 22nd Doright , and Hapsala   37 minutes later.  About two hours after that Doright  to the talk page requesting no further reversions without discussion, and then  a little later. About 9 or 10 hours after that  with the edit summary "currently, 4d simply wont work", but without engaging in any discussion on the talk page.  Twenty-five minutes later, though, he ''apparently decided to compromise'' and .
After another 101/2 hours Doright  with the edit summary: "changed bot content deletion interval to 3 days as a comprimise see talk".  Eight minutes later he posted  to Hapsala's talk page.
Two minutes later  with the edit summary "Undid revision 265853329 by Doright (talk) - per WP:nonsence".  This is an edit which Doright considers  . I agree with him, but I would also suggest that:
However, he did not do this, but chose instead to continue the dispute by  of edit warring and incivility, and demanding that Hapsala leave the comment and accusations on his talk page.  Hapsala responded by  some 9 hours later, with an edit summary "Undid revision 265856654 by Doright (talk) - per sockpuppet trolling".  Doright considers this edit summary to be a  . Again, presuming Hapsala has no solid evidence that Doright really is a sock puppent (and, as far as I know he has not provided any), I would agree that this does constitute a personal attack.
Doright made two other allegations for which I found no evidence:
The only grounds offered for the first of these two allegations appear to be that when Hapsala set the archive idle time to a low value, it caused the ''MiszaBot_I'' to archive threads that Doright still wanted to contribute to.  If the allegation is indeed based on nothing more than that, then I would consider it both unwarranted and tendentious.
The second allegation is one for which Doright will need to supply more specific evidence in the form of diffs, since I didn't come across any edit or edit summary in which Hapsala accused him of wikistalking.
This criticism of Bwilkins's efforts to restore deleted content to the this page is completely uncalled for, in my opinion.  Between Doright's unjustifiable removal of Theseeker4's response to his original complaint, and Bwilkins's attempt to restore it, there had been 5 edits to the page, one of which (by Neon white) was to an unrelated thread.  If Bwilkins's statement, "Thanks to the absolute mess caused by the removal of wide swaths of text from this page, and a number of newer posts to unrelated threads, and even replies to this thread, I did my very best to restore all issues, ...", is read with a conscientious effort to understand what he was saying, it will be found to contain only one relatively minor inaccuracy&mdash;namely, it gives the impression that there had been several edits to unrelated threads rather than just one.  Doright has apparently misread the statement as asserting that some posts had been ''removed'' from unrelated threads. Admittedly the statement was ambiguous and open to the misconstrual which Doright placed on it.  However, even a cursory examination of this page's edit history should have been enough to show him that this was a misreading of the statement.
When Bwilkin's decided to restore the removed content,  was the difference between the then current state of the page and the state it was in before the content was removed.  In light of this, he apparently decided that the safest way to go about restoring the removed content was to revert the page to the earlier state and then redo the subsequent edits.  In doing so, he apparently inadvertently missed  of Doright's, for which he has now apologised.  Perhaps it would have been simpler for Bwilkins to have simply copied and pasted the deleted content back into the page at the appropriate place, but since I haven't examined the subsequent edits in any detail I wouldn't presume to criticise him for having chosen a different approach.
Doright is apparently concerned that if editors who based their comments on the original version of his complaint had instead had the later "heavily edited" version available to them they might have come to different conclusions.  I'm afraid I can't see much justification for that concern.  between the original version of the complaint and the "heavily edited" version seem to be:
I can assure him that my own comments, at least, would not have been influenced in any way by these changes.
Usernames Ceha, Ivan Stambuk, Laz and Zenanarh are resorting to swearings and personal insults to anyone who disagrees with their point of view, which is by the way wrong and is stemming from "current" works" of highly politically orchestrated and designed "grammars of so-called "hrvatski" language. Their nationalistic and blatantly racist remarks, derogatory use of the noun serbian in a vide variety of variations, identifying all participants as serbs, communists and "chetnikofiles" just because other users disagree with their incorrect interpretations of grammar is destroying any serious discussion or exchange of ideas. They also openly boast of intentionally editing anything that they deem unsuitable to their personal point of view. These users should be prevented from being able to edit and should be monitored for possible use of other aliases to edit texts in order to promote their own political agendas, usually with strong racist and agressive tones.
Discussion tab under serbo-croatian language contains plenty of examples of their agressive and insulting style. Please ban from these pages, or at least disable their edit functionality so that they cannot insult and swear at other users, and change contents to promote their racist point of view.     Preceding   comment added by   ( ) 13:17, 24 January 2009 (UTC) 
I believe this user has gotten way out of order for which there should be consequences. Ex-Yugoslav article are hard enough to edit without this type of language (I even think there is a special arbcom case relating to bad behavior in Ex-Yugoslav article,  , see Decorum and Remedies under the   section.
User is being grossly uncivil and violating NPA. Calls edit , when editor (who is an admin) complains, advises user to . (Previous complaint , impressive block log ). I think this user, literally, ''wants'' a ban.   00:44, 25 January 2009 (UTC)
Every time this user has the slightest disagreement with someone, they instantly resort to condescending rudeness, name calling, and a post on their own little section of the user page apparently reserved for mockery of other editors. Examples:  
A quick scan of their talk page shows that several users, including myself, have tried to discuss civility with them, to no avail. Maybe yet another uninvolved third party could take a look and try to talk some sense...   ( ) 00:50, 26 January 2009 (UTC)
I saw that   incorrectly placed a   warning template on   (and thread ), and commented upon this fact, and his reading on policy in his talk page. His response was rude, uncivil, and totally over the top. When I reminded him that civility is a core policy around here, he reacted by further rudeness with a claim ''I'' had been uncivil in my talk page. Furthermore, he deleted my response to his rude response from his talk page - giving the impression I haven't responded, a further example of rudeness (yes, we kinda own our talk page, but Wikiquette usually establishes that non-rude, non-NPA comments in a thread remain, unless the whole thread is archived). I responded in my talk page to his latest, and as I wrote this, he posted this  - which quite frankly makes no sense to me, but might to others - which further means my instincts were right in raising this here. I am worried, as he has blanket reverted me in Union busting without any real discussion, and his bellingerent attitude is an early sign of an edit warrior, long-time editor or not. I want to discuss in good faith our edits, and his treatment of the other user and myself are not good signs. Could someone look at this, please? --  ( ) 04:14, 26 January 2009 (UTC)
There seems to be overreaction on the part of all three parties. While LedRush is correct that Goldsztajn's editing of his comments technically violated the  , it is a guideline -- ''it is best treated with common sense and the occasional exception.'' and there is a   argument to be made that correcting a user name falls into the exception category.  Goldsztajn could have just fixed his name without the strikethrough, which called undue attention to the issue. Cerejota's posting on LedRush's talk was unnecessarily inflammatory, and begs the question of why he's getting involved.   ( ) 15:14, 26 January 2009 (UTC)
If anyone has any questions, I'd be happy to answer them.  Otherwise, can we close this as resolved and unnecessary?  ( ) 21:13, 27 January 2009 (UTC)
This is a minor thing, and I'm not offended, but someone might want to have a talk with . In my experience, he seems to take things way too personally. --  16:56, 26 January 2009 (UTC)
This user has repeatedly inserted agenda driven nonsense into evolution related articles. At first he was posting under the name  and was relatively harmless so I tried to work with his edits on a few occasions such as here: . He then started posting using this IP address  from which he has inserted such nonsense as  .  
He has also admitted to his agenda on   talk page. I have admittedly completely lost my   with this guy but he keeps inserting this junk into pages on my watch list so I have no idea what to do. --  ( ) 16:36, 28 January 2009 (UTC)
This user has made some very rude comments about me personally at .
When I confronted him about it:  he responded with more rudeness and condescension .
I don't care that he's voting '''keep''' on the article. I just want him to remove the rude and false accusations of bad faith. 
Please help and advise.
Personal Threats
And to be very clear, WP:3RR does apply, and I will personally make it my mission to get you blocked if you violate it, even if I get blocked myself. This is your only warning. Spotfixer (talk) 05:05, 29 January 2009 (UTC)
This has occurred because Spotfixer and Teledildonix314 have decided to use the Rick Warren page for a personal agenda, which is currently trying to insert terminology about anal sex in church teens into the article.  This clearly violates  , and they have been asked to wait at least 24 hours for consensus, since this is highly contentious and not verifiable.  Lyonscc has tried to discuss the item, asking for civility and consensus (beyond two hours) for something that is rather clearly contradictory to  .
Personal Threats
Spotfixer also threatened me on my talk page (see below), even though I had absolutely nothing to do with his fight with Lyonscc. 
Clearly, something needs to be done.   ( ) 05:37, 29 January 2009 (UTC)
Teledildonix314 made this highly inappropriate personal comment about me (below). Oh yeah, he's also caused the Rick Warren article to be fully protected not once, but twice.   ( ) 05:58, 29 January 2009 (UTC)
On my talk page ( ),  misinterpreted edits I made and referred to the editorial efforts on my part as "arrogant" and "evil", further describing unnamed editors as "nazi's" and rapists.  While  , I didn't find it warranted warning or further elabouration; I've had other editors call me names before.  Had that been all, I would have ignored this editor's bile.
However, on the talk page of  ( ), Fabartus make personal attacks and threats against that user today (bolding added):FIX THE DOUBLE REDIRECTS FROM THIS  OF WHAT A TOTAL SCREW UP YOU ARE. and stay out of Charmed pages... I've spent six weeks of my free time trying to pick up the mess you created when fucking up the merge of these pages. FYI, had you not screwed up our coverage here, I wouldn't have seen so much of the series, so in a way I owe you thanks. Nonetheless, '''Pray, Really  Pray we never meet face to face, for you won't enjoy the common sense I pound into your sorry and foolish ass.''' In between, study IAR... you seem to have missed the lesson. And get some consideration for others time spent. Raping their GF efforts that took hundreds of man-months because you aren't mature enough to know when not to apply a rule or two really shows how unqualified you are to be editing here, much less be an admin. Fortunately, you can find most of them using .  //    21:49, 29 January 2009 (UTC)You know...  than I  thought. Try ADDING SOME CONTENT, not judging others. What a frigging piker. GROW THE FUCK UP. //    21:52, 29 January 2009 (UTC)  While wholly  , a   specifying violence seemed very over-the-top of acceptability.
Fabartus was again politely warned against incivility and personal attacks by  on the former's talk page ( ), to which he responded (original bolding preserved):Over applying questionable guidelines aren't anything but a wast of time.Why is it that every rookie around here thinks they need to say " ... '''THAT WAS VERY CIVIL...''' you should see the first three drafts.Rapists should be jailed or shot. What he did to the 180 charmed article is mind boggling. So. Sorry, don't agree... read the above exchange (a day or two back). Someone has to tell a fuck up the truth. It's also free speech. Mine, so thanks, but I'll do what's right.  //    23:18, 29 January 2009 (UTC)
While I didn't feel warning him yet again would garner any suitable result, I certainly didn't feel comfortable silently condoning comments about physical violence and guns with regards to other editors.  I don't know if being clearly and detailedly warned by an   is the reminder needed, or if the comments themselves warrant something more, but comments and insinuations such as these are, I infer, unacceptable.       ''' ''' |'''  ''' | 02:02, 30 January 2009 (UTC)
Once again the same user in the same article: White Brazilian. Last week, this user was blocked 2 times for his behavior in this article. Now that his block expired, he is back again to the same article, wih the same useless discussion in the  . He's flooding this talk page with his personal opinions and theories about the figures of the Embassies of Italy and Lebanon in Brazil (his theory is that the Embassies are lying). He is frequently changing the article with his own theories, with unsouced informations (he has a "pro-Portuguese" point of view of the subject, and tries to erase the informations about Germans, Italians, Arabs and other ethnic groups). 
Can someone please take a look at Opinoso's behaviour in the White Brazilians Talk Page?   ( ) 16:50, 30 January 2009 (UTC)
Apparently, I should not post in the article's Talk Page because I'm being accused of "flooding it". But thanks for your advice, I will keep myself to the ANI page.   ( ) 18:28, 30 January 2009 (UTC)
Could an admin have a word with this user, please? He's new, and I left a note on his talk page because he used the f-word twice in one edit summary , and he took exception, leaving uncivil comments on my talk page  and continuing to swear in his edit summaries, like this . I don't know how admins deal with this kind of thing, so here it is.   ( ) 22:39, 30 January 2009 (UTC)
I just browsed over to the new diffs that you posted, and I see absolutely ''no'' instance where you were "flamed". Criticized, yes. And maybe that criticizm was a bit unfounded. But definitely not flamed. Trust me, I've been flamed by some of the best in the biz, from BBS systems to IRC, to the web, so I know flaming when I see it. As for the restructuring of the talk page, that has already been addressed, so it's moot now. Trust me, SharkD, accepting this framework for informal mediation is a win-win scenario, for you, for Kirihari, and for Wikipedia.   ( ) 09:31, 31 January 2009 (UTC)
In other words, the purpose of this exercise was simply to vent? Okay, that in and of itself is a good thing. As I stated previously, the edit warring was a ''shared'' culpability. However, your own words here, "I don't feel I need assitance (sic) on the article itself; it's a small article!" sound dangerously like  , which has me honestly concerned. At this point, I'd like some other third-parties to comment on this.   ( ) 10:14, 31 January 2009 (UTC)
Articles are always in a state of change.  When one party is willing to mediate, and the other party is unwilling, it says a lot about both parties.  Mediation requires you to use the past as a route forward.  A failure to try is a violation of the spirit of Wikipedia Community. ( '''&nbsp;Bwilkins / BMW&nbsp;''' ) 10:52, 31 January 2009 (UTC)
I'm tagging this one as resolved for archiving, as both editors seem to have a new perspective over at the article's talk page. Hopefully everything remains above board and "on the level".   ( ) 05:58, 1 February 2009 (UTC)
After I AFDed one of his articles and reverted some of his edits, Mickproper seriously lost it and posted  to my talk page and sent me a personal threat in email, which I took seriously enough to report to my local police. ("just so you know you punk...when I find out your real identity, you're going to have a VERY bad day!") I don't wish to be involved with this guy anymore. Someone should keep an eye on him, though - I think he is well-intentioned, but his edits are frequently unsourced, unverifiable, and/or contain original research. And he has a temper.   ( ) 23:31, 1 February 2009 (UTC)
They seem to be tag-teaming to prevent changes to the article Masonic conspiracy theories. There is reason to suspect that at least 2 of them (  and  ) may engage in edit-warring as well as revert-warring.   has already been blocked for violating 3RR. This has been mentioned in the noticeboards of:  ,   and  .   ( ) 21:52, 2 February 2009 (UTC)
This user sent another user's   to  . I have my opinions about that, but I'll leave that out of this. However, the nominator of the AFD is using phrases like "DEFUNCT ROUTE FOR ALMOST 40 YEARS" and "NO AGAIN!" Something doesn't seem right about it... --''' ''' (   ) 23:37, 29 January 2009 (UTC)
I believe that bringing an article at FAC to AFD is a violation of  . If the subject of an article isn't notable, then its sources will be deficient for FAC purposes, and it will likely fail quickly. The fact that this didn't happen at FAC demonstrates to me that the article subject was judged to have sufficient notability by the community. The FAC would probably have been the best venue to discuss the issues he had with it. I think that while GroundhogTheater's actions ''in nominating the article'' were probably not incivil (nor do I feel they were intended to be), bringing the article to AFD shows poor judgement on his part. If the article had been in need of deletion, it would have inevitably failed FAC, and only after that happened would an AFD have been proper. 
You two  seem to work very closely together. --''' ''' (   ) 08:49, 31 January 2009 (UTC)
Possible resolution of this Wikiquette alert:
Disclaimer: I have successfully worked with others in the past but have not participated in alerts before.  Therefore, please allow some laxity if I am unfamiliar with any unwritten customs of this board.
The Wikipedia product should be the most important goal.  Whether or not AFD was appropriate, it was done and has been concluded.  Editors' energy should be primarily directed to improving the article of their choice in the most cooperative way possible.  Changes in policy, such as to further define notability, may be useful depending on the editor's interests.  Left unresolved is whether the tone of the original AFD was appropriate.  Two possibilities are either to continue to debate that or to try to work cooperatively in other issues and leave that question unanswered.    ( ) 20:41, 31 January 2009 (UTC)
I would like the opinion of other editors and even more so administrators on the following matter:
I placed a   on  suggesting a move to ''Major British railway stations'' however I misread the instructions and placed it incorrectly. This caused an administrator   to place a message on  . I believe the tone was harsh and aggressive as the administrator threatened to take action against me for being disruptive. I feel this was unfair as the admin was not   and   did not cross their mind. 
The admin also claims I threatened editors who removed the template. This is simply untrue which can be seen on revision history of  and  . Furthermore, the admin claims I made ''threats of reporting people for vandalsim if they revert the changes in good faith''. While I admit that I misjudged that the reverts by an editor on  were vandalism, it is clear that they were not in good faith, given the lengthy discussion with the editor,  , on the talk page of .
I accused the admin of hypocrisy, which I didn't intend as a personal attack, merely what I believe is a fact, as he accused me of being uncivil and not assuming good faith, given the admins incivility and non assumption of good faith on my part, to which the admin replied sarcastically ''Thank you for your suggestion about me being civil, and I suggest you review  .'' 
So I would like to ask editors and administrators if this administrator acted unreasonably and unnecessarily hostile towards me. I would be happy to answer any questions or provide any more evidence on the matter. Thank you   ( ) 15:14, 4 February 2009 (UTC)
One of the key tenets of  /  is to discuss ''edits'' and not ''editors''.  You added a template wrongly.  It was removed and you reverted.  It was removed again, which you reverted.  The "stern warning" above is not an ''administrator'' type of "warning", it is a ''seasoned editor'' type of warning - indeed, it's extremely descriptive of what and why, and does its very best to discuss the brutal repercussions of specific '''edits''' and not '''editors'''.  The paragraph details why it was removed, recommends discussion, advises against threatening to "report" editors who revert you, and encourages discussion.  This "warning" is far more verbose than a standard warning, and indeed appears to be agood learning message.  Because the multiple additions of the template caused disruption throughout Wikipedia, he was required (after 3 times) to warn you about some form of "administrative action".  It could have been article protection, or even a block ... it is a very mild, non-specific warning, and is the only real "admin" portion.
Although I have trouble seeing "threats" when someone simply says "I will report you for vandalism" because I say "if I did AGF edits, go ahead, report me" (we all know that ANI Reporters who were disruptive to begin with usually get the bad end of Admin action in that situation).
The warning was stern, yet polite.  It met   and because the template was re-added multiple times,   does not apply - the FIRST time was AGF, the repetitions were not.
Welsh, if you disagree, you may take this to   or even  .  However, at this point, I would suggest that the severity of the first addition was ignored, the repeats could not be.  Rather than block first and advise later, you were politely and properly (and clearly) educated.  ( '''&nbsp;Bwilkins / BMW&nbsp;''' ) 17:15, 4 February 2009 (UTC)
Ddstretch, I hope you can see why I took your message as impolite but, as I have said before, I understand and approve of you pointing out that I incorrectly added the RM template. Also, I hope you can see that it was a simple misunderstanding and I did not revert it, nor threaten an editor who removed it, nor would revert it if it had been explained that it was incorrectly placed.
I understand the problems of edit warring and apologise for it, however the reverts I made were edits by a user who has continuously not respected the rules of adding/removing a station, also this does not excuse edit warring. In fact I have been working on an FAQ in my sandbox for this template to prevent further edit wars taking place on this page. You were quite right to warn me for the edit war but my intentions were to prevent one (one of the edit summaries), but I still maintain that you could have been less firm with regards to my addition of the RM template. My edit was indeed disruptive, but not intentionally disruptive, and I feel that called for a more politer tone. So if you can where I'm coming from, I'm happy to let the issue rest and we'll say no more about it, but before we can do so, would you mind having a word with the user who has been making these edits,  , as I feel the uncivil messages of this user have contributed to the dispute.   ( ) 18:45, 4 February 2009 (UTC)
I recently joined Wikipedia with the intent to publish an article about the band Behind Yellow Lines. (You can see my first impressions of Wikipedia  )
I was surprised to see that not long after I published the article, it was marked for "speedy deletion." I saw that on my talk page, it apparently wasn't notable enough. I attempted to delay the deletion, to see what was the matter, but the user who deleted it,   failed to provide me with the real reason it was deleted. I checked the notability requirements for articles about bands, and my article was up to par. I started to become suspicious, wondering whether maybe the article was deleted out of  .
To make a long story short, my previous positive impressions of Wikipedia were tarnished by the attitude of  , and other moderators.
What infuriated me the most was that when I asked Julian to send me the article he hastily deleted, he refused. I had to go to another user ( ) to get my article back (for my own personal use). 
So, hopefully, this article will cause Wikipedia to review the character of their moderators, in an effort to treat new authors with respect and dignity.--  ( ) 23:35, 5 February 2009 (UTC)
For some reason,   is making a variety of seemingly personal attacks against me regarding an  . I can't remember ever having any personal issues with him, so I don't know where this apparent hostility it coming from. There is nothing wrong with the AfD nom that I can see. It certainly isn't a bad faith nomination but for some reason appears to seriously be ticking some people off, particularly Dekkappai. I tried noting to him that he was making personal attacks, but he ignored my response and continued with more. --  &nbsp;( &nbsp;'''  '''  ) 01:11, 5 February 2009 (UTC)
I've not been involved in any of these discussions or AfDs. I would have thought that the second nomination in 2.5 months by the ''same editor'' might get people annoyed, especially when the first nomination received a very large number of opinions that the material should be kept. In 2.5 months, the consensus is unlikely to have changed so radically, though it could have happened, and the burden of evidence would rest with Collectonian to show that it had. So, I do think the decision to try a second nomination in such a comparatively short time may well have contributed to the idea that it was time-wasting if such evidence was not gathered and is not forthcoming. Collectonian states that "Previously kept articles have been deleted in subsequent AfDs after consensus and guidelines changed." so, perhaps this applied here. Would he/she care to provide the evidence that the guidelines for such material has changed in a way that would have affected the retention of the material? Or would he/she let us know what the evidence was that led he/she to think that consensus had changed enough so that a quick second nomination was justified? Being able to do this would certainly change the view I am getting of this matter just now.  &nbsp;  01:59, 5 February 2009 (UTC)
Butting in again. While working on one of the articles in this AfD nomination bundle, I came across . So, if it matters, it's actually this nominator's third attempt to delete this.   ( ) 18:57, 6 February 2009 (UTC)
He however refused to take criticism and advise from me, and  . I decided not to bite him, have the issue I had with him resolved (an unsourced map, for which he provided sources in the meantime), and now I am backing out. However his rants I do not take ''that'' easy, and his behaviour will certainly bring him in trouble when he encounters someone not as patient as me. I therefore think he needs someone not yet involved to explain to him where he can get technical help, what the important guidelines are and what behaviour is not tolerated. 
I notified aaronjhill of this thread  .   ( ) 10:54, 5 February 2009 (UTC)
I happen to think that   is quite rude and arrogant. He seems to think I know nothing of German history, especially Pomerania. He has preconceived notions on where people with certain genetics should be living. I am merely basing my map and edits on papers I read. --  ( ) 11:23, 6 February 2009 (UTC)
It should just be common courtesy in my opinion, which is apparently part of Wiki's standards at the moment. This, however, is a secondary issue. The manner in which he went about it wasn't very diplomatic. I seriously think he may have an anti-Polish bias, whether he is aware of it or not. Any cursory knowledge of I1 and its history knows that several studies have shown the gradient in northern Poland, then tailing off. --  ( ) 12:04, 6 February 2009 (UTC)
If you think my comments there were bad, you should see what I really wanted to write. Perhaps you should take a look at what he wrote again. --  ( ) 12:05, 6 February 2009 (UTC)
I am curious why this suddenly became an issue as the image had been on that page for nearly a year since March 2008. --  ( ) 12:08, 6 February 2009 (UTC)
All of this "chastisement" seems to be going one way. Perhaps those on patrol should reconsider how they are doing things. --  ( ) 12:10, 6 February 2009 (UTC)
Is it possible to delete one's account? How does someone leave? --  ( ) 12:14, 6 February 2009 (UTC)
I am serious. I want to know how to delete my account. I have better things to do. The application of the Wiki standards is so haphazard that this place is a joke. Here are two images that have no sources, but remain on the site. I am sure there thousands of examples.
Per the '''' I would like my subpages deleted, account deleted and username changed to something generic. I don't want anything to do with Wiki. --  ( ) 13:57, 6 February 2009 (UTC)