Phoenix Comicon also produces two other conventions, Con-Nichiwa and the Saboten-Con, held in Tucson and Phoenix respectively.
Originally showcasing comic books, science fiction/fantasy and film/television, and related popular arts, the convention has expanded over the years to include a larger range of pop culture elements, such as horror, anime, manga, animation, toys, collectible card games, video games, webcomics, and fantasy novels. 
Marv Wolfman
The first Phoenix ComiCon was held in June 2002. It was a one day only convention for six hours held at a best western in Ahwatukee, Arizona. Admission was $3 per person and there were 432 attendees, along with a few local creators and exhibitors.
For our next three years the convention was held at the Glendale Civic Center. The size of the convention and the attendance were doubled from the previous year. The Sunday morning six hour length of the convention was maintained. The convention began to bring out some guests from out of state including Spider-Man artist Todd Nauck and comic legend Marv Wolfman. The Programming was increased to include Q&A's with our guests, How To workshops, and film trailer presentations.
September 2006 was the first time the convention was held at the Mesa Convention Center in Mesa, Arizona. It also became a 2 day convention, with Friday preview night, and had guests such as voice actors Johnny Young Bosche and Greg Ayres. The exhibitor room was dramatically expanded, as was the amount of programming offered. This was the first convention to expand beyond comic books into the greater pop culture community, including Anime, Manga, Sci-Fi, Fantasy and Cosplay. Attendance was over 2,600 people for the weekend.
The convention was held in January from 2007 to 2009, at the Mesa Convention Center. Attendance jumped past 3,200 and we further fulfilled the promise of being the signature pop culture event in the southwest. 2007 was also considered the conventions first foray into media guests, with Feedback, the winner of "Stan Lee's Who Wants to be a Superhero" attending. In 2009 the event was expanded to 3 days, with a Thursday preview night. It was also announced at the 2009 convention that due to an overwhelming attendance of around 7,000 people for that year, the convention in 2010 will be moving to the Phoenix Convention Center the next year, along with the dates changing to the end of May.
Beginning in 2010 the convention was held on Memorial Day weekend, at the Phoenix Convention Center and Hyatt hotel in Phoenix, Az. This change was due to the large increase in attendance, and the availability of funds to hold the convention in a larger venue. Bigger names, such as Leonard Nimoy, George Takei, and Stan Lee also began to attend the convention as special guests.