The following is the '''list of the  Catholic dioceses and archdioceses of the United States'''. This list includes not only dioceses of the '''Latin''' or Western Church but also the eparchies (dioceses) of the Eastern Catholic Churches that are in full communion with the Bishop of Rome. 
The Catholic Church in the United States comprises 195 particular churches, of which the 194 dioceses and one apostolic exarchate are each led by a bishop.  In the United States, state, counties or county equivalents are usually used to determine boundaries of most territorial dioceses. There are also nationwide or large area dioceses defined by rite for many Eastern Catholics. In addition to the 195 territorial dioceses and exarchate, there is the Archdiocese for the Military Services, USA, which ministers to Catholics serving in the military or diplomatic corps and their dependents. Dioceses led by archbishops are called archdioceses. There are 32 archdioceses whose archbishops serve as the metropolitans of 32 Roman Catholic ecclesiastical provinces in the United States. The 33rd archdiocese (for the Military Services) is not a metropolitan see.
In addition to the 196 dioceses and exarchate whose bishops are members of the United States Conference of Catholic Bishops (USCCB), there are several other dioceses in the nation's commonwealth (i.e., in Puerto Rico, American Samoa, Guam, and the Northern Mariana Islands).
The United States Catholic population is mainly of the Latin rite, but eparchies and archeparchies of the Eastern Catholic Churches exist in the nation. These particular Churches are also organized into ecclesiastical provinces of their own or are exempt dioceses immediately subject to the Holy See.
Dioceses and archdioceses are normally named by the city in which the bishop or archbishop has his seat. The diocese may take in a much wider area: e.g., the Eparchy (Diocese) of Our Lady of Deliverance of Newark for Syrian Rite Catholics actually serves all Syrian Catholics in the entire United States and Canada; the Diocese of Albany serves not just the city of Albany, NY, but also the entire northeastern quarter of New York State.
All Eastern and Latin Catholic bishops from the United States and U. S. Virgin Islands   diocesan, coadjutor, and auxiliary   are members of the United States Conference of Catholic Bishops. Bishops from Puerto Rico form the Conferencia Episcopal Puertorriquena, while bishops in the overseas dependencies in the Pacific Ocean are members of the Episcopal Conference of the Pacific.
The Ecclesiastical Province of Anchorage comprises the state of Alaska.
The Ecclesiastical Province of Atlanta comprises the states of Georgia, North Carolina, and South Carolina.
The Ecclesiastical Province of Baltimore comprises all but five counties of the state of Maryland,Maryland is unusual in that fourteen of its 23 counties belong to dioceses whose see cities are outside Maryland: (1) the nine counties of Maryland's Eastern Shore (Delmarva Peninsula) are part of the Diocese of Wilmington  (Delaware) and (2) the five counties adjacent to the District of Columbia and in southern Maryland are part of the Archdiocese of Washington, which is a different province. Only the remaining nine counties and the City of Baltimore are part of the Archdiocese of Baltimore. See Ecclesiastical province#Provincial boundary lines. and all of the states of Delaware, Virginia, and West Virginia.
The Ecclesiastical Province of Boston comprises the states of Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, and Vermont.
The Ecclesiastical Province of Chicago comprises the state of Illinois.
The Ecclesiastical Province of Cincinnati comprises the state of Ohio.
The Ecclesiastical Province of Denver comprises the states of Colorado and Wyoming.
The Ecclesiastical Province of Detroit comprises the state of Michigan.
The Ecclesiastical Province of Dubuque comprises the state of Iowa.
The Ecclesiastical Province of Galveston-Houston comprises the eastern counties of the state of Texas.
The Ecclesiastical Province of Hartford comprises the states of Connecticut and Rhode Island, as well as a small portion of New York.See Ecclesiastical province#Provincial boundary lines.
The Ecclesiastical Province of Indianapolis comprises the state of Indiana.
The Ecclesiastical Province of Kansas City comprises the state of Kansas.
The Eccclesiastical Province of Los Angeles comprises the southern and central counties of the state of California.
The Ecclesiastical Province of Louisville comprises the states of Kentucky and Tennessee.
The Ecclesiastical Province of Miami comprises the state of Florida.
The Ecclesiastical Province of Milwaukee comprises the state of Wisconsin.
The Ecclesiastical Province of Mobile comprises the states of Alabama and Mississippi.
The Ecclesiastical Province of New Orleans comprises the state of Louisiana.
The Ecclesiastical Province of New York comprises the state of New York, except for a small portion that belongs to the Province of Hartford.
The Ecclesiastical Province of Newark comprises the state of New Jersey.
The Ecclesiastical Province of Oklahoma City comprises the states of Arkansas and Oklahoma.
The Ecclesiastical Province of Omaha comprises the state of Nebraska.
The Ecclesiastical Province of Philadelphia comprises the state of Pennsylvania.
The Ecclesiastical Province of Portland comprises the states of Idaho, Montana and Oregon.
The Ecclesiastical Province of Saint Louis comprises the state of Missouri.
The Ecclesiastical Province of Saint Paul and Minneapolis comprises the states of Minnesota, North Dakota and South Dakota.
The Ecclesiastical Province of San Antonio comprises the western counties of the state of Texas.
The Ecclesiastical Province of San Francisco comprises the northern counties of the state of California and all of the states of Hawaii, Nevada and Utah.
The Ecclesiastical Province of Santa Fe comprises the states of Arizona and New Mexico.
The Ecclesiastical Province of Seattle comprises the state of Washington.
The Ecclesiastical Province of Washington comprises the District of Columbia, five neighboring counties in Maryland, and the U.S. Virgin Islands.
The Ecclesistical Province of Agana comprises the United States overseas dependencies of Guam and the Northern Mariana Islands and the unorganized, unincorporated territory of Wake Island.  Also included are the sovereign and independent nations of the Marshall Islands, Micronesia, and Palau.
The Ecclesisatical Province of Samoa-Apia is foreign to the United States but however includes as a suffragan, a single diocese that comprises a United States overseas dependency, American Samoa.
The Ecclesiastical Province of San Juan de Puerto Rico comprises the United States Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.
The Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church in the United States is organized into a metropolia (or province) consisting of a metropolitan archeparchy and three suffragan eparchies.
The Ruthenian Catholic Church in the United States is organized into the ''sui iuris'' Province of Pittsburgh, consisting of a metropolitan archeparchy and three suffragen eparchies. The eparchies also serve the faithful of other Byzantine Rite Churches without established hierarchies in the United States.
The following eparchies and exarchate of the Eastern Catholic Churches do not have metropolitan sees in the United States to which they are subject, but are answerable to a patriarch, catholicos, major archbishop or metropolitan elsewhere.
Members of the Armed Forces of the United States and their dependents, employees of the U.S. Veterans Health Administration and its patients, and Americans in government service overseas, including the nation's diplomatic corps and their dependents     both Latin and Eastern     are served by the Archdiocese for the Military Services, USA, a non-metropolitan archdiocese (that is, without suffragan dioceses within a territorial province). It is led by an archbishop, who at present is assisted by three auxiliary bishops, and will have a fourth as of February 22, 2011. 