When researching the political party of a government official, is it acceptable to use public records as sources? The particular piece of information I am referring to contradicts an article by showing no party affiliation for the person in the state's public voter registration records, whereas at least one referenced source assigns a party to the individual. The main problem I have is that to put a reference in the article will necessarily reveal personal information about the individual (home address) which is not provided elsewhere that I've seen. It seems inappropriate to me, but the information is publicly available and didn't take me but 30 minutes to find.   ( ) 19:25, 21 December 2008 (UTC)
An editor added a section to the Chopra article that seems to be a personal observation. I tried three times to explain the problem to the editor who added it, and I moved the section to the Talk page for discussion. The editor fixed the problem with first person that I had also noted, and added two book titles -- and then reinserted the material, without discussion, and without addressing the NOR issue. It actually seems an apt observation, so is this something that should just be let go? I kind of wanted someone else's involvement or opinion. I'm reluctant to remove it again. Thanks.   ( ) 20:55, 2 January 2009 (UTC)
The first line of the article begins like this (or some variation thereof): 
I am suggesting that it is   to claim that the 2008-2009 Israel-Gaza conflict "refers to an Israeli military offensive."  The 2008-2009 Israel-Gaza conflict has been going on since Jan 1 2008 and did '''not begin''' with Operation Cast Lead. Many editors have tried to correct this by replacing "began" with "accelerated," "flare-up", "intensified" etc. but we are consistently reverted to "began" or "started." It is also true that there have been attempts to rename the article.  It is my contention that the article should not use "began" as long as it named the way it is. Until the name is changed to "Operation Cast Lead" or along those lines, we should use a word like "intensified" in place of "began" for accuracy. Comments please.
For some days now, I have tried explaining that the name "roof knocking" is a recent invention. I have been told by editors that this is OR. In fact, I cited the line, and the cite was removed with a  tag. I have restored, but before it becomes another lame edit war, I wanted a third opinion.
The lien in question:
Editors have removed the second reference, while leaving the first, alleging the second source doesn't directly support the claim. However, the first one doesn't support the claim either. Both have in common that the date published is the earliest date that can be found online for either phenomenon.
My point is, either both get removed as OR, or both stay. I would prefer both stay, as both pieces of information are important, and can be, using common sense, sourced. Comments?--  ( ) 04:39, 12 January 2009 (UTC)
I'm sure this has been discussed before, but what is the consensus on NOR as it applies to user-created maps? For example,   as used in Jell-O Belt and Mormon Corridor? What source states that those are the boundaries of said regions?   ( ) 15:15, 15 January 2009 (UTC)
What is the procedure for removing/correcting maps that do not accurately reflect their referenced sources?    ( ) 00:58, 16 January 2009 (UTC)
I'm trying to create a table of the National Conferences of a Social Fraternity. Lets say I have 3 sources that say that "The 23rd National Conference of XYZ was held in Boston on July 3-5, 1951", "The XYZ New York National Conference was held on July 1-3, 1952" and "Cleveland hosted the 25th National XYZ Conference in July 1953". 
Now I don't have a source that says that the Conference held in New York is the 24th National Conference even though it was proceeded by the 23rd and followed by the 25th, so in the table, would it be considered Original Research to put 24th in the box for the number of that Conference?  ( ) 14:32, 14 January 2009 (UTC)
We've got a heated dispute going on over at Discrimination against atheists regarding original research; one user is claiming that because he concludes something constitutes discrimination, that is sufficient to have Wikipedia say that it's discrimination. Examples include the British monarchy mandating the monarch be CofE constituting discrimination against atheists; one would think that if it were so obviously such discrimination, there would be at least one reliable source asserting such, not just his appeal to the dictionary. Or are the rest of us offbase? Serious   behavior as well. I'd just protect the article myself except I got involved. Extra eyes would be nice. --   15:55, 21 December 2008 (UTC)
We're having trouble with this article with an editor ((  ( ))) who seems to want to break   in order to break  . The issue is thus: Stuart Campbell has a verifiable involvement in the FairPlay campaign, to the extent of "supporter" and "spokesman". The FairPlay campaign encouraged a boycott of games buying in the UK during the first full week of December. The campaign website claims that there was a "big sales blip during the campaign week which saw Game, Europe's biggest videogame retailer, lose a massive 80% of its share value overnight in response to disappointing sales". It also claims "When the campaign was over, sales shot up again, just as we said they would".  Taking these claims at face value, they are all either false or unverifiable. Sales blip: Game's sales figures for the weeks surrounding the boycott are not available. 80% of share value lost overnight: verifiably false using historical share price information. And sales shooting up again: again, no sales figures are available.
It is true, however, that GAME did issue a profit warning on 17th December 2002. News articles ( ) blame this on a price war with Argos and Dixons. The share price did drop on this profit warning, which came on 17th December (just over a week after the end of the boycott). In order to get close to the "80% overnight" claim, we have to interpret "80%" as "70%", and "overnight" as "15 days". Now, ''obviously'', if we include this information and link it to the boycott, it would be synthesis ( ). What 83.67.217.135 wants to do is to include all this information in the section about the boycott, but not to ''explicitly'' link it to the boycott, which he considers not to be a breach of WP:OR. The other editors concerned in the debate all think that to mention one after the other like this ''implies'' a link. 83.67.217.135 thinks that this will allow the reader to determine for themselves the "notability" of the campaign. To read this debate, simply scroll to the bottom of the talk page for article in question.
It seems to me that the only reason to include information on a share price relating a claim made on a website for a campaign that the subject of the article is not particularly closely linked with, is to push the POV that the boycott was a success.
As can be seen from the history of the article, 83.67.217.135 considers himself the "owner" of the article, reverting others' changes whenever he disagrees with them, sometimes with an edit summary such as "what the fuck is wrong with you?". From the talk page you can see that he will not listen to other editors, considering himself to be the ultimate authority on what changes are allowed to be made. He has had to be warned about civility on several occasions (indeed, he has recently called me a liar, ignoring me when I show that what I have said is true).
Frustratingly, this debate would probably not be occurring if 83.67.217.135 would declare the   that he seems to have. He refuses to confirm his identity, or rule anything out. He has almost certainly used at least one sockpuppet on the talk page. With deference to  , examining his contributions reveal that he is almost entirely concerned with mentions of the name 'Stuart Campbell' on wikipedia. His writing style and way of treating people is recognisable from other websites. Yet this article cannot currently be changed without his say-so, as he will just revert the change.
All we really need is a few more than the 3 or 4 editors we currently have to come along and chat for a few minutes. Maybe you will all agree with him, but at least the debate will be resolved. Please do help - it could all be resolved so easily and quickly! Thank you.   ( ) 10:20, 7 January 2009 (UTC)
Reliable sources have identified Arab leaders, media, and personalities as saying the events in Gaza are a "massacre". Editors have felt that this is the generalized viewed as simple POV name for what the Israeli side calls the "Operation Cast Lead", and should be included in the lede and in the article itself as an important contrast to the name given by one side. Other editors have insisted on removing this sentence, and have raised concerns about POV, bias and Original Research, they have also removed content in the article itself that elaborates on the fact that this name is used. (as a note, the "Gaza massacre" is a redirect)
I find the POV/Bias arguments snowballable wrong: describing the ''opinion'' and ''name'' used by one side of a conflict is never POV unless we appear to support the actual name as if it were fact, which we don't.
While I think the sentence is very well-sourced, I do recognize a weakness I recognize: they do not explicitly refer to the "Gaza Massacre" but rather than "massacre in Gaza" or "massacre" and specifiying place somewhere else, etc. SOme editors opposed to the inclusion of the term argue that using the phrase "Gaza massacre" is OR because we are deriving a novel idea from the sources. I and others have argued this is an incorrect interpretation: the sources are unambigous int hat when "massacre" is used, it refers to the current events in Gaza, and not to another event. In case the "offending" sentence is removed from the version of the article you read, here is it in context at a  and in text (no context):
There are other issues I would like to raise regarding what I consider pointy allegations of original resarch, but this one would do for now. Please give us your perspective.--  ( ) 07:57, 9 January 2009 (UTC)
As Cerejota has acknowledged, none of the references refer to "The Gaza Massacre" as the Arabic Name for either the "conflict" or the "operation."    ( ) 00:28, 10 January 2009 (UTC)
Of course Hamas calls Israel's actions a "Massacre".  One of the interesting things about this particular round of Israeli-Palestinian conflict is the fact that ''both'' sides are much more media savy than they used to be... and both sides have become more expert at media manipulation. For example, both pro-Israeli and pro-Palestinian groups offer automatic "missle strike" counters that you can place on your MySpace page so you can keep track of how bad the "other side" is, and groups from both sides have learned to post videos on Youtube showing the damage that the other side is committing to all those "innocent people" (and not showing the damage their side does).  This is a war folks... and  media manipulation is just one more front in that war. The key for Wikipedia is to not be duped by either side... I think that, within the context of a neutral discussion media manipulation by ''both'' sides, it would be quite appropriate to mention that Hamas leaders use the term "Massacre" to describe Israel's actions.  Otherwise we should be skeptical of such words.   ( ) 22:04, 9 January 2009 (UTC)
Darwish, your list of references does NOT say what you claim it says.  What you are saying constitutes  .  The only time that your sources even capitalize "massacre" is when they use the word in a headline and then capitalize every main word.  The Arab speakers are quoted as calling the situation "a massacre" "a terrible massacre" etc.  At no time does anyone report that it is referred to as "''''''The Gaza Massacre'''''"  And finally, the context makes it clear that it is not NPOV to accuse Israel of a "massacre" without even allowing a justification from Israel in the same breath.  Basically what is being attempted here is to remove all of Israel's justification to the second paragraph, and to manage to call the situation a bolded capitalised '''Massacre''' in the first two defining sentences.  It goes against wiki   even if there ''were'' reliable sources to back it (which there are not).
This article has bothered me for awhile now.  There are many problems with it.  Barely anything is actually sourced, and most of the info is just users' opinions.  I don't think an acurate comparison like this is even possible under wikipedia's guidelines, so I'd say it's best if the article were removed.  Much like the article on racing games, I think this comparison is more of a "battle" between fans of a specific game, trying to show that their preferred simulation/game is a better simulation/game.
I hope I'm putting this in the right place, if not I'm sorry, and hopefully someone will quickly remove this and point me in the right direction.  If this is the right place, then please discuss and let me know what you think. --  ( ) 22:19, 16 January 2009 (UTC)
It has 62 references and claims that methanol has ethanol as an antidote, which is found in fruit juice and alcoholic beverages, and therefore prevents methanol poisoning.   ( ) 16:19, 22 January 2009 (UTC)
This has come up before, but is now coming up again.  At   there are claims that photos need sources.  My understanding is that " .  Which is it, photos need a source or no?    ( ) 20:55, 16 January 2009 (UTC)
I'm working on a hockey article for a league that doesn't directly report shut-outs for goaltenders as an aggregate statistic, however in the world of goaltenders its normally a fairly important statistic. The league does report the scores of the games and player stats from the games, so I don't think it would constitute original research to say "Goaltender X recorded 5 shutouts in Season Y". My question becomes this:
I wouldn't be saying anything that wasn't true, and that couldn't be verified, but the verification could be cumbersome as I might have to cite a dozen games to prove a single statement.--  ( ) 05:38, 26 January 2009 (UTC)
A dispute has arisen on the article Hamitic about the continued use of the term "Hamitic" as an ethnic identifier in the CIA Factbook (a book that has been determined to be an RS when raised several times on the RS noticeboard). One editor states that the reference is "OR" on the following grounds "neither the CIA nor another source talking about the CIA says that it's still in use; it's wiki editors personally 'reporting' that it is". In response to the assertion that all summaries of the content of RS's constitute wikipedia editors "personally reporting" the content of the source, the editor replies "It's OR. User is indeed personally reporting that "the CIA Factbook continues to uses  the term Hamitic as a specific ethnic identity"; CIA ref itself makes no such assertion; see WP:NOT#OR)" I can see nothing in the rules which state that this is a misuse of the source. The source lists information in the form of tables . Among these is a table which states "Ethnic groups: Hutu (Bantu) 85%, Tutsi (Hamitic) 14%, Twa (Pygmy) 1%, Europeans 3,000, South Asians 2,000". I do think that it can possibly be OR to state that "the CIA Factbook continues to use the term Hamitic as a specific ethnic identity", since this is indeed what the table asserts, in exactly the same way that it asserts that the Twa are "Pygmy" and that they constitute 1% of the population. The fact that it does not make the assertion in the form of a sentence, but in the form of a tabulation seems to me to be irrelevant. If it were not, all the content would be inadmissible. This eems to me to be a clear case of "wikilawyering". We need precedent here, otherwise it will be possible in future for editors to claim that any information in tabulation form "makes no such assertion; see WP:NOT#ORWP", and that the tabulation "Twa (Pygmy)" just constitutes the word Twa with the word Pygmy in brackets after it, not an "assertion" that the Twa are Pygmies. Tabulations that follow clear rules constitute statements made by the source, otherwise we are in for pointless rounds of dispute over tabulated sources with statistical and other information that editors don't like. OR should not be used as a tool to delete information one does not like. In my own view the CIA is being sloppy by using an obsolete term no longer considered useful by anthropologists, but that does not justify excluding the fact that the term continues to be used by a mainstream source.   ( ) 10:50, 5 January 2009 (UTC)
Violation of WP:NOR - Original analysis of graph that was beyond the capability of typical reader and may or may not be correct.}}
Would I be correct that it would be considered original research to in this article say that  shows that the number of new cases per week/month has remained similar since mid-November 2008?   ( ) 06:42, 29 January 2009 (UTC)
I have major OR concerns about this article.  For starts, the lead, which I moved to talk That  , I would appreciate people commenting on this talk specifically, and the article as a whole more generally.     |    20:51, 29 January 2009 (UTC)
A rather interesting set of original research that basically amounts to a prostitution travel guide. I don't even know where to begin in cleaning up this article. A bold hand and drastic chopping down is needed here.   ( ) 08:51, 31 January 2009 (UTC)
I've reverted what I see as synth here . It's a recurring problem, would appreciate a few extra pairs of eyes to look through before and after? Thanks! --  ( ) 13:02, 31 January 2009 (UTC)
Not a violation of   - Subject item contained no conclusion,  just two facts from two reliable sources that are put in the same sentence. But part of subject item was not supported by source and was corrected. }}
I may be missing something here or perhaps my interpretation of   should be more literal so I need to know if the following is indeed considered synthesis or if it is indeed allowed within the spirit of the policy.
This is true and verifiable, but another editor is citing synthesis because the flash passes haven't been specifically cited about this incident. The same editor resisted allowing New Year's Eve to be mentioned in the lede until it was pointed out that nearly all reports stated the national holiday as a part of the reporting. These trains don't normally run after midnight or so - the shooting occurred at 2:15am - and certainly aren't packed and overflowing after the evening work rush has ended. These "flash passes", issued and sold specifically for New Year's Eve allow users to pass through swing gates used to accommodate large crowds but I'm not stating any of this. Simply that in addition to extended hours these passes existed. Any insight appreciated.   14:09, 3 February 2009 (UTC)
Myself and   have been batting back and forth over some reference to the Obama inauguration and CJ Roberts use of "so help me god" for nearly 2 weeks now I think, where he wishes (or has wished) to include various statements to the effect that Roberts use of 'so help me god' was specifically phrased as a question, that this is different from every previous occasion, and that this might have been due to the Michael Newdow lawsuit. The specific problem comes down particularly to referencing a youtube video that contains audio of all the inaugurations since 1933, and whether this alone constitutes sufficient sourcing for the various statements and inferences that have been added and reverted or edited several times. The discussion between us (and an intervention by   is  . I'm basically wondering, am I being overly restrictive with regards to sourcing? I stand by the beleif that the inferences that previously been included were OR, but is what he's claiming self evident from the video and does that constitute enough of a basis to allow some of the statements to stand supported? - ''' ''' '' '' 01:40, 5 February 2009 (UTC)
I'm wondering if this statement is acceptable in an article on a very fringe area:
The last three words are being challenged.  The problem is that the source doesn't directly state "perpetual motion device".  However, the article is a straightforward claim of research toward perpetual motion.  Example from the link:''the system would run utilizing only the heat from the environment'', which is a claimed violation of the Second Law of Thermodynamics, equivalent to saying "will run perpetually" or "overcoming the second law". Per  , I would consider this reference directly supporting the text "perpetual motion device".  You may need a science background to appreciate the obviousness.  The trouble is that there are no other sources which discuss the activity of this organization (they fail notability), so does   give a bit of leeway to state the obvious?  The alternative seems to be not mentioning the organization since no RS exist (which some SPAs are fighting) or using the organization's own (biased, unclear) text, since that's the only source.   ( ) 11:09, 5 February 2009 (UTC)
To the average reader, it would suggest that people had voted for the "use of any and every means available" (ie - including war) to secure an Irish Republic. It then mentions the shooting of RIC members at Soloheadbeg, and that this is seen as the start of the war. So people voted for war, two RIC members were shot, and war began. However this omits key points about the incidents, and the selective quoting of the manifesto ignores what sources have actually said about the elections. Pat Muldowney's version implies that Sinn Fein had a mandate for an intended war, when this was not the case.
The incident at Soloheadbeg also omits key facts, one of which being that the two RIC men were shot and killed. It also omits that it was an action not sanctioned by Sinn Fein, the Dail, the IRA/Irish Volunteers or anyone else except the participants acting on their own initiative.
The version implies that Sinn Fein, the Dail, and the IRA/Irish Volunteers were all acting in unison, when this was not the case, even by their own admission;
Any request for sources to support their version is just met with their own opinions (at length), repeatedly claiming the manifesto itself is the only source needed, dismissal of any source provided that does not support their unique view of history. More eyes welcome.   ( ) 01:56, 6 February 2009 (UTC)
Part of an artist's notoriety is the amount of YouTube views he's received, this fact has been mentioned by many a reliable source.  However, all of those sources are (at best) a year old, and we'd like to update the statistic.  Can we go to the user's YouTube home page, compile the individual video hits listed, and cite that in the article with the updated number?  Part of me worries that that's original research or synthesis, but it seems reliable, and it would be cited to the original source of information.  Hence, I'm here.       ''' ''' |'''  ''' | 19:03, 5 February 2009 (UTC)
I have cited an article on the web that has not involved a peer-reviewed organization, and because of that, its validity is being challenged. While it appears to fall into the "original research" catagory, I wonder if the nature of the information there would nevertheless make it acceptable in certain contexts. The information is based on research into primary records, with conclusions based on that research. Although a bit complex in its reasoning (necessarily so), the core of the article is a pretty simple statement about immigration dates, family structure and associated geography. All sources are cited. I'd appreciate some comments about it. Apparently it's the only source of its type available for this family (the Warner Brothers of film fame, although the dispute is specifically at the Jack Warner bio page), and if it is deemed inadmissible, it leaves a part of the Jack Warner page with questionable credibility - in my opinion. I have raised the question of reliability of the other sources used at the "reliable sources" discussion page. The Benjamin Warner family article is at 
Ultimately this may be an issue of whether or not this part of the article is even needed, but that would be someone else's editing situation to deal with. I'd still like some input. Thank you!   ( ) 18:27, 7 February 2009 (UTC)
If I have a source that gives data like,
Is it original research, or otherwise forbidden, to merely add them, like,
Why aren't they?
And about this:
Is it OK?   ( ) 17:07, 4 February 2009 (UTC)
I see. The problem would be with the definition of "primary predators" and "secondary predators". I suppose a source would be needed to make the point that eagles and dogs are "secondary predators" - eaters of other animals - while the others are "primary predators" - eaters of plants. Is this how it works?
Anyway, I'm going to step from theory to practice. I have edited article White Brazilians to insert the following table:
Another user removed the "Portuguese+Brazilian" and "All Others" lines, arguing that they were not part of the table in the source (which is true). Was I wrong to insert the lines, which are merely an addition ("Portuguese+Brazilian" is the sum of the "Brazilian" and the "Portuguese" lines) and a subtraction ("All Others" is the difference betwee "Total" and "Portuguese+Brazilian")? Or is the other user wrong in suppressing them (and writing "Removing "Portuguese + Brazilian" category, because it's not even listed in the original resource (stop manipulating numbers" in the summary)?   ( ) 18:35, 4 February 2009 (UTC)
Well, the question about the total being more than 100% is answered in the article:
About why does the article need the subtotal, it brings to the main discussion between me and the other user. I have been maintaining that most White Brazilians are of Portuguese ancestry, while the other user thinks this is no longer the case. In general, "Brazilian" ancestry can be taken to mean, "of ancient, pre-independence Portuguese ancestry". If it is the case that there are more White Brazilians who report either "Brazilian" or "Portuguese" ancestry than the double of "All Other" ancestries, this would be strong evidence that most White Brazilians are indeed of Portuguese ancestry.   ( ) 20:37, 4 February 2009 (UTC)
Probably there are more non-White people of Portuguese descent than non-White people of Italian descent. This would explain more Italians in the first column and more Portuguese in the second.
Why Brazilian+Portuguese, and not Brazilians+Italians? Because people of "Brazilian" descent are of Portuguese ancestry, not of Italian ancestry.   ( ) 21:43, 4 February 2009 (UTC)
That there are multiple answers given by respondents makes ''any'' summing of the results meaningless.  OR or not, it's just misleading presentation to include those sums.   ( ) 22:15, 4 February 2009 (UTC)
I will try to fix the sources. But, then, most sources in that article are in Portuguese. If the sources I gave aren't valid because they are in Portuguese, then I suppose all sources in Portuguese are invalid? Should the information then be removed? Taged for "citation needed"? Or?   ( ) 00:50, 5 February 2009 (UTC)
About the math again. Only 39.97% of Brazilian Whites have reported ancestries different from both "Brazilian" and "Portuguese". This necessarily means that at least 100-39.97=60.03% have responded either "Brazilian", "Portuguese", or "Brazilian and Portuguese". Evidently, if there were double answers of the kind "Italian and Japanese", or "German and African", this would mean even more than 60.03% of Brazilian/Portuguese/Portuguese-Brazilian ancestries. If I'm wrong, please show me where, because I certainly am not seeing it.   ( ) 01:18, 5 February 2009 (UTC)
Many Americans claim to be of "American" ancestry, according to the American census. Nobody can assume they are of English ancestry. They can be German, Irish or Italian. The same goes for Brazilians.   ( ) 01:29, 5 February 2009 (UTC)
Those numbers come from the IBGE Pesquisa Mensal de Emprego (Monthly Employment Research) of July 1998. The IBGE is the Brazilian government's demographic office. The article linked is a paper by Professor Simon Schwartzmann, analysing the data. If this is unreliable, I don't know what would be called reliable.
Jayen, you will notice that while 2.2% of people who answered "Brazilian" in the closed question said "Italian" in the open one, still 85.71% answered again "Brazilian". And as we know that multiple answers were allowed in the closed question, it would be certainly possible, even probable, that those 2.2% had answered "Brazilian and Italian" in the closed question.
I would like to point that Opinoso's way to refer to me is a breach of  . Whether I'm right or wrong, I am certainly not "manipulating" anything. Moreover, I would like to recall that Opinoso has actually agreed that "most white Brazilians have Portuguese ancestry", as can be seen in the articles Talk Page:
So I wonder why he's making such a fight against an idea he knows and acknowledges is true.   ( ) 02:06, 5 February 2009 (UTC)
Moreover, even if I had writeen the "majority if Portuguese", you cannot use my personal opinion as a source. What I wrote in the talk page is my opinion and, different from you, I do not use my personal theories as source. Then, you cannot use my personal opinion as a source or theory to support your point of view.
Most white Brazilians do not have a single ancestry, like Ninguem is trying to claim it is "Portuguese". Most white Brazilians have multiple ancestries, which includes Portuguese, Italian, German, Spanish, and many other and, in many cases, non-white ancestry (chiefly African and Amerindian). Then, your obsession with a "pure" Portuguese ancestry is a complete nonse. That's why these "ancestry" census would never work in Brazil, since a person would have to choose multiple ancestry, that's why most people claimed to be only "Brazilian", rather than write "Portuguese, German, Ukrainian, African and Japanese".
Then, you cannot claim a person who choose "Brazilian" has any Portuguese ancestry. Moreover, cannot claim he/she is "pure Portuguese", since a full-blooded Portuguese in Brazil is very rare (they mixed a lot during our History).   ( ) 02:14, 5 February 2009 (UTC)
So, if I correctly understand, what I would need to do now is to prove that eagles and dogs are secondary predators, ie, that "Brazilian-Brazilians" are of Portuguese ancestry?   ( ) 02:20, 5 February 2009 (UTC)
Thank you. Oh, and back to predators, Wikipedia seems to acknowledge the distinction I made, though it calls them "primary consumers" and "secondary consumers". Here: Predator#Trophic_level. On the other hand, the article does not give sources for the classification. Should it have them?   ( ) 02:54, 5 February 2009 (UTC)
Jayen, could you take a look at  please, and tell me if it can be used in this context?   ( ) 03:08, 5 February 2009 (UTC)
The figure for the Spanish row was taken from the source cited, . There was no calculation of my part. The same goes for all the other rows. The only calculations I did were those that were suppressed by the other user.   ( ) 10:42, 5 February 2009 (UTC)
I think that if it is impossible to define what is a Brazilian of Italian (German, Spanish, etc) descent, then we should not give any figures for them. The only reasonably reliable figures are the numbers of immigrants arriving, and the population of 1872, before the immigration wave. The others are guesstimates.   ( ) 10:50, 5 February 2009 (UTC)
My impression is that you are calculating the percent of Brazilians of "Portuguese" or "Brazilian" descent that are white. In fact, these numbers suggest that 75% of Brazilians of "Portuguese" or "Brazilian" descent would be White if there were no intersection between the two groups.
But what I am trying to discuss is the percent of White Brazilians that are of either "Portuguese" or "Brazilian" descent.
The column "% of Total" isn't supposed to show the percent of people of each of these ancestries that are White, but the percent of the whole universe that is from each of those ancestries. For instance, the figure for "German" in that column is 3.54%; it does not mean that only 3.54% of people of German ancestry would be White, but rather that 3.54% of the whole universe, regardless of "race" would be of German descent (see, this is why "obviously White" ancestries such as German, Italian, and Spanish, have a higher figure in the left column, while "obviously non-White" ancestries, such as Black, Indigenous, or Japanese, show a higher figure in the right column: people of "German" descent are 5.51% of Whites, but only 3.54% of the universe; people of "Japanese" descent are only 0.62% of Whites, but more than twice that, 1.34%, of the universe, mainly because they are 70.79% of "Amarelos"). 
Thank you for your patience.   ( ) 00:00, 6 February 2009 (UTC)
Yes, that's correct. If, on the side of caution, we assume complete intersection, and, on the other hand, no intersection at all among all other ancestries, we would get a minimum of 83.11% "Portuguese", "Portuguese-Brazilian", and "Brazilian" ancestries, vs 39.97% of "All Others". Seems a significant difference. What remains to be done, now, is to substantiate my claim that a "Brazilian" ancestry actually means "remote Portuguese ancestry". This seems easier than it probably is; excessively obvious ideas tend to be underdocumented (how many sources state that the sky is blue? Probably not many, because few people would dispute it).
If you are interested, the overlap between "Brazilian" ancestry and the other categories can be assessed through Table 5. In it, each line stands for the % of people that have stated some other ancestry that have also stated "Brazilian" ancestry. For instance, 56.30% of people who reported "African" ancestry have also reported "Brazilian" ancestry.
Unhappily, it is not detailed by "race", so while we know that, say, 55% of people who reported "Spanish" ancestry have also reported "Brazilian" ancestry, we don't know how many of them consider themselves "White" or "non-White".   ( ) 17:04, 6 February 2009 (UTC)
I see... thank you for your patience and interest. If I may continue to disturb you about this issue, am I allowed to project the percents of the tables upon actual population, such as "the total population of Brazil is 170 million people; the percent of people of "Jewish origin" in this research is 0.20%; since 0.20% of 170 million is 340,000, it would seem that there are about 340,000 people of "Jewish origin" in Brazil"?   ( ) 20:51, 8 February 2009 (UTC)
Well, that was a massive research, with about 90,000 interviews. The problem is, it was conducted exclusively within metropolitan regions, which may differ, demographically, from the population at large. Evidently, results wouldn't differ too much, but still.
When I tried to inform that Germans (whose immigration was more rural) would be underrepresented, and Jews and Arabs (whose migration was more urban) would be overrepresented, the other user, in his sympathetic, agreeable, and charming style, reverted my edit. :(   ( ) 21:40, 8 February 2009 (UTC)
There is a dispute at   regarding whether or not the inclusion of the Boy Scout's Oath is OR or not. All input there would be much appreciated. Thanks! -  ( ) 19:02, 7 February 2009 (UTC)
In 1965 Israel Shahak claimed that someone had refused him the use of a telephone during a medial emergency, because it was the Sabbath. In 1966 Immanuel Jakobovits, later Chief Rabbi of the U.K., published an article stating that Shahak had fabricated the incident. The article on Shahak states exactly that, noting that it was an assertion by Jackobovits. However, an editor has now inserted the following argument into the article:  I've been removing the material, noting that this argument is one made only by a Wikipedia editor, not by the sources. In response, the editor has stated that ''WP:NOR doesn't say, "switch off your brain" - I made a perfectly reasonable clarification, since the sentence doesn't reflect the fact that there is no evidence to support the claims of Jakobovits.'' and ''I simply drew attention to the FACTS AS THEY ARE. That is not original research.'' I strongly disagree, since, in my view, the editor is clearly making an argument in order to discredit Jakobovits's claim. I've brought the issue here for additional views.    21:05, 8 February 2009 (UTC)
See for instance footnotes 51-61 in Moses - some of these are ok, others are claims that might easily be contended.Canaan has a number of similar footnotes.  I think this is inappropriate and makes it difficult for the reader and for editors who want to make it clear what claims need verifying, etc. Comments? Thanks. 09:40, 9 February 2009 (UTC)  ( )
Location of Aram seems very ORy, but discussion on the talk page has focused more on whether the Bible is used as a primary or a secondary source, which seems a bit off as that doesn't really matter if the editor synthesizes it to make a point, does it? Any input on the talk page appreciated.                  22:30, 10 February 2009 (UTC)
If you cite a quotation from an author's own work and the work's dedication - without drawing any inferences from it - is it considered   to do so?
Without going into the distasteful nature of the work:
Another editor argues that the citation at the end of that sentence should refer to sources on which comment on the book almost exclusively.
Given that the article is not about David Duke, but rather Israel Shahak, it seems to smell of coatracking to tag on sources which only refer to the article subject in passing.
So,
I see many examples of quotations from people such as Mark Twain or Shakespeare, where their own work (a primary source) is used as a reference for quotations.
Hi, editor removes  source requests from lead statements, and fails to provide sources -  . Editor was blocked for edit warring  before. What the correct action should be? --  ( ) 21:26, 12 February 2009 (UTC)
There is a disagreement at the Larry Sanger page over the description of Sanger as a "critic of Wikipedia". There are five different references  given for Sanger's criticism, as well as two other sources .
Are these references sufficient to justify the description of Sanger as a critic of Wikipedia? If so, how many references are appropriate in the lead to support the statement? (A half dozen references for such a straightforward statement strikes me as a bit silly.)   ( ) 16:59, 12 February 2009 (UTC)
This is an FA article so I don't want to charge in, but I can easily spot some OR. Look at the trial section for instance, the bit about demonstrating her intellect, the subtlety, etc. The last paragraph says "The twelve articles of accusation that summarize the court's finding contradict the already doctored court record" -- but it's referenced to the trial itself, a primary source, not to a reliable source making the claim. There's quite a bit more. Thanks.   ( ) 19:19, 15 February 2009 (UTC)
In the season one episode Solitary, Rousseau told Sayid that it was the Other's that infected her crewmembers with "the sickness" and claimed it made necessary that she execute them  in order to keep the disease from spreading to the outside world. In This Place Is Death, it was revealed that Rousseau's crew was not infected by the Others, but by whatever was inside the ancient Temple that Monstad was dragged into by the Smoke Monster. Why this change in continuity took place was not shown in the Enhanced version of the show.
For fans of the show LOST, this is a pretty major error in continuity on the show, as thru season 5, THE OTHERS and the SmokeMonster have not neccesarily been related.  Like many LOST fan's I noted it right away.  I did a few edits to it, which were turned back over the ORIGINAL RESEARCH when I was using Wikipedia's own episode summary's (which are taken generally from ABC.COM).  However, I wanted to see what would happen on the Enhanced version of the episode when they showed it in repeats a week later, to see if the creators of the show would comment on it (in ENHANCED Lost, during the repeat, there is a bar at the bottom of the screen where the show creators comment on things regarding the episode).  
During the enhanced version of the show, the show creators did not mention this change in continuity of the show, meaning either they did not catch this error either, or they approved the change in continuity from the OTHERS to the TEMPLE/SMOKEMONSTER.  
To try to keep Jackyboy from claiming I was using original research, I cited the direct episode summary for the show at ABC.COM, but he is still claiming it is original research when it clearly is not, as I am using the offical episode summary now from ABC.  
I'll pause to go to work and let Jacky say what he has to say here.  Thanks for the overview    ( ) 14:50, 19 February 2009 (UTC)
Uh...how is the offical ABC website's OFFICIAL episode summary not the absolute most Prime Source possible?  I can go to other lost pages and find them, but going to ABC.COM for the official episode summary should be the absolute gold standard here for a TV Show.   ( ) 14:57, 19 February 2009 (UTC)
I was wondering if  contituted Original Research? Could someone check them out please? It's rather beyond my knowledge of these matters. Thank you,  -  03:44, 20 February 2009 (UTC)
This is someone's personal theory for blending western and eastern zodiacs.  This was previously deleted - see  , and the editor has also added his theory to  Origins of the Chinese Zodiac (see this difference )   ( ) 15:59, 21 February 2009 (UTC)
This list has grown hugely unwieldy and now is full of broken links, unverifiable statistics (citing a list of faculty rather than anything claiming total affiliates), outdated information, dubious sources (like wikipedia itself), inconsistent procedures for inclusion/exclusion, and absolutely hideous non-MoS highlighting. It's used repeatedly on other university articles as a citation or a piped link/psuedo-citation. With such a classic case of synthesis run amok, where does one even begin?   ( ) 01:39, 24 February 2009 (UTC)
Hi I would like your advice or opinions on some text below, and would like to know is this an example of  . I   ve raised this issue on the  and place a tag on , but would like your opinions before I change the text.   
This suggests in my opinion, that the IRA burned all the homes of British loyalists in revenge for the burning of two republicans homes. However the source says ''"Some of those burnings were reprisals for the destruction of houses like O   Mahony   s of Belrose, Tom Tom Kelleher   s of Crowhill, '''and others which the Essex destroyed''' a few hours after they had captured and released me'' ." 
The Barry quote is also misrepresented, it suggests in my opinion that the price exacted was the burning of all the homes of British loyalists, however the actual quote  "''The value of those homes''  ''would total approximately three thousand pounds, but the I.R.A. exacted a heavy price in return, and destroyed property of active British supporters valued at least one hundred thousand pounds''" suggests that the heavy price referred to was financial, and did not say "''the homes of British loyalists''" but said "''active British supporters''." 
Should you require any additional quotes please just let me know? Thanks, -- '' '' 16:57, 10 February 2009 (UTC)
I do think that the statements ''are'' unsupported by the source. For example linking "The IRA extracted a heavy price" and the burning of the homes, the heavy price referred to was financial. Therefore I do think you can have   even with only one source. I would not however consider "the burning of two republicans' homes" and leaving out the "and others" as  , that's just very bad citing. I do think that the use of "British loyalists" in place of "active British supporters" in the context of the articles subject matter is very bad indeed. I agree though that some other editors comments would be welcome, so thanks for that  , regards -- '' '' 22:53, 10 February 2009 (UTC)
Is this: 'In an interview in The Wall Street Journal, the interviewer wondered why "most of the press  under the impression that Rick Warren, a Southern Baptist,  so different from, say, Focus on the Family president James Dobson?" Warren said that "it's a matter of tone" and, according to the interviewer, seemed "unable to name any particular theological issues on which he and Mr. Dobson disagreed."' a synthesis / Original Research or not and can it be added into Rick Warren article? Issue is being discussed here:     ( ) 06:24, 26 February 2009 (UTC)
I am having problems with both   and   (who, perhaps inadvertently, helped the former circumvent the  ) in List of space agencies. They keep adding the Mexican Space Agency to the list when the agency has '''never''' existed; it is just contemplated in an initiative still being discussed at the Mexican Congress. I've provided plenty of evidence at   (which is mostly in Spanish, because the agency doesn't exist yet) but he keeps insisting that 1. It was created by a vote in the Senate (which is ridiculous) and 2. They have gone as far as providing an "official logo" (which is an amateurish draw found at a fan's website) and a "date of foundation" in the Spanish Wikipedia ( ). -   ( ) 08:43, 26 February 2009 (UTC)
Could editors with some interest in resolving issues of original research take a look at Benjamin Lucraft?  The article appears to have a number of problems, but I think they mostly stem from original research.  A look at the edit history reveals this edit summary, explaining the creation of the article: "I now want to publish my prepared work and can only find this way to do so."  Thanks,   ( ) 16:59, 10 February 2009 (UTC)
A well known fact in the scientific community is that the basic constituent particles of matter are the proton,neutron,and electron.
Also,every individual electron produces its own electromagnetic field as it orbits the atom and or molecule.
Atoms and or molecules,(mass),in the far reaches of outer space experience no,or minimal effects from the magnetic fields produced from  large bodies,stars,planets,moons,etc.,are affected minimally,electromagnetically,thus the electrons orbiting said mass are being
I am here asking for assistance not to complain about anyone. The following article Hala Sultan Tekke contains this section Significance, following are my reservations on this section:
I know in wikipedia we can edit any section of any article if we find out that it is in violation with any of the above policies, but the thing is   is insisting on having all of those violations, and refused all of my edits.
Now let us move to the other part of reservations of the contents of the section:
I want to add one important thing, I am not saying that Islam is the only correct thing in this world, all what I am saying is that: If there is a holy site in Islam then Islam through it   s designated channels (Qoran and/or Hadith) should indicate to the holiness of this place, or at least through reliable Islamic scholars and through reliable and verifiable Islamic resources, not through unreliable and unverifiable NON MUSLIM scholars and books. This is my main point. The usage of reliable Islamic sources in the context of the holiness of this site is not available in this section whatsoever.
Last, I want to tell you that I was trying my best to solve this issue without asking for assistance but with no use as the same user is insisting on the usage of his unreliable sources.
The required assistance is: How best I should handle this issue, I thought of nominating this section to deletion but there is no such process at wiki, could you please assist me here.
Looking forward to hearing your feedback. And please forgive me for the long thread. 
P.S. This thread is posted at   as well.   ( ) 09:08, 1 March 2009 (UTC)
Are summaries of books Original Research? Regarding a, say, 500 page work, should Wikipedia rely on Wikipedia editors to accurately summarize the important points in the book, or should they instead rely on what secondary sources (i.e. book reviews) say?    02:43, 3 March 2009 (UTC)
This short article is about an event celebrated by the Nation of Islam to honour its founder Wallace Fard Muhammad. I have been reverting additions to the page by   in which LF wants to inform readers that the NOI's spelling is incorrect because they have misplaced the apostrophe.  LF's edits had previously been removed by another user . While I strongly believe that LF's comments are inappropriate, might there be a better and less ORish form of words? The matter is complicated because NOI doctrine apparently accepts that more than one 'saviour' has existed.   ( ) 08:51, 5 March 2009 (UTC)
Hey, several users and I have been having a dispute with another user, who claims that this article  claims that it states that India and Italy are economic great powers. However, he's getting it from this line, '''"The only other states of comparable economic size are Italy and perhaps India"''', however, the full line says '''"The only other states of comparable economic size are Italy and perhaps India, neither of which has the global outlook or military strength to qualify as a great power."'''. If we added India and Italy as economic great powers according to this source, wouldn't that be OR or SYN?   ( ) 03:37, 6 March 2009 (UTC)
Sor some time I periodically removed various unreferenced and how-to stuff from articles like bong etc., only it to pop up elsewhere. Today I see that this is not just some random pot smokers share their skills: it looks like  a concerted effort to turn wikipedia into a vehicle for publicshing various stuff because, citing "''. Any researcher thinks twice before publishing any positive information about cannabis''", see   and the surrounds, which was reaction to my deletion of yet anouther batch of original research. I would suggest to set up a temporary task force to put the whole subject under control and ensure strict enforcement of  , as it is done in some other topics, prone to creeping propagation of dubious stuff, such as List of ethnic slurs. - 7-bub  n   03:47, 10 March 2009 (UTC)
An editor insists that his "decades of experience" justifies the inclusion of discussion of an unrelated lawsuit against a client of the Burke Group, though neither the cited source nor the underlying primary court opinion mentions The Burke Group.   ( ) 15:01, 25 February 2009 (UTC)
Editor is adding discussion of a lawsuit that neither mentions The Burke Group or has anything to do with any of the Burke Group's activities to The Burke Group article. I argue that it is   and  ; I still can't figure out why the other editor thinks it's policy-compliant.   ( ) 15:46, 9 March 2009 (UTC)
Hi, recently I had some edits reverted based on unspecified claims of 'OR'. 
The passage is .
I should note that I opened a section on the GAO87 report that is mentioned over on  . To try to find out if the GAO87 is considered RS or not. I apologize for the overlapping subject matter but I seem to have had the book thrown at me and I am trying to find out what is 'actual' wikipedia policy. Thank you.   ( ) 04:43, 10 March 2009 (UTC)