The '''Liancourt Rocks dispute''' is a territorial dispute between the Republic of Korea (South Korea) and Japan.
Currently both the Republic of Korea (ROK)  and Japan claim sovereignty over Liancourt Rocks, a group of small islets in the Sea of Japan (East Sea). North Korea supports South Korea's claim.
Although claimed by both Korea and Japan, Liancourt Rocks have been administered by the Republic of Korea since 1954 by stationing ROK forces, which action was taken after the United States stated that the Japanese claim to the Liancourt Rocks would not be renounced in the peace treaty (the Rusk documents or Rusk-Yang correspondence of 1951). In 1954, Japan proposed to ROK a reference to the International Court of Justice; the ROK rejected the proposal.
There are conflicting interpretations about the state of sovereignty over the islets in pre-modern times. Korean claims are partly based on references to a Korean island called ''Usan-do'' (      ,          /         ) in various historical records, geographies, maps, and encyclopedia such as ''Samguk Sagi'', ''Annals of Joseon Dynasty'', ''Dongguk Yeoji Seungnam'', and ''Dongguk munhon bigo''. According to the Korean view, these refer to today's Liancourt Rocks, while the Japanese views variously argue that they refer to either Juksoe (             ; Korean Jukdo or Dae'soem), Kwanumdo (         ,          ,       ; Korean Seommok, G'aksae), Ulleungdo, or a non-existent island.
Researchers disagree on who first had administrative control over the islets due to ambiguities in early historical records and maps, partly due to changes in the names of the islands in the area over the years.
Samguk Sagi (''History of Three Kingdoms'') recorded that in 512, the 13th reign year of King Jijeung of Silla, one of the Three Kingdoms of Korea, Gen. Isabu conquered the State of Usan (Usan-guk), whence it submitted yearly tributes to the Silla court. Usan-guk had been an independent kingdom based on Ulleung Island (Ulleungdo). Samguk Sagi mentions that Usan State is also called Ulleung Island.
The Taejong-Sillok (            , Annals of King Taejong) recorded that "60 people were living on Yusan-guk-do (                   , Yusan-state-island). According to a 1417 government report, there were 86 yusando inhabitants as of 1412. Yusan-guk's diameter was 2shik (24km), and its circumference is eight 8shik (96km)."
The 1417 report is as follows:
Although the Korean government claims that Usando is the Liancourt Rocks, it is impossible for one to survive at Liancourt Rocks without outside assistance, and bamboo does not grow there. It appears more likely that Usando is Jukdo, which is still inhabited, and the name of which literally means Bamboo Island (      ).
The ''Sejong-Sillok'' (            , "Chronicle of King Sejong", 1432) mentions Usando,Korea.net (1999   2006).. Retrieved 9 January, 2006 but interpretation of the context is disputed. The text is interpreted as follows: "Usando (                   ) and Mureungdo (                   , a former name of Ulleungdo), in the sea due east of Uljin Prefecture, are close enough to each other to be mutually visible in clear weather". South Korea insists that this constitutes clear evidence that Usan-do refers to the Liancourt Rocks, the only island that is visible from Ulleungdo only in clear weather. Japan, however, holds that the latter part as "come into view from mainland Korea," believing that it refers instead to Jukdo, located two kilometers east of Ulleungdo. "                                                                                                                                                                                                       (When the Korean topography records in the Joseon dynasty described islands, it was regulated to write the direction from the local government and the distance from the land.) See .                                      by Prof. Shimojyo. South Korea counters that interpretation as out-of-context, since the text includes        "the two islands" and     "the other, mutually," which seems to disregard Japan's interpretation.
The ''Dong'guk yeoji seungnam'' (                  , "Augmented Geography Survey of the Eastern Nation (Korea)", 1481) defining Korea's territory, stated that "Usando and Ulleungdo are under the jurisdiction of Uljin-hyeon of Gangwon-do as an administrative unit. However, it also mentions that the tree and the beach could be clearly seen on a fine day. The 1531 revision of this book includes the   ("Map of the Eight Provinces"), showing two separate islands of Usan-do and Ulleung-do in the middle of the Sea of Japan. Usando is drawn to the ''west'' of Ulleungdo (The Liancourt rocks are actually located ''south'' of Ulleungdo).
From the early fifteenth century to the aftermath of the Japanese invasions of Korea (1592-1598), the Joseon court was unable and unwilling to maintain a civilian population on either Ulleungdo or Usando. According to the ''Taejong Sillok'' ("Annals of King Taejong"), the mainland government forcibly evacuated the islands during Taejong's reign, in accordance with the "vacant island policy". Thus, the islets were only occasionally populated by permanent settlers up to the seventeenth century; a permanent population existed only on Ulleungdo. Following the war, the islands were completely vacated.
As this report was compiled from a Japanese geographical perspective, Matsushima (the closer island) refers to Liancourt Rocks and Takeshima (the farther island) refers to Ulleungdo.
In 1695 the Shogunate inquired of the Tottori clan (Shimane Prefecture) if Takeshima (Ulleungdo) and "Matsushima" (possibly Jukdo or Liancourt Rocks) were part of either Imbashu or Hoki districts, where the Oyas and Murakawas of Yonago resided.
The Shogunate inquired:
The Tottori (Shimane) replied:
Korean historical sources state that the administrator of Tokugawa shogunate reaffirmed in January 1696 that Ulleungdo and Dokdo belonged to Korea, quoting An Yong-bok's testimony.
After the An Yong-bok incident and the Kanpaku's reconfirmation of Korea's title to Ullungdo and Tokdo around the end of the 17th century, no documentary records of the period showed Japan's claim to these two islands."
On his first trip to Japan in 1693, An Yong-Bok stayed in Tottori from June 1 to June 7; he met with four officers of the Tottori feudal government. On his second trip to Japan in 1696, An again stayed in Tottori from June 21 to some time before August 6; the Tottori hanshu was away from Tottori to Edo from June 23 to July 19. Contacts between Tottori officers and An clearly existed, and the Tottori feudal lord was not away for the whole period of An's stay in Tottori. The dispute between Chosun Korea and Tokugawa Japan about the ownership of Ulleung-do ignited when Korean fishermen clashed with Japanese fishermen in Ulleungdo waters in 1692. The following year, An Yong-Bok and Park Eo-dun, representing Korean fishing communities, are variously said to have visited, drifted, or even been abducted by Japanese fishermen, arriving at Oki island in 1693. Taking this occasion, An discussed territorial title matters with a Japanese governmental official, reminding him that Ulleungdo and Jasando (         ,           sic; a scribal corruption of Usan-do          /         ) are Korean territory. As a result, the bakufu issued prohibitions banning Japanese fishermen from travelling to Ulleng-do. This is called the First An Yong-bok incident.
An, on being released from a two-year exile on charges of traveling to a foreign country without permission, made a second trip to Japan together with a group of Koreans from Dongnae and other maritime regions in 1696 with documents and a map to reconfirm his initial claim during the first confrontation, which had come under suspicion by the Korean government due to the Tsushima clan's delaying Edo's orders to notify the Korean government of Japan's prohibition to travel to Ulleungdo. Aware of the severe punishment which the Edo government would certainly pass on the Tsushima lord, Tsushima expedited Edo's decision to nullify "Permission to cross to Takeshima (Ulleund-do)" to the Korean government, which Edo had been withholding until An's visit. Although Japan did not mention Matsushima (Liancourt Rocks) on the prohibition papers, no Japanese could legitimately travel to either Takeshima or Matsushima until the end of the bakufu period.
In Feb 1697, the Korean government decided to reject Tsushima clan's request to emend a previous letter that mentioned Korea's Ulleungdo, and that An Yong-Bok's visit to Japan to raise a legal case did not require a written response from Korea since the Royal Court had no foreknowledge. These facts were to be conveyed to the Tsushima envoy's house informally: "An was an unenlightened subject who got thrown about by a storm. If he executed something, it had not been known by the Joseon Royal Court."
In March, 1699, the Korean government made a formal communication in writing that An was punished for submitting a legal case against the governor of Hokishu to the Edo government without authorisation from the Korean government."
Although the Border Defense Command demanded capital punishment, King Sukjong commuted An's sentence to exile in positive consideration of his successful negotiations with the Edo government that resulted in the "prohibition of all Japanese travelling to Korea for fishing, harvesting, and lumbering for eternity".
A Japanese scholar of practical science, Hayashi Shihei, published "Map of Three Adjoining Countries" (                  ) in his work "Sangoku Tsuran Zusetsu" in 1785, which showed each country in distinct colours; Joseon (old name of Korea) in yellow, Japan in green. In the map, Ulleungdo and an island to its northeast were marked "As Korean territories (               )".  The name of the larger island was given as "      ", the current name of Ulleungdo then in Japan. According to Korean scholars, the islands to the northeast of Ulleungdo represent the Liancourt Rocks, and thus proves Liancourt belonged to Korea at the time. According to Japanese scholars, neither of these conclusions are necessary or even probable, as the Liancourt Rocks are located southeast of Ulleungdo.
Usando is displayed on the cartographs made by Chong Sang-gi (1678~1752);   (1822), and   (by Kim Tae-gon, 1821   1846), Usando is displayed. Japanese believe it to be Jukdo, noting the distance, shape, size, and direction., whlie Koreans believe it to be Liancourt and they said that Usando was a former name of Liancourt.
In 2011, Usando is found on the Kim Jeong-ho's ''Daedong Yeojido''. 
On March 20, 1877, the Japanese Supreme Council Daijo-kan issued an order
Korea claims that "another island" (         ) besides Ulleungdo refers to Liancourt Rocks 
The distance given here is in ri (   ,   ,   ) There were two forms of ri used at this time in Japan. One was a standard ri of 4km (Used for land measurements). It was used in the circumference of Ulleungdo in this document (10     = 40km). The other was a nautical ri or nautical mile which equalled 1.852 meters. Nautical     or miles are/were used in international law and treaties especially regarding the limit of territorial waters. There can be no doubt given the location, name, and description the island referred to in this document was today  s Dokdo.
The ratio of the real distances in kilometers and the distances in     on the 1877 document are about the same.
On October 25, 1900, Korea issued Imperial Decree No. 41, which included the following administrative actions.
The decree was published in Official Gazette No. 1716 (          1716   ) on Oct 27 and distributed to the international community, including Imperial Japan, with representations in Seoul.
This decree states that Ulleungdo be renamed to Uldo (mod. Ulleungdo), and that the county hall shall govern Ulleungdo, Jukdo, and '''Seokdo'''.
 and that there is no record that proves the effective occupation by Korea before Japanese Cabinet decision of Jan 28, 1905. Korea claims that the island "Seokdo" mentioned in this document is Liancourt Rocks, and thus Liancourt Rocks was still officially part of Korea as an ancient territory since 512. Korea presents evidence that Koreans living on Ulleungdo referred to Liancourt Rocks as Dokseom (or Dolseom; literally "rocky island") in speech and Dokdo        in writing as a phonetic transcription (             , umdok;                        on-yomi), while the name "Seokdo"        ("rocky island") in the Ordinance was an instance of logographic translation (      ,       , hundok;                        kun-yomi).
Korea also claims Liancourt Rocks was effectively managed by seasonal fishermen and divers in recent times 
The Japan-Korea Protocol of 1904 signed between Japan and Korea on February 23, 1904 (Korean                ,                , Han'il uijongso; Japanese                , Nikkan Giteisho) stipulates in article 3 that Japan shall guarantee the territorial integrity of Korea. It further stipulates in article 4 that, in case the territorial integrity of Korea is endangered by aggression of a third power, Korea shall give full facilities to promote the action of Japan, and that Japan may occupy, when the circumstances require, such places as may be necessary for strategic reasons.
Article 4 of the treaty has been quoted as giving Japan full authorisation in terms of international law in taking Liancourt Rocks as a strategic surveillance point during the Russo-Japanese War.
Article 3, however, has been quoted as preventing Japan from appropriating Liancourt Rocks post bellum, and hence ruling the 1905 Shimane incorporation illegal after the end of the war.
The imperial government of Japan incorporated Liancourt Rocks as a result of a Cabinet decision in early 1905. Three motives are commonly cited for this decision: civilian occupation of said islets by a Japanese citizen from Oki, Nakai Yozaburo (                                         ; 1864   1934), practical necessities arising from the armed conflict with Russia, and Japan's foreign policy regarding Korea as its western frontier to fend off encroaching foreign powers. The incorporation was conducted incognito to foreign nations, including Korea, as the decision had never been announced by the central government to the international community. The Korean response to reports of the verbal notice by a local Japanese official were shock and disbelief, and orders were issued to investigate the truth of the report. While the result of the investigation is obscured in silence, apparently lending momentum to the Japanese claim, the Japanese Resident-General residing in Seoul, in 1906, makes an inquiry into which islands are administered by Ulleungdo (sic.), in the older designation prior to the 1900 Korean Imperial Decree No 40, to which the Internal Ministry relays facts consistent with the 1900 Imperial Decree No 41, to wit Uldo County administers Uldo proper, Jukdo, and Seokdo.
An officer of the Ministry of Home Affairs considered it unwise to incorporate Liancourt Rocks, as it was suspected to be Korean territory, but the Navy and the Foreign Ministry advised incorporation would be profitable, and that there would arise no diplomatic repercussions.
The Japanese government's official view has evolved since 1905. On Jan 28, 1905, the Cabinet reached a decision to incorporate Liancourt Rocks (                                                ), on grounds that it had been ''terra nullius'' under international law:
Professor Kim Myung-Ki summarises: "The Japanese government stated on Feb 10, 1954, that Japan announcing  prior occupation of territory ... has satisfied the requisite conditions under international law,"
MOFA of Korea, Tokdo kwan'gye charyojip (Collection of Data on Tokdo) (I) Wangbok oegyio munso (Diplomatic Correspondence Exchanged); Chipmu charyo (Reference Material for Staff), (Seoul: MFA, 1997), p. 55
From 1947 to 1954, the Japanese government's claim shifted from ''prior occupation of a terra nullius'' to ''effective occupation'' by "executing state intention to acquire territory".
Not later than 1962, Japan again shifted its claim to ''" reconfirmation of title to an inherent/ancient territory"'', all based on Japan's changing interpretation of the same Cabinet decision document, all the while carefully avoiding its previous claim of incorporation on grounds of ''prior occupation of a terra nullius''.
Korea also claims that Japan's 1905 claim to terra nullius conflicts with its previous recognition (i.e., the 1877 Daijo-kan order) of the islets as  Korean territory.
Japan claims to have enforced its Cabinet decision of Jan 28, 1905 to incorporate the islets as part of Shimane Prefecture (         ) in Shimane Prefectural Notice No. 40 of Feb 22, 1905 (                  40   ) .
The incorporation came in the heat of the Russo-Japanese War and before the Eulsa Treaty of November 17, 1905, when Korea became Japan's protectorate. A temporary watchtower was erected on the islets for anti-Russian surveillance purposes, which was demolished after Japan's victory in the war.
Japanese claims the incorporation was legitimate in that Korea did not dispute the incorporation when the news was published. Korea claims the incorporation was invalid in that the Feb 24 San-in Shimbun report lacked official status as its circulation was limited to the Shimane prefectural region. Korea claims neither the decision of the Japanese Cabinet, the order of Ministry of Home Affairs, nor the Shimane Notice had been announced to the Korean government until March 28, 1906. Many Japanese, including petitioner Nakai Yozaburo (               ), and certain governmental officials believed the title of Liancourt Rocks belonged to Korea.
On that date, a party of 44 officials from Shimane Prefecture visited Ulleungdo. The Japanese officials, including Kanda Yoshitaro, travelled to Ulleungdo by way of Dokdo, and informed Sim Heung-taek, then Magistrate of Ulleungdo, that the rocks had been incorporated into Japan.
According to Korean historians, Sim immediately contacted Yi Myeong-nae, then Governor of Gangwon Province. Yi then forwarded the report to the State Council Minister of the Korean Empire. State Council Minister Bak Je-sun, in Directive No. 3 issued on May 20, 1906, stated, "It is totally groundless that Dokdo has become Japanese territory," and went on to order "an investigation and report on the situation and on what the Japanese have done."
A curious inquiry and reply are exchanged between Japanese and Korean officials, the result of which is reported in the July 13 edition of Hwangseong Shinmun. In the letter, says the report, the Japanese Resident-General asks which islands are administered by Ulleung Island. The Korean Home Ministry simply lists the same islands as in the 1900 Decree specifying Seokdo, which Korea claims to be Liancourt Rocks. It also adds a physical measurement of what is believed to be Ulleung Island.
The Japanese inquiry is not current with the 1900 Korean Decree in its inaccurate designation of place names and offices, while the Korean reply remains silent on the ''rumour'' of incorporation of Liancourt Rocks of which it had not been officially notified. The details of the reasons for the Resident-General's inquiry and the Korean government's judgement regarding the inquiry are not known.
Yoo, Mirim, ''op. cit.'' Jun 30, 2008.
 Although Hwangseong Shinmun had clearly declared that rumours of the Japanese incorporation of Liancourt Rocks were baseless two months before the July communication, and although the July communication reminded the Resident-General, Itou Hirobumi, of the 1900 Imperial Decree reaffirming Korea's state authority over Liancourt Rocks, there is no evidence that the then Resident-General or any other representation of Imperial Japan raised a formal objection to it.
In a memorial speech at the first anniversary of the 1919 March 1st Movement, Prime Minister Yi Dongnyeong accused Japanese government of illegal incorporation of Liancourt Rocks of 1905.
The recent dispute stems largely from conflicting interpretations of whether Japan's renunciation of sovereignty over its occupied territories after World War II included the Liancourt Rocks.
Supreme Commander of the Allied Powers   of January 29, 1946, listed the Liancourt Rocks, along with many other islands, as part of those territories over which Japanese administration was to be suspended.
The   and   drafts, made on Dec 29, 1949, and Aug 7, 1950, respectively, ruled that Liancourt Rocks belonged to Japan.
Finally, the U.K. agreed to the US version of the treaty excluding the islands of Quelpart, Port Hamilton and Dagelet from Japan.
During the discussions in Washington, the British agreed to drop this proposal when the U.S. pointed to the psychological disadvantages of seeming to fence Japan in by a continuous line around Japan. The Japanese had objected to the British proposal when it was discussed with them in Tokyo. U.S. willingness to specify in the treaty that Korean territory included Quelpart, Port Hamilton and Dagelet also helped to persuade the British.
Korea claims that its territorial title to Liancourt Rocks was returned to Korea with the surrender of Japan which was enforced by Supreme Commander for Allied Powers' prohibitions suspending Japanese access to within  from said island 
US recognition of this format of treaty was Japan recovered full sovereignty under article 1 except islands which were excluded from Japan by name.
Both countries submitted petitions and documents to persuade the Allied Powers to rule Liancourt Rocks in their favour. The Japanese government's Foreign Office submitted a series of documents, issued from November 1946 to June 1947, entitled ''Minor Islands Adjacent to Japan Proper; Parts I-IV'', of which ''Part IV, Minor Islands in the Pacific, Minor Islands in the Sea of Japan'' described Utsuryo-shima (Ulleungdo) and Take-shima (Dokdo, Liancourt Rocks) as Japanese territory.
Many of these claims, regardless of their historical verity, and without critical historical review, were emphasised by William J. Sebald, the then political advisor for SCAP in Tokyo, which eventually had a strong formative influence on the position maintained by the Diplomatic Section of SCAP and the US State Department regarding the territorial aspect of the Peace Treaty.
Educated neither as an historian nor a geographer,  went on to build on this early investigation supporting the Japanese claim in a work called ''                                 '',              , ISBN 4-7722-1856-4, May 1966,             ;                    for the Japanese Ministry of Foreign Affairs published in 1966, in which he said:
Adherents including , , and Gerry Bevers have presented arguments building on Kawakami's arguments. Recent studies by numerous Korean and Japanese scholars such as Baek In-ki (         ), Shim Mun-bo (         ), Yu Mirim (         ), Lee Han-key (         ), Wada Haruki             , and Jeong Taeman (         ) have disproved many of the claims.
A corresponding Korean effort came from a private organization self-styled "Patriotic Old Men's Association" led by a former military leader of the Korean Government in Exile, Cho Sung Hwan, on August 5, 1948, ten days before the inauguration of the South Korean government.
To erase any doubts, Hodge unceremoniously dumped Yo, explaining 'There is only one government in South Korea     the United States Army Military Government.'20"
They petitioned for the sovereignty of Docksum (Liancourt Rocks), Ullung Do, Tsushima and Parang islands 
The document's clear identification of Liancourt Rocks with "Docksum" in the Korean vernacular language is curiously ignored by William Sebald, whose office relayed a facsimile copy to the US State Department. The document is unique in its logical treatment of Liancourt Rocks as an appendage or dependency  to Ulleung Is as can be seen in the statement: "these variously named island was the very island 'Ulneungdo'"  although some scholars believe the prerequisite to unity theory needs a qualification before it can be applied to the case of Liancourt Rocks.
The US designated Liancourt Rocks as a bombing range ( ), and notified Japanese government on September 16, 1947. On June 8, 1948, twenty-nine US B-29 bombers from Kadena, Okinawa, flew over Liancourt Rocks in a bombing exercise dropping seventy-six bombs causing civilian casualties.
Transactions of the Royal Asiatic Society - Korea Branch, Vol. 78 (2003), pp. 21-33.
International Journal of Korean History, Vol. 4, (August 2003), pp. 261-278.
The South Korean government announced 16 civilians were killed by the US military drill, higher estimates run up to twenty times that figure, i.e. 320.
One researcher estimates damages somewhere between 30 and 80 fishing boats and civilian deaths between 30 and 100.
On Aug 10, 1951, a secret correspondence currently known as Rusk documents was sent to South Korea communicating the then U.S. position on issues of territorial sovereignty in the Peace Treaty explaining why the US believed Liancourt Rocks were Japanese territory: ''"his normally uninhabited rock formation was according to our information never treated as part of Korea and, since about 1905, has been under the jurisdiction of the Oki Islands Branch Office of Shimane Prefecture of Japan. The island does not appear ever before to have been claimed by Korea."''
On January 18, 1952, South Korea, a non-signatory state to the San Francisco Peace Treaty, announced the Presidential Declaration of Sovereignty over Adjacent Seas (Peace Line, Rhee Line) including Liancourt Rocks within Korean territory along the expiring MacArthur Line (SCAPIN#1033; June 22, 1946 - April 1952) before the Peace Treaty came into force on April 28.
On July 18, 1952, South Korea issued a presidential order to seize all illegal foreign vessels engaging in fishing in breach of the Peace Line.
On May 23, 1952, in a Foreign Affairs committee meeting held in the House of Representatives, Ishihara, Vice-minister of Foreigner Affairs acknowledged MOFA's intention regarding the designation of Liancourt Rocks as bombing range for Occupation Forces in response to a question raised by Yamamoto, a Diet member from the Shimane constituency: "'' help Japan get confirmation of its territorial sovereignty over the island.''" 
In response to the bombing incident, the US Embassy to Japan in Tokyo transmitted a message including the following on October 3, 1952, to the US State Department, ''"The history of these rocks has been reviewed more than once by the Department, and does not need extensive recounting here.  The rocks, which are fertile seal breeding grounds, were at one time part of the Kingdom of Korea. They were, of course, annexed together with the remaining territory of Korea when Japan extended its Empire over the former Korean State... There exists a fair chance that... American bombs may cause loss of life... which will bring the Korean efforts to recapture these islands into more prominent play, and may involve the United States unhappily in the implications of that effort."'' 
Finally, US government kept the understanding of Rusk notes, and  , ''"The Embassy has taken note of the statement contained in the Ministry's Note that 'Dokdo Island (Liancourt Rocks) .....is a part of the territory of the Republic of Korea.' The United States Government's understanding of the territorial status of this island was stated in assistant Secretary dated August 10, 1951."'' .
On Dec 9, 1953, the US Secretary of State John Foster Dulles cabled the American Embassy in Tokyo, ''"US view re Takeshima is simply that of one of many signatories to the treaty. The U.S. is not obligated to 'protect Japan' from Korean "pretensions" to Dokdo, and that such an idea cannot...be considered as a legitimate claim for US action under the U.S.-Japan security treaty.""''
In 1954, James Van Fleet, a US special mission ambassador, submitted a secret report to U.S. President Dwight Eisenhower after a round of visits to South Korea, Japan, Taiwan, and the Philippines. The Report of Van Fleet mission to the Far East summarised: ''"he United States concluded that they remained under Japanese sovereignty and the Island was not included among the Islands that Japan released from its ownership under the Peace Treaty ... Though the United States considers that the islands are Japanese territory, we have declined to interfere in the dispute.""''
In September 1954 and March 1962, Japan proposed to South Korea that the dispute be referred to the International Court of Justice. South Korea has rejected the proposal.
On November 17, 1954, Japanese Embassy Minister Shigenobu Shima asked William Sebald, the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Far Eastern Affairs, and Mr. R. B. Finn, Officer in Charge of Japanese Affairs at the State Department, Washington D.C., whether the U.S. would support Japan in the Security Council if it submitted the dispute with the ROK over Liancourt Rocks.
William Sebald responded, "I have personally followed this controversy over a long period of time... although Japan is free to do as it thought best in presenting its case, the Security Council would probably want to see that all bilateral efforts have been exhausted before hearing the case."
He added, "It seems that the ROK will not submit to ICJ arbitration regardless of Security Council action." Sebald added, "It is important for Japan to keep its claim alive and not to permit its rights to be prejudiced by default... A note to the ROK or other periodic formal statements would serve this purpose." 
When Embassy Minister Shigenobu Shima asked whether this constituted US recognition of the validity of Japan  s claim, Sebald responded, "US relations with the ROK had recently improved," noting, "The US-ROK Mututal Defense Treaty is being brought into force on November 17...The general understanding had been agreed to in Seoul."
The current U.S. government stands on a neutral position on this issue.
On April 15, 2006, President Roh Moo-hyun of South Korea announced a special dialog about Korea   Japan relation, that demanded Japanese government's actions following the apology of Japan about previous colonization of Korea.
In the dialog, he said 'Dokdo is Korean territory, not an ordinary Korean territory, but Korean territory which had been carved with bitter grief. Dokdo is the first Korean territory which was deprived of when Japan colonized Korea. Japan occupied the land for the battles during Russo-Japanese war'. And he expressed that Japanese claim for Dokdo means a pursuit of the right for the occupied land by imperial invasion, hence the claim for a previous colony. He stated that Dokdo is a symbol of the recovery of Korean sovereignty.
S. Korean President Takes Tough Stand on Japan |publisher=Ohmynews |date=2006-04-25 }} This address is related to Japanese plan for maritime survey around Liancourt Rocks.
Japan argues that as it would be undertaking the survey in its own claimed EEZ, it feels there was no need to obtain South Korea's consent and that announcing its intentions was a simple courtesy. South Korea said it would arrest Japanese Coast Guard survey boats if they began to survey in South Korea's claimed zone. To back up its threat, it dispatched 20 gunboats to the area to conduct high seas seizure drills.
 In July 2006, the South Korean government sent a research ship to collect data on currents around the Liancourt Rocks and stated "research is just an act based on sovereignty". On July 5, the research vessel, followed by a South Korean escort ship, entered the area.
On July 14, 2008, South Korea temporarily recalled its ambassador to Japan,
Prime Minister Han Seung-soo expressed strong dissatisfaction for Japan's Education Ministry.
South Korea rejected a Japanese offer for a bilateral meeting on the sidelines of the annual ASEAN  regional security summit in Singapore.
The same change that classified Liancourt Rocks as Undesignated Sovereignty in the BGN database was reversed on July 30 under the order of U.S. President George W. Bush, once again marking the status of Liancourt Rocks under South Korean control.