The '''Diacria quadrangle''' is one of a series of 30 quadrangle maps of Mars used by the United States Geological Survey (USGS) Astrogeology Research Program. The quadrangle is located in the northwestern portion of Mars    western hemisphere and covers 180   to 240   east longitude (120   to 180   west longitude) and 30   to 65   north latitude. The quadrangle uses a Lambert conformal conic projection at a nominal scale of 1:5,000,000 (1:5M). The Diacria quadrangle is also referred to as MC-2 (Mars Chart-2).
The southern and northern borders of the Diacria quadrangle are approximately 3,065&nbsp;km and 1,500&nbsp;km wide, respectively. The north to south distance is about 2,050&nbsp;km (slightly less than the length of Greenland). The quadrangle covers an approximate area of 4.9 million square km, or a little over 3% of Mars    surface area. The Phoenix Lander   s landing site (68.22   N, 234.25   E) lies about 186&nbsp;km north of the northeastern quarter of the Diacria quadrangle. The landscape viewed by the Phoenix lander is probably representative of a large portion of the terrain in the northern Diacria quadrangle.
Diacria is the name of a telescopic albedo feature located at 48   N and 190   E on Mars. The feature was named by Greek astronomer E. M. Antoniadi in 1930 after a highland area in northern Attica, Greece. The name was approved by the International Astronomical Union (IAU) in 1958.
The Diacria quadrangle is located at the northwestern edge of the Tharsis volcanic plateau. Topographic, volcanic, and tectonic features associated with the large volcanoes Olympus Mons (south of map area) and Alba Mons (east of map area) characterize the southeastern and east central portions of the quadrangle.
The northern and western areas of the quadrangle lie in the northern lowland plains of Mars and cover portions of Amazonis Planitia (in the south), Arcadia Planitia (west central) and Vastitas Borealis (in the north). The large crater Milankovic (118.4&nbsp;km in diameter) is located in the north central portion of the quadrangle at 54.7   N, 213.3   E.
Elevation data from the Mars Orbital Laser Altimeter (MOLA) instrument on the Mars Global Surveyor spacecraft shows that the regional terrain slopes gently downward to the northwest, with the highest elevation about 3.5&nbsp;km (3,500 m) above datum (Mars    sea level   ) on the western flank of the Alba Mons volcano in the southeastern portion of the quadrangle. The lowest points in the quadrangle are about 4.5&nbsp;km below datum (-4,500 m) in Vastitas Borealis in the northwest corner. The regional relief is thus about 8&nbsp;km, but at a local scale, slopes are very shallow; the portion of Amazonis Planitia in the south central part of the quadrangle contains some of the flattest terrain on the entire planet.
Unlike some other places visited on Mars with landers (''Viking'' and ''Pathfinder''), nearly all the rocks near ''Phoenix'' are small. For about as far as the camera can see, the land is flat, but shaped into polygons between 2   3 meters in diameter and are bounded by troughs that are 20&nbsp;cm to 50&nbsp;cm deep. These shapes are due to ice in the soil expanding and contracting due to major temperature changes. The microscope showed that the soil on top of the polygons is composed of flat particles (probably a type of clay) and rounded particles. Also, unlike other places visited on Mars, the site has no ripples or dunes. Ice is present a few inches below the surface in the middle of the polygons, and along its edges, the ice is at least 8&nbsp;inches deep. When the ice is exposed to the Martian atmosphere it slowly sublimates. Some dust devils were observed.
Image:Phoenix_Sol_0_horizon.jpg| Comparison between polygons photographed by ''Phoenix'' on Mars...
Image:PSP 008301 2480 cut a.jpg | ... and as photographed (in false color) from Mars orbit...
Image:Patterned_ground_devon_island.jpg | ... with patterned ground on Devon Island in the Canadian Arctic, on Earth.
The western flank of the Alba Mons volcano makes up the eastern and southeastern edge of the quadrangle. In terms of area, Alba Mons (formerly, Alba Patera) is the largest volcanic feature on Mars. The flank has a very low slope (l   or less) and is characterized by lava flows and an outwardly radiating array of ridges and channels. Some of the channels have a drainage pattern that resembles that formed by rain water on the slopes of terrestrial volcanoes. However, many other channels on the flanks of Alba Mons were clearly formed by flowing lava.
The western flank of the volcano also contains some NW-SE trending grabens (Cyane Fossae). An image from High Resolution Imaging Science Experiment (HiRISE) on the Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter (MRO) beautifully shows a line of rimless pit craters in Cyane Fossae. The pits may have formed by the collapse of surface materials into open fractures created as magma intruded the subsurface rock to form dikes.
Image:Cyane Fossae.JPG|Cyane Fossae, as seen by HiRISE.  More information can be found under Fossa (geology).
Image: PSP 003370 2140 RED abrowse.jpg|Pit craters in Cyane Fossae, as seen by HiRISE.
Near the southeast corner of the quadrangle (37   N, 225   E) lies a southward sloping, semicircular block of ancient, heavily cratered, highland crust that is dissected by numerous, arcuate troughs (Acheron Fossae). The troughs are grabens, structures formed when the crust moves downward between two faults. Grabens form in areas where the crust has undergone extensional stress.The Acheron Fossae region is partially covered by volcanic deposits from Alba Mons in the east, geologically young basaltic lava flows or sediments in the west and southeast, and the jumbled, furrowed terrain of Lycus Sulci in the south.
Image:Acheron Fossae Crater.JPG|Acheron Fossae Dissected Crater, as seen by HiRISE.  Part of eroded floor is shown in image.
Image:Acheron Fossae.JPG|Acheron Fossae, as seen by HiRISE.  Scale bar is 1000 meters long.  Click on image to see dark slope streaks.
Lycus Sulci (24.6   N, 219   E) is the name applied to the northwestern portion of a larger terrain feature that partially encircles Olympus Mons and extends up to 750&nbsp;km from the giant shield volcano   s base. This feature, called the Olympus Mons aureole, consists of several large lobes and has a distinctive corrugated or grooved surface texture. East of Olympus Mons, the aureole is partially covered by lava flows, but where it is exposed it goes by different names (Gigas Sulci, for example).The origin of the aureole remains debated, but it was likely formed by huge landslides or gravity-driven thrust sheets that sloughed off the edges of the Olympus Mons shield.
Westward from Lycus Sulci, across the flat plains of Amazonis Planitia, lies an elongated region of knobby terrain called Erebus Montes (Erebus Mountains). The region contains hundreds of clustered to isolated hillocks that stand 500 to 1,000 m above the surrounding plains. The presence of numerous partly filled    ghost    craters in the area indicates that the hills represent the high-standing remnants of ancient highland crust that was inundated by lava flows and (possibly) alluvial sediments from Tharsis in the southeast and the Elysium volcanic province to the west.
North and east of the Erebus Montes are low-lying plains that characterize a large part of the Diacria Quadrangle and of the martian northern hemisphere in general.
Medium resolution Mariner 9 and Viking spacecraft images from the 1970s show that large portions of Arcadia Planitia have an overall mottled (blotchy light and dark) appearance. At higher resolution, landforms commonly consist of lobate flow fronts; small channel segments; wrinkle ridges; pedestal craters; and low, isolated volcano-like hills with summit craters. MOLA images reveal numerous large, shallowly buried craters, suggesting that an old cratered surface lies under a layer of younger material.
At the resolution of the Mars Orbital Camera (MOC) on the Mars Global Surveyor spacecraft (around several m per pixel), much of the northern plains has a distinctly stippled, pitted texture that causes the ground to resemble the surface of a basketball or orange rind. This texture is likely caused by a mantle of ice and dust covering the landscape. The small hollows and pits formed as the ice evaporated (sublimed).
The geologic history and origin of the northern plains are complex and still poorly understood. Many of the landforms resemble periglacial features seen on Earth, such as moraines, ice-wedged polygons, and pingos. Arcadia Planitia and Vastitas Borealis likely consist of a hodgepodge of old lava flows, ice-related features, and reworked sediments of diverse origin. Some theorize that the northern plains were once covered by oceans or large lakes.
Image:Arcadia Planitia Texture.jpg|Surface texture of northern Arcadia Planitia at high resolution.
Image:Scandia Colles.jpg|HiRISE image of Scandia Colles. Note the "basketball" texture caused by mantle of dust over surface.
A study reported in the journal Science in September 2009, shows that some newly formed craters have excavated clean, water ice from just below the surface in five locations on Mars. After a short time, the ice disappears, subliming into the atmosphere.  The ice is only a few feet deep.  The ice was confirmed with the Compact Imaging Spectrometer (CRISM) onboard the Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter (MRO).  The ice was found in a total of 5 locations.  One of the locations (Site 5) is in the Diacria quadrangle at about 46   N, 182   E (Arcadia Planitia).  
This discovery is significant because it shows the presence of subsurface ice at latitudes further south than expected and proves that future colonists on Mars will be able to obtain water from a wide variety of locations.  The ice can be dug up, melted, then taken apart to provide fresh oxygen and hydrogen for rocket fuel.  Hydrogen is the powerful fuel used by the space shuttle main engines
Many places on Mars show '''dark streaks on steep slopes''', such as crater walls.  It seems that the youngest streaks are dark and they become lighter with age.  Often they begin as a small narrow spot then widen and extend downhill for hundreds of meters.  Several ideas have been advanced to explain the streaks. Some involve water, or even the growth of organisms.   The streaks appear in areas covered with dust.  Much of the Martian surface is covered with dust because at more or less regular intervals dust settles out of the atmosphere covering everything.  We know a lot about this dust because the solar panels of Mars rovers get covered with dust.  The power of the Rovers has been saved many times by the wind, in the form of dust devils, that have cleared the panels and boosted the power.  So we know that dust falls from the atmosphere frequently.
It is most generally accepted that the streaks represent avalanches of dust.  Streaks appear in areas covered with dust.  When a thin layer of dust is removed, the underlying surface appears dark.  Much of the Martian surface is covered with dust.  Dust storms are frequent, especially when the spring season begins in the southern hemisphere.  At that time, Mars is 40% closer to the sun.  The orbit of Mars is much more elliptical then the Earth's.  That is the difference between the farthest point from the sun and the closest point to the sun is very great for Mars, but only slight for the Earth.  Also, every few years, the entire planet is engulfed in a global dust storm.  When NASA's Mariner 9 craft arrived there, nothing could be seen through the dust storm.  Other global dust storms have also been observed, since that time.  Dark streaks can be seen in some of the images below.
Image:Dark streaks in Diacria.JPG|Dark streaks in Diacria, as seen by Mars Global Surveyor.  When they age, streaks get lighter in color.
Image:Acheron Fossae.JPG|Acheron Fossae, as seen by HiRISE.  Scale bar is 1000 meters long.  Click on image to see dark slope streaks
Large portions of the martian surface are blanketed with bright reddish-ochre dust. The dust particles are typically less than 40 micrometres in size and are composed of iron oxide minerals. Data from the Thermal Emission Spectrometer (TES) on the Mars Global Surveyor spacecraft has allowed planetary scientists to estimate the amount of dust cover for broad swaths of the planet. In general, the Diacria quadrangle is extremely dusty, particularly in Arcadia Planitia and the region around the flank of Alba Mons and the Olympus Mons aureole in the southeastern portion of the quadrangle. A few large patches of relatively low dust cover occur in Amazonis Planitia and in the northwest corner of the quadrangle.
Many areas on Mars, including the Diacria quadrangle, experience the passage of giant dust devils.  When a dust devil goes by it blows away the coating of dust and exposes the underlying dark surface.  Dust devils have been seen from the ground and high overhead from orbit.  They have even blown the dust off of the solar panels of the two Rovers on Mars, thereby greatly extending their lives.  The twin Rovers were designed to last for 3 months, instead they have lasted more than six years and are still going.  The pattern of the tracks have been shown to change every few months.
Image:Milankovic Crater.jpg|Milankovic Crater central area, as seen by HiRISE.  Click on image to see more deatils: dark dunes, beautiful dust devil tracks, and boulders (small bright dots).