In his youth, Williamson developed an interest in comic strips, particularly Alex Raymond's ''Flash Gordon''. He took art classes at Burne Hogarth's Cartoonists and Illustrators School, there befriending future cartoonists Wally Wood and Roy Krenkel, who introduced him to the work of illustrators who had influenced adventure strips. Before long, he was working professionally in the comics industry. His most notable works include his science-fiction/heroic fantasy art for EC Comics in the 1950s, on titles including ''Weird Science'' and ''Weird Fantasy''. 
In the 1960s, he gained recognition for continuing Raymond's illustrative tradition with his work on the ''Flash Gordon'' comic-book series, and was a seminal contributor to the Warren Publishing's black-and-white horror comics magazines ''Creepy'' and ''Eerie''. Williamson spent most of the 1970s working on his own credited strip, another Raymond creation, ''Secret Agent X-9''. The following decade, he became known for his work adapting ''Star Wars'' films to comic books and newspaper strips. From the mid-1980s to 2003, he was primarily active as an inker, mainly on Marvel Comics superhero titles starring such characters as Daredevil, Spider-Man, and Spider-Girl.
Williamson is known for his collaborations with a group of artists including Frank Frazetta, Roy Krenkel, Angelo Torres, and George Woodbridge, which was affectionately known as the "Fleagle Gang". Williamson has been cited as a stylistic influence on a number of younger artists, and encouraged many, helping such newcomers as Berni Wrightson and Mike Kaluta break into the business. He has won several industry awards, and six career-retrospective books about him have been published since 1998. Living in Pennsylvania with his wife Corina, Williamson retired in his seventies.
Williamson was inducted into the Will Eisner Comic Book Hall of Fame in 2000.
During this period Williamson met his main stylistic influence, Raymond: "I had just turned 18. I had been in the business about six months or so. He gave me about two hours."
From 1949 to 1951, Williamson worked on science-fiction and Western stories for publishers such as American Comics Group (AGC), Avon Publications, Fawcett Comics, Standard Comics, and, possibly, Toby Press. He began collaborating with Frank Frazetta, who often inked his work; and with Roy Krenkel, who often did backgrounds. Examples of his work from that period include "Chief Victorio's Last Stand", in Avon's ''Chief Victorio's Apache Massacre'' (no number, no month, 1951); "Death in Deep Space", in Magazine Enterprises' ''Jet'' #4 (no month, 1951); and "Skull of the Sorcerer", in ACG's ''Forbidden Worlds'' #3 (Dec. 1951), inked by Wally Wood
In 1952, upon the suggestion of artists Wally Wood and Joe Orlando, Williamson began working for EC Comics, an influential comic book company with a reputation for quality artists. While at EC, Williamson frequently collaborated with fellow artists Frank Frazetta, Roy Krenkel and Angelo Torres, a group which, along with Nick Meglin and George Woodbridge, became affectionately known as the "Fleagle Gang", named after a notorious criminal gang.  Williamson primarily worked on EC's science fiction comics ''Weird Science'', ''Weird Fantasy'', and ''Weird Science-Fantasy'', illustrating both original stories, primarily by writer Al Feldstein, and adaptations of stories by authors such as Ray Bradbury and Harlan Ellison, but his work occasionally appeared in EC's horror and crime comics as well.
Williamson worked at EC through 1956 until the cancellation of most of the company's line. Williamson's EC art has been lauded for its illustrative flamboyance, evident in such stories as "I, Rocket", in ''Weird Fantasy'' #20 (Aug. 1953), co-penciled and co-inked with Frank Frazetta; and "50 Girls 50", in ''Weird Science'' #20 (Aug. 1953), co-inked by Williamson and Frazetta. His final published EC story was the 10-page "A Question of Time", in ''Shock Illustrated'' #2 (Feb. 1956) with partial inking by Torres, who put his initials on last page.
 With Mayo, one of the first editors to give Williamson work, at Standard Comics, Williamson collaborated on the jungle girl series ''Jann of the Jungle'' #16&ndash;17 (April & June 1957). Following Mayo's death, Williamson drew stories solo for the planned #18, but the series was abruptly canceled before that issue could be published. His "prolific though somewhat uneven two-year stint at Atlas",Strauss, pp. 11&ndash;12 where he first drew war comics, yielded superlative art in such stories as "The City That Time Forgot", in ''Marvel Tales'' #144 (March 1956); "Menace from the Stars", in ''Mystery Tales'' #44 (Aug. 1956); "The Unknown Ones", in ''Astonishing'' #57 (Jan. 1957); "Dreadnaught", in ''Navy Tales'' #2 (March 1957); and "Helpless", in ''Battle'' #55 (Nov. 1957). While "something appeared to be missing from a lot of his Atlas work: enthusiasm," Williamson's Atlas Westerns, at least, "form a strongly consistent body of work, characterized by minimal to nonexistent action, a preponderance of closeups and reaction shots, and well-defined figures set against sparse backgrounds."
It was at Harvey Comics that writer Archie Goodwin, upon Williamson's recommendation, landed his first comic-book writing job. Goodwin would collaborate with Williamson on several projects over the next few decades.
Williamson's work during this decade was his most prolific in terms of comic book work and has garnered considerable praise for its high quality. He has been noted for his perfectionism and love for the medium. Despite its high reputation, it has been remarked that his artwork of this period can at times be uneven and uninspired. Williamson was single during this period and was said to have a bohemian and undisciplined lifestyle.Van Hise, ''The Art of Al Williamson'', p. 45
He returned to comics in 1965 doing one story each in Gold Key Comics' ''Ripley's Believe It or Not'' #1 (June 1965), ''The Twilight Zone'' #12 (Aug. 1965), and ''Boris Karloff Tales of Mystery'' #11 (Sept. 1965), and helped launch Warren Publishing's black-and-white horror-comics magazines ''Creepy'' and ''Eerie'' with several stories in early issue, while also contributing to Warren's war comics magazine ''Blazing Combat''. He was instrumental in recruiting other former EC Comics artists as Frazetta, Krenkel, Torres, Crandall, and Evans, as well as artist Gray Morrow and writer-editor Archie Goodwin.
Williamson also helped assemble the first major book on Alex Raymond's ''Flash Gordon'', published by Nostalgia Press in 1967, and wrote the introduction. In 1969, Wally Wood's alternative-press comic book ''witzend'' #1 published Williamson's "Savage World", a 1956 story originally drawn for a Buster Crabbe comic book that had been cancelled.  With significant contributions by Frazetta, Krenkel, and Torres, the story is a prime sample of the "Fleagle Gang" style and has since been reprinted by Marvel Comics (in the black-and-white comics magazine ''Unknown Worlds of Science Fiction'' #1, January 1975), Pacific Comics and Kitchen Sink Press. Wood would later write the script for a three-page story drawn by Williamson, "The Tube", in another alternative-press comic, publisher Flo Steinberg's ''Big Apple Comix'' (1975).
By the end of the decade, Williamson was beginning to encourage younger artists whom he would meet at comic book conventions, helping Berni Wrightson to break into the business.
He drew a few more stories for Gold Key Comics, in ''Grimm's Ghost Stories'' #5 & 8 (Aug. 1972, March 1973), and ''The Twilight Zone'' #51 (Aug. 1973), as well two mystery stories for DC Comics, in ''The Witching Hour'' #14 (May 1971), with inker Carlos Garzon, and ''House of Mystery'' #185 (April 1970), with Mike Kaluta, another artist whom he helped break into the field, assisting him. He also drew various Flash Gordon illustrations. In the burgeoning fan movement, Williamson became an early subject of comics historians with the publication of Jim Vadebonceour's ''Al Williamson: His Works'' in 1971 and the "Al Williamson Collector" by James Van Hise, featured in the fanzine ''Rocket's Blast Comicollector'' in the early 1970s. Samples of his sketches alsoappear in various fanzines of the period. Marvel Comics began regularly reprinting Williamson's 1950 Atlas Comics Western stories, starting with ''The Ringo Kid'' #1 (Jan. 1970) and ''Kid Colt, Outlaw'' #147 (June 1970), further introducing Williamson's early work to a latter-day generation.
After leaving the Secret Agent Corrigan daily strip, he illustrated ''The Empire Strikes Back'' for Marvel's ''Star Wars'' movie adaptations (with Carlos Garzon), as well as the 50th issue of the monthly ''Star Wars'' comic. Williamson was Lucasfilms' first choice as illustrator for the ''Star Wars'' newspaper comic strip, a project Williamson had been offered years earlier but had declined to take on at the time. He was offered the ''Empire Strikes Back'' adaptation upon Lucasfilm's specific request, as George Lucas had an appreciation of Williamson's EC Comics and Flash Gordon work. Writer Archie Goodwin cited "the comfort of knowing that I would be working with Al Williamson, an old friend that I've worked with over the years. He was absolutely the best ''Star Wars'' artist you could ever want to have. That makes it easier because you feel that whatever you do as a writer, you have an artist that will make it look great. He's also an artist that Lucasfilm kind of begged and pleaded for and always wanted to have do ''Star Wars'' material. There was that comfort factor in it as well."
A comic book adaptation of the Dino De Laurentiis' film, ''Flash Gordon,'' written by Bruce Jones and illustrated by Al Williamson, was released by Western Publishing in both hardcover and softcover formats to coincide with the film's release. A photograph of actor Sam J. Jones, who played Flash Gordon, was pasted into the original cover art. It was serialized in three issues of Whitman's Flash Gordon comic book, #31-33, March   May, 1981. Alden McWilliams inked the backgrounds for the last 25 pages.  According to Williamson, "It was the hardest job I ever had to do in my life." He then began drawing the ''Star Wars'' comic strip following Alfredo Alcala's tenure, with Goodwin writing.  He drew the daily and Sunday feature until 1983, when the strip was canceled.  Williamson's daily strips on this series were completely reprinted in Russ Cochran's three-volume slipcase edition in 1991.
Returning to comic books full-time for the first time since 1959, Williamson began work for Pacific Comics, collaborating with writer Bruce Jones for the ''Alien Worlds'' title (#1, 4, 8), and "Cliff Hanger", a six-issue adventure-strip backup feature in the ''Somerset Holmes'' miniseries. For Marvel, he illustrated the '' '' and ''Return of the Jedi'' movie adaptations.  The two Archie Goodwin stories he illustrated for ''Epic Illustrated'' ("Relic" in issue #27, 1984; and "Out of Phase", in #34, 1986) have been considered to be some of his finest work. He drew a short story for ''Time Spirits'' #4 and the full issue of ''Star Wars'' #98. For DC Comics, he penciled and inked an eight-page story by Elliot S. Maggin for ''Superman'' #400 (Oct. 1984) and he inked Rick Veitch on the classic, oft reprinted Alan Moore Superman/Swamp Thing story "The Jungle Line" in DC Comics Presents #85 (Sept. 1985).
In the mid 1980s, Williamson made a successful transition to becoming strictly an inker, beginning with DC Comics (inking Curt Swan on ''Superman'' #408&ndash;416) and moving to Marvel where he inked such pencillers such as John Romita Jr., Gene Colan, John Buscema, Rick Leonardi, Pat Oliffe, Mike Mignola, Lee Weeks, and many others.  John Romita, Sr., Marvel's art director during that time, considered Williamson to be "one of the best pencillers in the world but he really can't make a living at penciling because he wants to do these beautifully pencilled pages with ample time to do them. That's why Al is inking now ... and adding a greater dimension to the penciller he's working with." He won nine industry awards for Best Inker between 1988 and 1997.
In 1995, Marvel released a two-part ''Flash Gordon'' miniseries written by Mark Schultz and drawn by Williamson, which was his last major work doing both pencils and inks. Also with Schultz, he illustrated the short story "One Last Job" for ''Dark Horse Presents'' #120 in 1997. In 1999, he drew the ''Flash Gordon'' character a final time when regular cartoonist Jim Keefe asked for his help on a ''Flash Gordon'' Sunday page.
Since 1998, there have been six career retrospective books published (see "Further Reading" section).  Williamson cooperated with their production, with the exception of the books from Pure Imagination. He was interviewed for the 2003 Frank Frazetta documentary ''Painting with Fire'', along with fellow surviving "Fleagle Gang" members Angelo Torres and Nick Meglin. In 2009, a Williamson illustrated Sub-Mariner story written by Schultz and dedicated to Sub-Mariner creator Bill Everett was published. The story itself was originally drawn ten years previously. Williamson also illustrated a "Xenozoic Tales" story written by Schultz that remains unpublished.
Living in Pennsylvania with his wife Corina, Williamson retired in his seventies and died on June 12, 2010, in upstate New York.Hevesi, Dennis. , ''The New York Times'', posted June 20, 2010, published June 21, 2010, p. B8 Some premature reports, based on unsubstantiated Twitter claims, erroneously gave June 13, 2010.Greenberger, Robert. , ComicMix.com, June 14, 2010
Williamson has been a stylistic influence on a number of younger artists such as Tom Yeates, Mark Schultz, Frank Cho,
Harvey Award
Eisner Award
Jack Kirby Hall of Fame 