ViVOtech's products are used for contactless credit/debit cards, mobile phones, and key fobs payments in business such as retail stores and gas stations to vending machines and taxi cabs.  ViVOtech's products have been put to use in 33 countries.  ViVOtech has worked in collaboration with corporations such as Bank of America, MasterCard, Discover, Citibank, VISA, Chase, Sprint, AT&T, SingTel and Sony.
ViVOtech has developed an end-to-end contactless/NFC payment and promotion solution that allow consumers to make payments with radio frequency-enabled credit cards, debit cards, key fobs, and NFC-enabled mobile phones. These solutions enable:
Hundreds of thousands of ViVOtech products are currently in use in over 35 countries and have been recognized with several industry awards.
The ViVOpay  readers are some of the secure contactless terminals available today. They are currently in use in movie theatres, fast food restaurants (QSR), casual dining establishments, convenience stores, petrol stations, grocery stores, buses, taxicabs, and vending machine locations. These devices are available for global contactless payment applications such as MasterCard PayPass and Visa payWave, as well as specialized closed-loop payment, loyalty and promotions applications. The entire ViVOpay series is compatible with most POS and ECR systems.
ViVOtech also has a line of products for the unattended and self-service vertical markets.  These "solutions" are for vending machine, drive through, kiosk, transit/turnstile, ticketing machine and parking meter type applications.
The ViVOnfc infrastructure software from ViVOtech allows companies to enable cell phones for use in mobile payment, marketing, and loyalty programs.  This implements the use of near field communication technology (NFC) for payments, promotions and advertisements directly to close proximity cell phones (at the point of sale). ViVOtech has done close to 30 NFC mobile payments and promotion pilots in United States, Canada, Asia, Europe and Latin America.
ViVOnfc - ViVOwallet:
The ViVOwallet is a software application that runs on NFC mobile phones and allows consumers to securely download multiple soft-cards for credit/debit cards, coupons, and loyalty cards into their cell phones.  This application allows cellular devices to make contactless payments, or redeem digital coupons via a contactless near field communication payment terminal.
ViVOnfc - Issuer Server:
The Issuer Server is the standalone server that allows a card issuer to provision a soft card to a ViVOwallet application running on an NFC-enabled phone. The Issuer Server, which is hosted in the card issuer network or a trusted party, holds all the personalization algorithms, features, functions, procedures, and interfaces for a card issuer. Additionally, it provides all the personalization data from the issuer back-office and is responsible for personalizing the ViVOwallet with all the required information for users to download the issuer   s cards, coupons, or tickets.
ViVOnfc - Control Server:
The Control Server provides the Over-the-Air (OTA) provisioning control function for the Mobile Network Operator. Mobile Operators use the Control Server to manage ViVOwallet applications residing on their NFC-enabled phones and connect to the Issuer Server supporting the card issuer backoffice systems.
The ViVOplatform software is composed of 2 modules that use contactless, NFC and mobile technologies to deliver new services and tools to merchants:
Gift and Loyalty Application:
The ViVOplatform Gift and Loyalty Application is the application software platform ViVOtech offers in order to process prepaid, loyalty, and promotion transactions, manage functionality, and gather customer statistics.  This platform is browser-based for all users, including administrators, merchants, and consumers.
Smart Poster Management Software Application:
ViVOplatform Smart Poster Management Software Application is a one-on-one mobile marketing software system that enables merchants to send spam to consumers    mobile phones. Smart posters are similar to traditional posters or billboards but contain one or more embedded NFC tags. By tapping a NFC enabled mobile phone on a smart poster a consumer is automatically connected to a backend content server over the wireless data network. The content server sends personalized and location based information back to the user based on the mobile phone number and NFC tag ID. Consumers can then view the content and redeem the promotions at participating merchants.
The ViVOtag is offered in form of a sticker that can be attached to any convenient form factors such as card, key fobs, mobile phones or 3D images for efficient contactless payment transactions. These stickers can be used for prepaid transactions, credit, or loyalty products.
Capital Raised: ViVOtech raised an undisclosed amount in their last round of financing completed in February 2009.  Investors in the firm include Alloy Ventures, Citigroup Private Equity, Draper Fisher Jurvetson, First Data Corp., Miven Venture Partners, Motorola Ventures, NCR Corp., Nokia Growth Partners.