Stanley is a founding and current partner of Stanley, Mandel & Iola, L.L.P. and serves on the Credential Committee of the 2008 Democratic National Convention, the Board of the Foundation for Jewish Culture, is a partner of Democracy Alliance, and a fundraiser for the Democratic Congressional, Senate and National Committees.
Stanley received a BBA from the George Washington University in 1979 and a J.D. from the University Texas School of Law in 1982. Stanley served on the National Finance Council for the Edwards Campaign in 2008 and has been actively involved in fundraising for each Democratic Presidential nominee since 1987. In 2006, Marc served as President of the Texas Trial Lawyers Association and has been active in the American Jewish Congress, serving as the National Vice President from 1990 to 1992.
During the 2008 election, the Republican Jewish Coalition ran a series of advertisements in Jewish newspapers around the United States, mostly critical of Barack Obama and linking him to Iranian leader Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, Jeremiah Wright, Patrick Buchanan and many other perceived anti-Israel leaders. In response to this, the NJDC came out with several blogs and articles relating to Obama's strong ties with Israel. 
Stanley wrote an op-ed entitled "Why Jews Voted for Obama". In the article, he gave two explanations. "First, Obama   s performance in the debates belied the GOP narrative that he could not be trusted, while McCain   s pick of Alaska Gov. Sarah Palin as his running mate undermined his Jewish support. Second, Jewish Democrats   the National Jewish Democratic Council, along with the Obama campaign and other independent efforts   were better organized than ever."
In the aftermath of the 2008 election, Stanley wrote an article explaining how "This year, once again, the Jewish community overwhelmingly supported the Democratic nominee for President."  Stanley added that despite ""sky is falling" predictions that Jewish voters would give significant support to the Republican nominee", the Jewish vote went overwhelmingly for the democratic candidate, Barack Obama. He also noted that Obama "received 78% of the Jewish vote -- about 26% greater than Obama's percentage of total support nationally."