Palm Coast
Deltona
Port Orange
New Smyrna Beach
The '''Fun Coast''' is a region of Florida, in the United States. It extends along the Atlantic, or eastern, coast of the state, from Marineland to Canaveral National Seashore, and includes all of Flagler County and Volusia County. It is bounded by the Space Coast on the south and by the First Coast on the north. It is bounded by the Central Florida region on the west, and by the Atlantic Ocean on the east.
Although Flagler County is sometimes included with the First Coast region, and Volusia County is sometimes included with the Central Florida region for demographics and statistics, those regions frequently omit the two counties in publications and guides ''(see also: Forgotten Coast)''. This caused the local governments and NGOs in Flagler and Volusia to pool their resources and cooperate in many affairs. The Convention and visitor bureaus in both counties started to promote the region as Florida's ''Fun Coast''.
The Fun Coast region has a humid subtropical climate (Koppen ''Cfa''), with warm temperatures and the threat of thunderstorms during the summer, and rare winter frosts on occasion. The area is listed by the USDA as being in hardiness zone 9, which is about the northern limit of where Date palms can be grown. Highs usually range between 71 and 91   F (21 and 33   C) year round.
The United States Census Bureau separates the Fun Coast into two metropolitan statistical areas.
The Deltona-Daytona Beach-Ormond Beach Metropolitan Statistical Area includes Volusia County. The Palm Coast, Florida Metropolitan Statistical Area includes Flagler County.
The region is governed by the two counties in the area. In total there are 21 municipalities or incorporated places in the region. Each one of the municipalities has its own city or town government, although there is little distinction between the two types. Much of the land in the region is unincorporated, which means it does not belong to any municipality, and is governed by the county it is located in.
Incorporated Cities and Towns in the Fun Coast region:
In Florida, each county is also a school district. Each district is headed by an elected school board.  A professional superintendent manages the day-to-day operations of each district, who is appointed by the School Board.
Some colleges and universities in the Fun Coast include:
The Fun Coast region is served by two interstate highways operated by the Florida Department of Transportation in conjunction with local agencies.
Three U.S. highways serve the region:
Several Florida State Roads serve the region:
The Fun Coast region is dominated by Motorsports, with several race track venues in the area.
Once the area became too large to be served by the 904 area code, The Daytona Beach/Halifax Area Chamber of Commerce discovered that area code 386 was not assigned to any other territory. The numbers 386 spell out "FUN" on a phone keypad, and was a perfect device to promote the ''Fun Coast'' area. Other government officials, agencies, and residents were recruited to lobby the State Public Service Commission to obtain this area code for the area.
Florida's Fun Coast is served mainly by ''The Daytona Beach News-Journal'', a daily newspaper headquartered in the Daytona Beach area. The ''Orlando Sentinel'' based in Orlando, and ''The Florida Times-Union'' based in Jacksonville have some market penetration in the region. There are a few weekly publications in the area, such as ''The DeLand-Deltona Beacon'' and ''The Daytona Times''.
The Orlando television market serves Volusia County and Flagler County. The only television station physically located in the Fun Coast region is WDSC-TV Channel 15, a PBS affiliate operated by Daytona State College.
The Fun Coast is covered by Arbitron's Daytona Beach Radio Market.