If so, are both of his parents Indian?  -   ( ) 01:08, 27 February 2009 (UTC)
Were gays seen as bad in Victorian time? Why was Oscar Wilde imprisonment while others continued or was it just he is the most well known?     Preceding   comment added by   ( ) 13:41, 27 February 2009 (UTC) 
The websites of some American newspapers carry invitation to subscribe to the paper edition of the newspaper. This would never happen in the UK. Here, if you want your newspaper delivered, you go to your local newsagent, and arrange it with him. He sends a teenager out on a bike before school each morning to deliver to all his customers. We have about ten national newspapers, so it wouldn't make sense for each paper to have its own door-to-door delivery system. But so far as I can work out, in most parts of America, there is a choice of only one or two daily papers. In practical terms, if you subscribe to the paper edition of an American paper, how is the delivery actually arranged? Who organises the deliveries? The newspaper company, a contractor, a local store? Who physically delivers? A kid on a bike, a man in a van (would that be light truck?), the postal service? What time of day are the papers delivered?   ( ) 16:30, 27 February 2009 (UTC)
I am applying for a technology grant and need some help of what to add and what to edit. Any additional ideas would be greatly appreciated.
At minimum the proposal must:
Describe the different types of student populations and student grade levels that you serve; Provide the number of students that I serve; Clearly articulate hou you plan to improve student achievement by the integration of technology in to your classroom curriculum through innovative ways; Clearly describe how you will measure student achievement gains as a result of integrating innovative technology strategies into classroom curriculum; Describe any additional outcomes you seek to achieve; Describe how you will measure the success of these additional outcomes; Provide a detailed timeline for the implementation of the grant.
The school that I work for is a rural school with approximately 76% of the students receiving free and reduced lunches. I think that number reflects that socioeconomic status of our community. For many of our student   s the only access they have to technology is what we provide for them in our classrooms. Due to budget cuts and other changes in our district over the past year we have cut our computer classes, and now the school is relying more on teachers to pick up the slack, by bringing more technology in to our daily lessons. The benefit this gives us is that now technology is starting to be integrated more into students    daily routines and is not treated as a separate entity. The problem we face is getting the technology in the hands of the students. With limited lab space, it becomes hard for teachers to plan lessons around when there are computers available.
I believe we have a problem that faces many schools. Our students are being prepared for the 20th century, when they are living in and will be working in the 21st century. We need to work on getting the tools our students will be using in their hands. With the school being the only place our students will be exposed to some forms of technology, I feel the burden falls upon the teachers to make sure students at our school are not falling further behind than they are already starting.
Our school could truly benefit by getting net books in our school. These are more cost effective than full sized computers and run nearly all the same operations. I would like to start by getting a class set of 20, so I could pilot the use of these computers. I believe once the school sees all the uses of these computers, they will allow us to budget for more of them in the future. There has already been talk about looking for cheaper alternatives to desktop computers, so I feel this would be a good alternative.
I would use this in my social studies classroom. Because there is only one social studies teacher per grade level, I see every seventh grade student in our building. With one class set of net books I would be able to serve nearly 150 students every year. Every student that came through our school system would benefit from the use of this technology in my classroom.
There will be a number of benefits to having this technology at our fingertips. In my classroom we study ancient world history. We will now have the opportunity to contact professionals in these areas. With the built in web cams we could even have face to face discussions with these people. I know these people are busy, but it would be easier to get them to spend five minutes with us online, as opposed to trying to actually get them to come to our school. We will be able to do the same thing with authors that have written books and have done research on these time periods. When we study ancient Chinese dynasties we would have to opportunity to skype students in china and see if we could start a discussion and see what they know.
I think having net books will have a direct impact on student achievement, not only in my class, but in other classes as well. Students will be able to improve their writing by creating wikis and responding to questions I post to the class. We will be able to publish papers to the web, my class will become authors and can have their work published online. They will also improve their critical thinking and editing skills by reading the posts of other students and responding to them. Reading achievement will be improved by providing students with access to more information that is outside the textbook. We will also have the ability to research topics that interest the students in greater detail. When students spend time researching and reading about subjects they are interested in they will be more engaged and more learning will take place.
By having the students blog and produce wikis I will be able to check and see what the students are writing about, this will give me instant feedback to see if students are grasping concepts I am teaching. I will also be able to assess their improvements in writing, and I will be able to work with language arts to make sure the students are using the skills that are being taught in their classes. There will be instant feedback available for me and the students, so we will be able to move through areas quicker when the students understand what is going on.
I have a few suggestions for improving the grammar and sound of the proposal, including a few obvious mistakes (such as "student's" for "students").  Some of these suggestions depend on how formal you need to be.
I live in the USA.  If I wanted to purchase obsolete military equipment (Specifically a tank or APC), who would I need to talk to? I would assume that this is possible though I strongly suspect that they would remove or disable any weaponry on the vehicle.  At least one would never have to worry about being booted or towed and you could really show up your neighbor who had an H2?  No but seriously?    ( ) 18:40, 27 February 2009 (UTC)
That sounds like what I am looking for.  Where can I get more info?    ( ) 19:44, 27 February 2009 (UTC)
I have a swiss army knife - one of the crazy ones with about 30 gizmo's...but a genuine Victorinox one, not a knock-off.
Due to a series of unfortunate events, the thing is gummed up with some tarry stuff that got spilled onto it - and since (a) they cost about $120 bucks and (b) it has a certain sentimental value - I want to take it apart and clean it with some kind of solvent.
So - here's the question.  Can you dismantle a swiss army knife and put it back together without wrecking it?  If so - how do you start?  It looks like the plastic side panels are glued onto the metal frame - if I remove them, will there be a handy set of screws underneath for pulling it all apart?
You could try several different solvents such as Xylene or Acetone.  Depending on what the gunk is, they might dissolve it without harming the knife.    ( ) 19:45, 27 February 2009 (UTC)
Obviously if I can't get it apart, I'll try soaking it as-is.  But aside from what that might do to the plastic panels, there are all sorts of plastic parts inside the knife.  Mine has a tiny magnifying glass, and a ball-point pen for example.  Plus, this tarry gunk has gotten into all of the hinges and springs and other mechanisms - without pulling it all apart it's going to be almost impossible to get into all the nooks and crannies.  The 'soaking-it-in-stuff' answer is something I can handle.  I specifically want to know if I can dismantle it down to the individual gadgets - because that way I can really get it clean...but I don't want to risk doing something fatal to the plastic side-panels if what's underneath is rivetted rather than screwed or bolted together.    ( ) 22:11, 27 February 2009 (UTC)
Victorinox is usually very good about repairing damaged knives. Contact them.   ( ) 20:38, 28 February 2009 (UTC)
I am told that leaving my cell phone on the recharger is detremental to the battery life. I do know that leaving it on the recharger unused for several days will make the cell phone warmer. Is there an optimal time beyond which I should take it off the recharger?    ( ) 21:20, 27 February 2009 (UTC)
I live in Canada, and keep getting recorded telemarketing calls on my cell phone.  I was under the impression that this was illegal (as per ).  Am I incorrect here?  What can I do about it?  I considered adding my number to the do not call registry, but am a little concerned that this won't work, as per .  Any suggestions on what I should do?  The number that calls me is 888-111-1110.    ( ) 21:44, 27 February 2009 (UTC)
While phone numbers starting with 1 would theoretically be possible in situations where the area code must be dialed, such as a toll-free number, I don't think any of them actually exist, in which case they're falsifying their number.  That might be a regulatory violation even if the telemarketing is otherwise legal.
The original poster, although in Canada, cited the FTC, which is a US agency.  In Canada it's the CRTC whose area this is, and you can find their "unsolicited telecommunications rules" under crtc.gc.ca; there's nothing special about cellphones but phoning to deliver a recorded message containing a commercial advertisiment (I simplify the rule slightly) is prohibited.
But looking through the hits where people have googled the phone number, there are some suggestions that the calls are originating from the US.  I'm not sure which country's rules or laws apply in that case.  --Anonymous, 06:45 UTC, February 28, 2009.