Juares' work in Spanish-language music videos help build momentum for in "modernizing" contemporary Regional Mexican music videos. In 1999 Juares co-founded SER International, Corp., which became a sought-after source of creative materials for use in music marketing and built a stable of clients which included: Sony Discos, Univision Music Group, EMI Latin, Fonovisa Records among others. Vaughn's best known for his work with artist Pilar Montenegro whose number one Billboard Chart hit "Quitame Ese Hombre" holds the record for longest running number one song and for his work with Jennifer Pena and her song "Vamos Al Mundial", the official song of the FIFA World Cup written by Rudy Perez.
Vaughn founded SER International, Corp, a Los Angeles based production company, in 1997. Under Vaughn's leadership, SER became a sought-after provider of content and advertising strategy catering to the music and entertainment industries for Spanish-language markets worldwide. Vaughn has directed music videos for ''Billboard'' #1 tracks and has produced films that have won top honors at the San Francisco International Film Festival and Showtime NetworksFilm Showcase, among others.  Mr. Juares' film, "The Tipparinos" won best Film of the 2006 ; and his film "Stairwell C" received the Best Director, Best Film and Best Editing honors for the 2006 . Stairwell C was also honored with a special opening day screening at the Cannes Film Festival in May 2007.
Every music video project Vaughn directed in 2006 charted on the Billboard, including the video for "I'm Here With Everything," produced for model phenomenon Mayra Veronica.  "I'm Here With Everything" ("") was also voted AOL's "Sexiest Video of 2006".
Vaughn's first venture into "viral" internet videos was to write a direct the "Jesus Christ Action Figure" spec commercial.  The Jesus Action Figure piece was posted on its own web-page and received more than 4 million hits per month in 2003...before the advent of YouTube and without the help of MySpace.
The Jesus Action Figure mock product and campaign became a springboard for Vaughn's creative advertising abilities. His first work was with Nestle on a variety of viral video and web-based marketing campaigns. Vaughn directed and wrote a series of video clips for the re-launch of the Butterfinger website, , aimed at encouraging visitors to submit homemade videos that promoted "The Finger"--Butterfinger's new brand icon   and its "Make the Most of Any Moment" campaign.
Early in 2007, Vaughn worked with Baby Ruth to develop their home website promoting the brand's status as the official candy bar of Major League Baseball (see the project at: ).
Juares has been integral in defining new ways to reach consumers via technology. In 2006, he created a "''--a serialized novel--for exclusive distribution on cell phones. His first effort in this exciting and emerging "viral" cell phone video market,  "Short Cuts" "", caught the attention of development executives and later that year, Vaughn created a series of Mobisode--episodic content for mobile phones. In 2007, Vaughn wrote and produced internet short film content " and "Paper Trail".
Vaughn has written and directed a catalog of short films in conjunction with  for one of their marquee clients, Dunkin' Donuts. The webisodes--produced in cooperation with NFL, NBA and Major League Baseball for the New York Jets, New York Giants, New York Mets, New York Yankees and the New Jersey Nets--all feature , a larger-than-life man in a foam Dunkin' Donuts cup suit.
Juares is best known for his work with artist Pilar Montenegro whose number one Billboard Chart hit  holds a record among the longest running number one songs and, more notably, for his work with Jennifer Pena whose song "Vamos Al Mundial" became the official song of the FIFA World Cup written by Rudy Perez.
Vaughn's work with Jennifer Pena stems from his time with her at Univision Music Group (UMG), a Latin music company located in the United States. With the help of Juares, UMG saw great success in the second quarter of 2004 where they found their record labels atop the U.S. Latin music industry, securing 45% of the market., All Business: Umvd Claims Half Of Latin Marketplace. Evidence of their success can also be found in just three of the many artists Vaughn has worked with including Pena, Jae-P and Los Tigres del Norte, who have earned either gold or platinum status from sales in the range of 100,000 to one million units., RIAA: Jennifer Pena, Los Tigres del Norte, Jae-P., RIAA: Los Tigres del Norte., RIAA: Jae-P.
More of Juares' work can be found at , an organization who acts as a representative for clients and their work. Through Crossover Films, Vaughn has directed multiple commercial and internet ads as well as numerous music videos. Along with representing Vaughn, Crossover Films client list includes the likes of director of photography  whose work on Coca-Cola, Heineken and McDonalds can be found on their website.
Currently, Vaughn works as Creative Director at North Woods Advertising Agency in Minneapolis, Minnesota where he spearheads integrated campaigns for political, advocacy and commercial based clients.  Vaughn is an indispensable member of the North Woods Advertising team writing, producing, directing and molding the overall communications strategy behind many of the agencies clients.
Refer to table in the "References" section at the bottom.