Cake Network was founded in 2004 and launched its first network skin, Cake Poker, in June 2006. Other network partners followed in fairly quick succession including Sportsbook.com, Red Star Poker and BetUS. The Cake Network currently has 35 network skins with its latest network partner Doyles Room, featuring Doyle Brunson, Todd Brunson and Mike Caro, joining in January 2009.
As of April 2010 the Cake Network saw a steep decline in player traffic as the company lost two major poker rooms, PlayersOnly and Sportsbook.com, to the Merge Gaming Network. Even with the addition of new rooms to the network, Cake has continued to lose ground on the rest of the industry. In less than a month the Cake Network has dropped significantly on Pokerscout.com's list of most trafficked sites.
The Cake Network Partners include:
Ring games and tournaments are available 24 hours a day, seven days a week. Tournament varieties include freerolls, satellites to live events, sit    n go tournaments, single-table and multi-table tournaments including a Sunday $250,000 Guaranteed Tournament. They also offer a player rewards program.
Cake Poker is the only site of the 10 largest in the world, which allows its players to regularly change their screen names. By allowing Cake Poker players to change their name every seven days, the advantage of using ID tracking software is mitigated.
In April 2009, Cake Poker was the first online poker room to offer a mobile poker room, where users can download and play poker from their smartphone.
In May of 2009, poker author Lee Jones joined Cake Poker as the Card Room Manager.
In September 2008, the Kentucky Governor Steve Beshear filed a civil suit asking a Franklin County Circuit Court to grant control of online poker website domain names to the government, including CakePoker.com . 
In January 2009, the Kentucky Court of Appeals ruled that the seizure order issued by Judge Thomas Wingate should be set aside and made the decision to halt the forfeiture of the domain names .
In February 2009, the Commonwealth of Kentucky appealed the ruling from January 2009 asking to submit a longer appeal brief.