After graduating from college, Carter accepted a commission in the United States Marine Corps.  He was promptly dispatched into service in Vietnam during the Vietnam War where he fought in the Battle of Khe Sahn in 1968.  Carter was released as a First Lieutenant following his service in Vietnam.  His military awards and decorations include a Bronze Star  and a Purple Heart.
Carter began his legal career as an Assistant District Attorney with the Orange County District Attorney's Office in 1972 where he became the senior deputy district attorney in charge of the office's homicide division.  Carter filed charges and was the initial prosecutor in the case of serial killer William Bonin, also known as "The Freeway Killer," who became the first person executed by lethal injection in California in 1996.
In addition to his judicial functions, Carter has lectured fellow judges at the California Judges College, the Judicial Criminal Law Institute, and the Ninth Circuit Judicial Conference.  He also speaks frequently with judges abroad, including engagements in Brazil, Bosnia, China, the Philippines, and Malawi.  Carter also teaches an undergraduate course on international narcotics trade at the University of California, Irvine, where he has received the school's Distinguished Professors Award three times, and has taught at Whittier Law School's Summer Abroad Program.
In 1981, Carter joined the bench as a Municipal Court Judge in Orange County, California.  One year later, he became an Orange County Superior Judge, a position that he held until joining the federal judiciary in 1998.  Carter initiated a variety of programs to assist in the rehabilitation of convicted felons, including a tattoo removal program for gang members, and was active in planning the county's Law Day festivities.  He earned the nickname "King David" from attorneys while serving as the Supervising Judge of the court's Criminal Division.
Carter was nominated by President Bill Clinton on June 25, 1998 to fill a seat vacated by William J. Rea. Carter was confirmed by the United States Senate on October 21, 1998, and received his commission the following day.
As a jurist, Carter is known for his intellect, courteous judicial demeanor, work ethic, and expertise in complex criminal cases.
In the first ruling of its kind, Carter issued a preliminary injunction in 2000 ordering Orange County public school officials to allow a Gay-Straight Alliance club organized by students to meet on campus.  Carter held that the Equal Access Act requires a public high school, which accepts federal funding and establishes a limited open forum for non-curriculum-related student groups, to allow a student group promoting homosexual tolerance for to meet on campus.
The case settled after Carter issued the injunction when the school board agreed to recognize the Gay-Straight Alliance organization.  Although the case was politically controversial, Orange County School Board member Linda Davis later admitted at a board meeting on November 18, 2000 that Carter's legal ruling was correct: "We know the law is on their side, but our community members don't want it."
Between 2000 and 2001, Carter presided over the longest criminal trial in the history of the Central District of California.
The case was severed into three trials, with Carter presiding over each, and lasted for a combined 18 months.  Following the conviction of Mariano "Chuy" Martinez on murder charges, the prosecution sought the death penalty, making it the first capital case to be tried in Los Angeles federal court since 1950.
In 2002, Carter awarded over $88 million in damages to former Playboy Playmate Vickie Lynn Marshall, better known as Anna Nicole Smith, in the battle over the estate of her late husband, billionaire J. Howard Marshall.  The case came to Carter on appeal following a federal bankruptcy court ruling that awarded Smith $475 million of her late husband's $1.6 billion fortune.
Carter ultimately concluded that Howard's son, E. Pierce Marshall, interfered with Smith's attempts to collect her inheritance.  "The evidence of willfulness, maliciousness, and fraud is overwhelming," Carter wrote in his 54-page opinion.
The Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals vacated Carter's order on the grounds that he lacked jurisdiction to hear the case because federal jurisdiction interfered with Texas probate court proceedings.
Carter has been heavily involved in the proceedings arising from the 2002 indictment on racketeering charges of forty alleged members of the Aryan Brotherhood ("AB"), a notorious prison gang.
Twenty of the defendants charged in the indictment were assigned to Carter, including two of the three commissioners of the AB's federal faction, Barry "The Baron" Mills and Tyler "The Hulk" Bingham.  Following a six-month trial, a jury convicted both Mills and Bingham of committing Violent Crimes in Aid of Racketeering (VICAR) and murder.  The jury deadlocked on the death penalty,
The trials of several remaining defendants are currently ongoing before Carter and other judges in the Central District of California.
In 2009, Carter dismissed a lawsuit, Barnett v. Obama, challenging President Barack Obama's election and assumption of office because of the claims that Obama was not a natural born citizen of the United States, commenting that the power to remove a sitting president from office resides with Congress, not the judiciary.