The history of this Hashmi Syed clan meets upward with Banu Hashim and regarding the word Nakokara, it means the "doer of goods". This word Nakokara has a history as this was a surname honoured to Hazrat Uqeel Bin Abu Talib is described as "once our dear Prophet Muhammad  was sitting in a circle among his Sahaba ikram (followers). Amir Muaawiya was sitting on right hand and the wind was also blowing from right to left. Dear Prophet  said Muawiya to exchange his place with Hazrat Uqeel Bin Abi Talib, who was sitting on the left hand. So the sitting place was exchanged and meeting continued and then finished. After the meeting, some sahaba ikram asked about this secret. Then Dear Prophet  explained that there is a sperm in Muawiya's back bone, who is the enemy of my race (this was redirection to Karbala Event) and as Hazrat Uqeel is a Nekokar (pious man ), so I exchanged their sittings as this was harming me that Muawiya is sitting on right and wind is also coming from right. After this Hazrat Uqeel was known as Uqeel Nakokar".
The Nakokara clawn are said to have come originally from Bahwalpur some 600 years ago. In addition to Jhang and Chiniot, they also hold lands in Gujranwala and Sargodha Districts.
Members of this Syed clan carry the family name Hashmi or Hashimi.
Nakokara (Pious) is a surname, was given by Prophet Muhammad Muhammad to Uqeel bin Abu Talib.
The family tree of the Nakokara meets up with their ancestor Abu Talib ibn    Abd al-Muttalib (Arabic:) (549     619), who was the head of the clan of Banu Hashim (Hashim ibn Abdul Manaf). He was married to Fatima bint Asad and was an uncle of Muhammad. His real name was Imran, but he is better known as Abu Talib because he had a son named Talib.
Abu Talib raised and supported Muhammad  while he was a young man. Abu Talib had four sons:
Aqeel ibn Abi Talib (Arabic) was born in the year 590.
Aqeel was second of the four sons of Abu Talib, who was the uncle and protector of Muhammad .
Aqeel's nickname was Abu Yazid. He fought in the Battle of Mu'tah and became blind late in his life, dying at the age of 96.
Aqeel had five sons:
Muslim ibn Aqeel was the cousin of Hazrat Imam Hussain is the First martyr of Kufa in the Kerbala Event. Hazrat Muslim was married to Hazrat Ruqayya (sister of Hazrat Ghazi Abbas and daughter of Hazrat Ali Murtaza).
Muslim Bin Aqeel family:
Most of the family is in rest in Lahore Pakistan famous as Bibi Pak Damanan  Bibi Pak Daman
It is said that these ladies came here after the event of Karbala on the 10th day of the month of Muharram in 61 AH (October 10, AD 680
Aqeel was the man who found Umme Habiba to marry Imam Ali.
Banu Hashim (Arabic) was a clan in the Quraish tribe. Islam's last Prophet Muhammad  was a member of this clan; his great-grandfather was Hashim, for whom the clan is named. Members of this Syed clan carry the family name Hashmi or Hashemi and in some areas known with surname Peerzada.
The family tree of the tribe is described as under:
The main villages of the tribe in Chiniot District area are Hersa Shaikh , Chauntrewala , Thatta Karam Shah , Taliyala  and Zakhera  . Here also a few villages in Jhang District such as Nekokara. In addition, Sheikh Waen  in Bahawalpur District, Sagharpur in Jhelum District are also important villages of the tribe.