Hello Everyone
I would like to ask some advice about creating a new article about an organization. This is a school of yoga called Advanced Yoga Practices. This draws on the eight limbs of yoga in an Open Source format.  The lessons are published online and are completely free. I believe there are several thousand users subscribed to the groups.  I feel this would make a valuable addition to the sections on yoga/spiritual practice and that AYP is now at a level of notability that may merit inclusion in Wikipedia. The group is global with its main geographical sources being the USA and Canada,the UK, Germany and India.
Yahoo Group page -  
I have done a bit of research and the following links, I hope, show notability.
I would welcome any advice about whether this would be acceptable before going ahead with a short article, in which I would post the links below also.
Many thanks
The Yahoo group for Advanced Yoga Practices is ranked first among Yahoo Yoga Groups 
The other links are to radio interviews and articles in newspapers.
Jan 4, 2009 KKCR Radio Interview with Yogani, founder of AYP - 
Jan 28, 2007 WSAI Radio Interview with Yogani 
This is one of a series
Dec 30, 2008 - Philadelphia Yoga Examiner - 
Sept 20, 2006 - Huntington News, Northeastern University - Yoga Enhances Sex, Spirituality -
April 9, 2006 - The Pagan Bodhisattva - Who Is Yogani? 
Circa 2005 - Hindustan Times, Inner Voice - The Spin on Sin 
Feb 19, 2004 - Hindustan Times, Sacred Corner - Bhakti - The Science of Devotion 
Working primarily on television commercials, '''Proton Studio''' pioneered the concept of the "virtual studio" whereby the editors often relocate and work remotely with clients and agencies outside of New York City.  
Hi I want to start new article about actor Ellis Jones. You can have a look what I created here . Your thoughts are more than welcome. Thanks   ( ) 21:29, 29 January 2009 (UTC)
As a psychotherapist and author of 13 books published in 16 languages, with five American publishers, I am widely quoted both in print media, and on the web.  I would like to request that my biography be included in wikipedia.  My user page TinaTessina, has a draft of such an article, citing references.  How do I go about getting into Wikipedia?     Preceding   comment added by   (      See the article here: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tinatessina/autobiography ) 02:00, 11 February 2009 (UTC) 
Hi I want to start new article about a Filipino artist Daisy Ann Gonzalez. Link  . Any suggestions are welcome.   ( ) 06:26, 17 February 2009 (UTC)
First of all thank you for your time. No I'm not DGonzalez. I personally saw her art collections and heard her history and I though it's worthy of being in the Wikipedia. I was thinking of starting with her and troll through her family tree (all artist). I will modify the text and ask permission from the author for the image. I will place it here again when I'm done.   ( ) 02:10, 18 February 2009 (UTC)