The Pokerstars.com '''European Poker Tour (EPT)''' is a series of poker tournaments similar to those in the World Poker Tour (WPT), created by John Duthie, winner of the inaugural Poker Million tournament. It began in 2004 as part of the worldwide explosion in Texas Hold 'em popularity. The EPT is sponsored by and part owned by PokerStars and taped by Sunset + Vine for television broadcast across Europe.
In seasons 1-3, the most significant difference between the competing poker tours was the buy-in and its effect on the prize pool, with the EPT featuring buy-ins about half the size of the WPT. This changed in season 4 when the buy-in for most EPT events was increased to    8,000. (Due to increased popularity and lack of space in participating casinos). At 2007 exchange rates, this is approximately equal to the US$10,000 which is the buy-in for most WPT events.
Furthermore, the final table is made up of 8 players, as opposed to the 6 player final tables popularised by the WPT.
For the first couple of seasons, Duthie commentated for the show alongside Colin Murray. Since the middle of Season 3, James Hartigan has been the lead commentator, with professional players Greg Raymer, Daniel Negreanu and Victoria Coren providing analysis.  Hartigan also presents the live webcast from each event.  The TV show was first hosted by Caroline Flack, then joined by Natalie Pinkham. Seasons 4 and 5 were hosted by Kara Scott. The EPT's current host is Michelle Orpe.
On March 6, 2010 four masked men, armed with knifes and at least one hand gun robbed the EPT event in Berlin. According to the police, the robbers got away with     242.000.  No one was seriously injured, only one guard got a minor cut while trying to detain one of the robbers. The panic which gripped the crowd was briefly captured on the live webcast before the camera cut away. The attackers were caught several days after the robbery and later convicted to three years in prison
Up to Madrid 2011
Up to Vienna 2010
Up to Monte Carlo 2010