As defined by the Texas Legislature, the official Western Texas College service area encompasses Borden, Dickens, Fisher, Jones, Kent, Mitchell, Nolan, Nolan, and Stonewall counties. 
Western Texas College offers programs that qualify students for the Associate of Arts degree and junior standing in a senior college or university, and programs that qualify students for the Associate of Applied Science degree. Students may also earn certificates of completion for vocational programs of less than two years    duration.
Western Texas College is listed as the fastest growing community college in the State of Texas in a report released by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board.
Western Texas College topped 1.1 million contact hours, the first time the college has eclipsed one million. The 28.8-percent increase was well above the state average of 7 percent growth.
In fall of 2009, WTC eclipsed 2,500 students for the first time. It is the 17th consecutive semester of growth, a trend which began in summer of 2004.
Western Texas College is part of the Western Junior College Athletic Conference and the National Junior College Athletic Association Region 5. Competing athletic teams include Baseball, Men   s and Women   s Basketball, Cross Country, Men   s and Women   s Golf, Rodeo, Men   s and Women   s Soccer, Softball, Track and Field, and Volleyball. Basketball games are broadcast on KGWB.
Western Texas College took over ownership and operations of the 40-year-old Scurry County Coliseum in 2008. Re-named "The Coliseum," the 3,400-seat arena has been received a facelift thanks to a $500,000 donation from wind energy company, Invenergy.
The men's and women's basketball teams play their home games on Invenergy Court in the Coliseum, which has a new scoreboard. The arena is host to the WTC rodeo as well as numerous civic and cultural events.
Home of the Lady Westerners softball team and host to tournaments for high schools and colleges.
Home of the Westerner baseball squad and local and regional baseball tournaments, including the annual Snyder High School tournament.
The WTC campus expanded by forty acres after Texas clothing and boot magnate James Cavender donated property adjacent to the campus for the construction of a soccer and track complex. The land is  under development for a full-sized collegiate soccer field and several practice fields, one of which will eventually be encircled by a regulation 400-meter track. 
The complexs will also include locker rooms, concessions, seating, and parking lots. Soccer and track are the newest sports at WTC.