The name of the group was first publicised by the ''Evening Standard'' newspaper in September 2000.
Joe Beevers is the only member of the group who actually comes from Hendon (a district of London) but the others played in Hendon.  The Hendon Mob describe John Kabbaj as their unofficial fifth member. Several other European professionals, including Harry Demetriou ''(Koumari Boy)'', Padraig Parkinson ''(Padraig)'', Neil Channing ''(Bad Beat)'' and John Duthie have posted on the group's forum.
The Mob first became recognised for their appearances on the original televised poker programme ''Late Night Poker'' (1999   2002). The Hendon Mob also regularly attends the annual World Series of Poker, World Poker Tour and other major tournaments. They have dozens of in the money results between them.
In 2004 and 2005, the Mob was sponsored by Prima Poker to the tune of $2 million worth of worldwide tournament buyin fees. In exchange they played on the online Prima poker-room network. As part of the tour, the Mob challenged four-player teams of various nationalities to heads-up matches, culminating with the UK versus the U.S. in the inaugural Prima Transatlantic Cup in 2004. The Mob had won each of these international team matches until falling 3-1 to the US team of Phil Ivey, Andy Bloch, Chris Ferguson, and Paul Wolfe. The Mob's deal with Prima expired at the end of 2005.
The Mob are now sponsored by Full Tilt Poker.
The Mob run a successful website that includes a tournament poker player database that attempts to house the results of every major worldwide poker tournament since 2000, indexed by location, date, and player. The origin of the information contained in the database was queried in a court action brought by rival website Pokerpages.com. Information sourced from Pokerpages.com has since been removed from the database.
The Mob were used in series one of the British con-art documentary series 'The Real Hustle'. Presenters Paul Wilson and Alexis Conran, posing as poker novices filming a documentary, beat the Mob by smuggling in decks stacked to their advantage.