This user has on several occasions taken a biographical article about a living person who has Turkish heritage, but was born and raised outside of Turkey and uses a westernized spelling of their name, and moved the article to a name using the Turkish spelling. Since all sources and the person's personal preference all reflected the original westernized spelling (as best I can determine), I reverted such changes. In each case, Saguamundi then inserted the Turkish spelling into the article (despite any connection to Turkey other than previous generations of the family) and left a talk message for me demanding that his changes be retained. Despite acceding to his wishes in each case, Saguamundi has become increasingly strident in expressing his demands. The , in my opinion, clearly and blatantly crosses the civility line. I would ask that someone council this user on  ,  , and  . I also think his edit pattern violates  , but lets start with the basics. As far as I can remember, some relevant pages are his and my talk and Halil Suleyman Ozerden, Mehmet Oz, Arda Ocal. (I'm assuming that the edits by 88.232.149.239 are also Saguamundi because of the identical language both used on my talk page.)   ( ) 21:14, 3 March 2009 (UTC)
I'd like to alert anyone interested in etiquette to Dave Souza's repeated, off-topic,  incivil characterizations of documentation by madman2000 and myself of hrafn's incivility to editors and what appears to have been hrafn's deliberate obliteration of text that described 19th and 20th century social organizations and authors who were advocates of various spiritual beliefs. Dave Souza associates this documentation with me alone, although others contributed to it. In his hostility, he overlooks the actual impetus for the research, namely hrafn's incivility to a number of editors. His mischaracterizations of the original attempts to rein in hrafn's incivility now constitute an ongoing violation of social etiquette carried to the level of a verbal vendetta against me. 
Dave Souza: 'So, Cat was missing the point of MEDCAB and produced a long inaccurate screed in an effort to defend her habit of producing articles without reliable sources?" 
Dave Souza: "your assertion that it is 'unlikely there was no truth at all in her statement' is an uncivil and unsourced smear." 
Dave Souza is being rude while banner-carrying for hrafn, an editor who is, despite his promises to act in a civil manner, still being called up on Wikiquette alerts and is still given to using loaded words like "rant" to describe the documentation produced by those (myself but one among them) who called him up on similar charges in the past. 
Why is it so difficult for Dave Souza to engage in civilized discourse when charges are made that hrafn has (again) committed violations of Wikiquette? 
I would like Dave Souza o apologize for his rudeness. I did nothing to deserve this latst outburst, nor did Malcolm Schoscha.
This user is very impolite, not just on my talk page, but others too...  ( ) 14:22, 4 March 2009 (UTC)
That's pretty uncivil, i'd say. The documentation which he calls a rant contained examples of his previous incivility, such as this:
Now he claims that this past documentation of his past editorial incivility is "analogous to Godwin's Law." 
I'm sorry, i just don't buy it. It looks to me like he still hasn't learned to interact with other editors as colleagues, but still tries to harrass them, and when his past history of editorial harrasment is mentioned, he flounces off in irrational anger, leaving, as always, Dave Souza to defend him.  
Time passes, but i don't think that hrafn has greatly improved his social skills.  
Several people have stated the consensus was clearly keep, not delete everything, and put a redirect there.  Several edits and reverts have taken place.  Attempts to discuss it on the talk page, have failed to get either side to agree.
During the , after overwhelming majority of people thus far had said Keep,   stated:
I asked about this, and got a response: 
Is that going against consensus?  ''' 16:25, 5 March 2009 (UTC)
Could someone who knows something about India-Pakistani relations keep an eye on this talk page, please? A uncivil squabble is starting to break out, I think ...  -  19:26, 6 March 2009 (UTC)
I would appreciate an outside view as to whether   is being uncivil or I'm being overly sensitive.  I asked Protonk at   whether he had a reason to delete a prod notice  and P replied "Not really" and referred to the article's "author" .  I questioned P's use of the word "author" (which struck me an an attempt to assert ownership by proxy)  using the sentence "What does "the author" mean on a wiki?"  P described that as "cute", which I don't understand precisely, but is obviously a Bad Thing, as P went on to say that P has "0 patience" for it .  My explanation of the point I was trying to make was admittedly blunt (presumably the opposite of cute)  and P's response was simply "This conversation is over" .
I think that Protonk is falling short of the standard of civility expected of an experienced user.  Am I being oversensitive?    ( ) 14:01, 7 March 2009 (UTC)
There's been a feud on   for some months now about whether or not the   on Chung Moo Doe is a reasonable source to include in the article.  I've pursued a few content-centered avenues for resolving this dispute --   was more or less inconclusive, an   received no response, and a   was not agreed to be any of the parties that disagree with me.  Discussion on the talk page has now sprawled across several sections:  ,  , and now  .
As I see it, one central issue preventing this disagreement from simply being resolved on the talk page is the refusal of some of the other editors to respond to my arguments (sometimes taking the form of specific statements that users aren't planning to participate in further discussion, i.e. to answer my questions).  It seems to me that this is a violation of  , specifically:
I'll limit this complaint to  's behavior to avoid making things too complicated.  Specific arguments which   has not addressed during this discussion (while continuing to readd the source on the handful of occasions when I've removed it, and more or less ignoring me pointing out that he's not addressing my arguments or answering my questions) include:
That first question I asked at least seven or eight times.
Do the folks here agree that this behavior is a violation of  ?    ( ) 19:41, 7 March 2009 (UTC)
This user's comments toward members of the   have been angry and offensive. He left the project several months ago after some members of the project opposed his RFA. Since then, he has returned several times to attack editors and criticize the project. His comments and edit summaries, including , . He holds other editors to different standards, however, as shown .   ( ) 02:58, 8 March 2009 (UTC)
This user disrupted me with a threatening warning , when asked why  gave this rationale , and subsequently refused to provide evidence of his explanation . But he was happy to threaten me again , and again , and again , and again , and again .   ( ) 04:42, 8 March 2009 (UTC)
Edit conflict.
This user seems to be obsessed with mocking  . They claim that this  was done by someone else using their account, but offer no explanation for  or  where they added pictures of this user with insulting captions.   ( ) 20:30, 8 March 2009 (UTC)
I started a thread on data and citation manipulation to which this admin referred to as "stirring the shit", and asked me why I wouldn't "stop stirring the shit".
Jeez, you admins are all a bunch of morons, you've lost track of what's uncivil or not. Stop protecting your own kind and open your eyes... Dipsticks...    ( ) 15:49, 9 March 2009 (UTC)
User, JCRB, keeps posting insulting statements about Spaniards. He says that phillipinos are Spaniards. His remarks are offensive to my heritage since I'm a Spaniard and we don't consider philipines as Spaniards. The world knows that philipinos are not Spaniards. When I disagree, he DELETES my remarks. He's a phillipino with a racial identity crisis who thinks he's a Spaniard, and wants everyone to think they they're Spaniards. I urge that you ban him. The following link is the discussion page where he posts his insults:
Thank you, and I hope you deal with the probelm since he greatly offends my heritage.
User:Veecort, who had been editing the ITT Technical Institute article with a negative POV, has returned from three months of inactivity.  He has accused all and sundry of being "PR" for ITT Tech  .  
He has also been incivil on the article's talk page , and he has also posted a profane off-topic rant there (while Wikipedia  , I still question whether this is appropriate for talk pages).
It should be noted that Veecort's negative POV on the subject isn't really in dispute.  I'm not including diffs because this all happened months ago, but they can be provided if needed.   ( ) 12:36, 9 March 2009 (UTC)
I have to unmark this resolved because Veecort is still insisting on placing the COI tag on the article without making any justification   and continuing hostility on the article talk page .  Would AIV or ANI be more appropriate here?   ( ) 06:23, 12 March 2009 (UTC)
On this AfD discussion  ,   suggested that by AfDing the article (an article about a susection of a residential subdivision) I was violating the policy not to disrupt wikipedia to prove a point. He wrote a note to the future closing admin to note my "bias" linked to a previously deleted version of my User Page. In that deleted version, I had expressed at length negative feelings about Wikipedia. My feelings about Wikipedia are changing, becoming more positive, and I deleted my comments because I decided to put my old feelings about Wikipedia behind me and give it a fresh start, and I continue to make constructive edits in good faith, and would like the same fresh start I have given Wikipedia. I don't think it is right for editors like Tothwolf to continue to use my old deleted views to undermine my contributions to discussions when there is no evidence that my old views are coloring my viewpoint in new discussions. I think this violates the spirit of  .
I respecfully but firmly asked Tothwolf to remove his comments directed to me and those directed to the closing admin attempting to prejudice the admin against me, as I don't think such comments are appropriate or constructive. I received from him in response a note that I should read  .  ( ) 17:22, 10 March 2009 (UTC)
Don't ever dare to consider the words of a volunteer trying to diffuse a situation a personal attack - you're not that important.  An editor had an issue with you - it appears they tried to resolve it on your talk, and they were not pleased with the resolution, so they brought it here.  You didn't HAVE to reply, but your silence would have likely spoken against you.  Don't ever think you're too important/too busy to respond to the concerns of a member of this community.  It takes only a few moments to try and resolve, rather than be aggressive in the way you are.  Your actions above now make me want to look further into this entire incident - which, according to you would be a waste of time, but I take the community that we both signed up for to be important, which means ''resolving'' issues, not simply throwing them away, and blaming others for "wasting your time".  ( '''&nbsp;Bwilkins / BMW&nbsp;''' ) 21:33, 10 March 2009 (UTC)
Here's the short version: although another editor's actions may ''explain'' your reactions, they may never ''excuse'' them.  You have spent the entire space above ''justifying'' your uncivil actions.  It is you who are gaming the system, and attempting to demonize someone for having an actual concern over your actions.  That is tantamount to attempting to dissuade them from editing.  Do not diminish others feelings.  Do not discard complaints.  I will have to admit that at first reading, I was probably more on your side ... however, the disdain you have shown your fellow Wikipedians above is some of the most disappointing series of actions I've seen.  If you had issues about the other editor's comments in AfD, then you should have begun DR yourself, rather than be uncivil in return, and moreso be uncivil in your "defence" above.  Consider yourself warned about similar future actions.  ( '''&nbsp;Bwilkins / BMW&nbsp;''' ) 13:41, 11 March 2009 (UTC)
User   used a name calling personal attack against   on   in violation of  .   ( ) 12:15, 12 March 2009 (UTC)
This user posted on my talk page "Hi,i can only conclude one thing,you are racist"  which I removed, but he reverted . I gave him a warning on his talk page , which he later removed  with the edit summary of "Stopping a racist freak." I hope I am not alone in my feelings that these comments are unacceptable?  &nbsp;|&nbsp;  12:34, 12 March 2009 (UTC)
While a number of editors are working through a mediation issue,   is continuing the insert   language into the discussion, particularly in disparaging the religion of the subject of the article in the RfM (Rick Warren) and some of the editors.  Examples include the types of phrases previously warned about, including "standard anti-humanist patriarchal heteronormative hyper-conformist agency", "church/cult/agencies", "cultist", "charlatan", etc..--  ( ) 18:10, 13 March 2009 (UTC)
Please look at this user's contributions.  You will see repeated uncivil attacks on everyone that reverts his vandalism.  I am also reporting him on the vandalism page, but the vandalism may not be as pervasive as the incivility, so I am reporting this behavior here as well.--   04:50, 14 March 2009 (UTC)
Collectonian tried to get an article deleted, and failed, the consensus .  So she waited, as she had in the past, until she thought no one was around to notice, and then deleted everything and posted a redirect.  I undid this.  She then insults me, once again, calling me a stalker. "'''figured the stalker was still there''' - tag for merge)"  The entire history for this article .  Any article I work on, I add to my watchlist, I also monitoring various AFD listings and the operation rescue, I certainly not stalking her.  She has accused me stalking among other things in the past, that a constant insult whenever someone disagrees with her on any article she goes to, and even distorted things so badly she had administrator to post on my talk page about it, he believing her until I cleared things up.  You have an editor with a long history of trying to get the same article deleted twice, pretending to follow consensus then returning to an article to destroy it when she thought no one was around to protest, and resulting to uncivilized behavior when she doesn't get her way.  I can't seem to search through the AFD and other places on wikipedia, and the tools at http://toolserver.org/~sql/afd.php?user=Collectonian no longer work.  Anyway, to search the wikipedia for the total number of times she has accused me of stalking?  ''' 19:24, 12 March 2009 (UTC)
Tries to establish personal terminology.. He answers questions and arguments by personal attacks both in discussions as like as in edit summaries    . I am active in Wikipedia and it's controversial scenes for a while but I never was reviled in such ways.   ( ) 14:29, 14 March 2009 (UTC)
This user is the creator  of and most prolific contributor  to the National Broadband Network article.  Whenever I have made contributions or edits to this article, the user has engaged in a protracted campaign of personal attacks and accusations of   against me on the article's  .
The user has referred to myself and/or my edits as ''"petty"'', ''"naive"'', displaying ''"pure ignorance"'', being ''"not the first unnecessary edit performed"'' and preventing the article from being of ''"good quality"''.  The campaign of accusing me of ownership whenever I make a contribution has included:
The conflict of opinion first came to a head when I made what I obviously saw as improvements to a table on the page.  It ended up going through the   process, which this user did initially participate in, although many of the above remarks were made during this process, making it difficult to proceed.  A third party ended up contributing a suggested compromise which I accepted, but by this time the user had withdrawn from the process and did not respond further.
During this process I did raise some of my concerns as stated above but no resolution was reached and the user has returned to the same behaviour.  In the most recent incident the subject of wether the article describes a Current Event or not has been referred to the third opinion process without any real engagement with myself other than a renewed personal attack and accusation of ownership, but really this (Current Event status) is hardly the issue at all and I don't think the concerns I'm raising here can be addressed by that process as it was attempted before with no resolution. --   ( ) 06:30, 14 March 2009 (UTC)
I stand by the fact that I did not engage in personal attacks, I do not regard the article as my own, how much clearer can I make that. "To be a balanced article your opinion should not influence the views of others" how is this a personal attack? Assuming good faith is a two sided street I have and still do assume good faith even though I feel that is not reciprocated. The context in which some of those quotes are used should also be highlighted, for example the quote "The opinion of one editor does seem to be influencing the article to large extent" was expressed during a discussion about a table, it was an open discussion in which I assumed good faith only to have that turned around on me.   ( ) 10:54, 17 March 2009 (UTC)
Ok, one by one:
Let's stop making this into a   against another editor.  I'm going to have to say that if, indeed, you had a significant case in the beginning, you've watered it down by insistance that discussions such as the above are uncivil in any way, shape, or form.  You continue to re-hash the same arguement again and again after multiple neutral editors have advised you differently. ( '''&nbsp;Bwilkins / BMW&nbsp;''' ) 11:06, 17 March 2009 (UTC)
A new user ( ) and what is likely a sock IP ( )  to the Floor article, with every paragraph being a reference to a website titled . I  (using the AGF rollback in Twinkle) and put a welcome template on WDIAROM's page warning against spam. My revert was quickly rolled back by the IP, and a  , with a large number of accusations lobbed my way.
Dmcq came in and tried to sort through things also, which  . Dmcq took the ''constructive'' conversation to the  , with a somewhat abrasive reply from WDIAROM.
In between all of this, there other shenanigans going on also- the user and IP   maintenance templates I'd placed on the page, , and  (which is allowed, I know).
Ultimately, here's what I see and feel is going on: Dmcq and I have tried to protect a neglected article that tends to get  , my quick reaction on removing unreferenced material may have sent the wrong message to a new user, and the new user/sock IP are rapidly becoming  . The worst of the etiquette occurred on my talk page and on Dmcq's talk page; please read through those to see the accusations lobbed against us.
I'm not immune from mistakes in my edits, either: while I reverted with AGF enabled, I can see how that could deflate well-intentioned edits that were simply missing reliable sources. So please don't hesitate to tell me how to improve my behavior either.   ( ) 15:47, 17 March 2009 (UTC)
I decided to explain what happened on THeseeker4's request, as they were clearly mis-informed about what happened.
1: I searched for article on sustainable flooring- there was none, to my big surprise. I had to do the research myself - and used private subscription journals and my books mainly.
2: I decided to make a small contribution in order to start improvements to the very basic and poor 'floor' page, with a ope this will evolve naturally, ad eventually split into flooring/ floor individual pages.
3: I created an account, as I was prompted to do so when I pressed edit page tab. I pasted the prepared text and previewed how it looks, however, my browser kept freezing and logging me out, so I just saved the page, and started to do edits one by one instead, to get the page to look right, fix grammar, and add references. 
4: To start I used a well researched 'green' website as a reference, that does not sell anything and does not advertise anything.
5: In the middle of my edits, the whole entry disappeared- and I received a patronising message accusing me of vanadlism by spam.
There was no justification or evidence of this.
6: I proceeded to modifying my entry making it sound more neutral, as I agreed parts did look like I was trying to advertise. I sent a message explaining what I am doing and why, and asked what the problems was - to the accuser.
7: They explained they felt like it may be spam, because I used a single source, and the course looked like it may be spam.
8: I proceeded to clean up my entry and add more references.
9: From there more discontent about the original reference followed, and this was all removed gradually- as new references were added.
10: The Teddedr? (I think) kept placing ridiculous patronising templates on the page, that were removed- and I objected to this practise and explained my objections.
This is what Tedder did:
1: They accused me of vandalism without checking the website he suspected. 
2: They failed to check if there was a spam.
3: They failed to admit they were wrong.
4: They failed to improve the floor page in any way.
5: They failed to justify their actions, and provide evidence.
6: They involved another party,who failed to check Tedders claims.
7: Both got involved in speculations about my motives and actions.
8: Bohh failed to improve the Floor page.
9: Both failed to show any expertise about the subject.
This is what I did:
I kept working o the article trying to improve the page.
I kept explaining to them I have no interest in advertising any produce/website.
I made changes Tedder suggested, but I refused to use newspaper articles as references
I agreed the page may need to split in the future, depending on further contributions.
This leads to simple conclusion- I wanted to provide a missing information about flooring, on page that is both for floor and flooring topics. I hoped others will collaborate, and I will occasionally add information, if I find an interesting piece of research. Tedder and their buddy made no attempt to improve the page, and insisted on patronising wikipedia users,by posting templates that tell people article needs improvement- as if the users could not work that out themselves, and proceeded to make further wild accusation on several places, where I was forced to waste time by responding.
I hope this helps - you can always waste a few ours of your time and checking that everything I said is correct.
To Beeblebrox: You missed the main problem here, the original dispute was not about the entry not being suitable,I had never problem with flooring becoming a new page, and as I said, I made the entry so that people start contributing to the floor page, that was very poor. The templates- you may like them, and they to pollute loads of pages sadly, but all they do is make a mockery of wikipedia by patronising the users. Instead of running around copying/pasting templates, maybe the person who feels there is a need for improvement- should just do that- do some research, and fix te problem- or at least start.
Anyway, the 'dispute' was about teh fact Tedder DID not check before they decided to make accusation- and then insisted on replacing references they criticised with newspaper articles, as more credible- WAIT a minute..dont those have adverts all over- YES they do...are they credible and not biased  - NOPE! Once Tedder did not like to be contested - they started to go all sulky and summoned help to bully me. - Am I surprised - NOT at all- sadly most people have ego and confidence issues, and that is why they seek little powers here and there, and when they feel those are somehow threatened, they get defensive...do I believe this is the wikipedia way- not always! Anyway, - nothing else to add really- shame that all this time wasted by all here ws not put into working on that page- it would certainly be more accurate by now.     Preceding   comment added by   ( ) 08:29, 18 March 2009 (UTC) 
Uncivil behaviour on  . User has been engaging in a series of revert wars in the article page with both myself and other editors. Referred to me on the Talk page using male pronouns. I am female. My userpage states I'm female and has always done so. When I pointed this out to the user. His response was "How in the world was I insulting?"   ( ) 00:03, 18 March 2009 (UTC)
User Bali Ultimate  had been insistent on tagging me as SPA   even after being pointed that I had this login since 2006, granted that I haven't posted many edits since then. However I had openly put in a disclaimer in my initial "Keep" comment for the wikipage MotleyMoose   that I do visit the webpage and had posted there. Instead of being civil and assuming good faith (as demonstrated by my initial comment) Mr. Bali Ultimate had been rude and uncivil. After I pointed that I considered his repeated misuse of SPA characterization as personal attack he posted a rude message on my talk page . I also followed up on his comments in the admin page  . It is clear that Mr Bali Ultimate  has been misusing the SPA characterization and resorting uncivil personal attacks. What is proper followup for resolution on this?--  ( ) 06:30, 18 March 2009 (UTC)
Pixel takes in appropriate tones with other editors, like  , ,  are some examples. A close look at Pixel's contributions will show that he has actually sought out and commented on just about every single comment that I have made on the   page. This includes back tracking to days before he arrived just to comment directly to me. I will note that I have made a single  since this all started, yet they continue respond to everything I say with an antagonistic attitude toward me, and from what I can see, everyone else they don't agree with. IMO, it is doing nothing but breeding a poor environment for any discussion that takes place (as, if one looks at the history of the pages, this hostility does not appear to be coming from anyone else who shares Pixel's opinions).      16:33, 18 March 2009 (UTC)