A friend who lives in Spain sent me an email warning about not using a cell (mobile) phone while it is recharging. I will spare you all the gory photos, but the text read:
I tried a few variations on "exploding cell phones" and "dangers of recharging cell phones" in the Archives' Search box, but didn't find anything useful to me, as I had no plans to use the cell phone while pumping gas. Is this email warning reasonable; that is, is it true or possibly true? Would it make a difference if the phone was recharging in Europe at 220 V as opposed to in North America, at 125 v? Thanks for your help.   ( ) 00:29, 9 March 2009 (UTC)
Can someone tell me the Mohs scale of mineral hardness value for diorite?  (It's not in the list.)   ( ) 02:47, 9 March 2009 (UTC)
Thank you.  It's weird, I was wartching something on TV and they said diorite was so hard the only thing that could cut it was diamond (they couldn't figure out how an ancient city was built), but 6 isn't that hard.  They pronounced it die-or-ite and I think I looked up the right spelling.   ( ) 15:54, 9 March 2009 (UTC)
Elsewhere Wikipedia refers to diorite as "extremely hard" and notes its use in ancient Egypt to work granite.  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Diorite
Good day. Can someone identify this insect? I photographed it today, in the Anza-Borrego Desert State Park, California. It was about 1.5 to 2 inches long. Thanks.  e  03:17, 9 March 2009 (UTC)
If a patient has to believe in the viability of a health treatment for it to work, is it necessarily a placebo?    04:48, 9 March 2009 (UTC)
I'm trying to do a lab with some psychrometric equations. Atmospheric pressure for the room (I believe) in which our experiments took place was measured, but I am not sure whether this is total pressure or the pressure of dry air. Does atmospheric pressure normally include the water vapor pressure? Thus in a closed system the atmospheric pressure surrounding a reservoir of water should increase with further evaporation? (This is different from saturation water vapor pressure and water vapor pressure being equal, I believe.) 
What is the name of air sac which is found in human's lung?     Preceding   comment added by   ( ) 09:16, 9 March 2009 (UTC) 
We have baryon number, but, apparently, "meson number" is not a noted concept. Can someone shed light? &mdash;   09:52, 9 March 2009 (UTC)
But could you please define light and its composition?--  ( ) 09:23, 10 March 2009 (UTC)
The main motive of yur answer is that light is simply an energy whose propogation is undefined. Its properties are a mix of electro magnetic, wave and particle propogation.--  ( ) 08:44, 12 March 2009 (UTC)
I could not axactly understand which amonst all the theories was correct.If it was the particle theory then how come the first line itself states light as electro magnetic radiation.If light consists of photons then how come polarisation was observed? Hope you can help out.--  ( ) 09:13, 10 March 2009 (UTC)
Usually c(transmission speed) = f(frequency)    w(wavelength) ; 
However, if I, per second, send 3 photons(wave packets) of wavelength 1cm at the speed of light,
I feel insecure/unsure about this, and
I have not succeeded in finding a measure 
Should there not be an explicit statement, 
Should there not be a special measure for 
Hullo all above ! I am the originator of the query. This is to thank you for Your efforts. 
I am going to attempt a new round, if it may please, titled "Frequency in physics ?" / Rolf
Heparin acts by decreasing the activity of thrombin, the common endpoint of coagulation cascades
Why then, does it only affect pTT blood times (intrinsic pathway), and not the PT(extrinsic pathway)?
I've been looking at SNOMED.  I see that it has a lot of terminology.  Does it have abbreviations?  For example, does it have "tab = tablet" and "hctz = hydrochlorothiazide"? --    17:47, 9 March 2009 (UTC)
This discussion began at  . --   ( ) 19:05, 9 March 2009 (UTC)
Imagine that the two-way communication of signals between us and some space-aliens orbiting a distant star has been established. They are blind and immobile and cannot use pictures or diagrams of any kind. There is no pre-established code or alphabet. While I can imagine that eventually the meaning of mathematical or logical symbols might eventually be established (for example tranmitting many messages such as "..+..=...." would give meaning to + and =), would it be possible to eventually build up enough meaning from a zero base so that in time they would understand what was meant by the message "Last thursday my Uncle Bill went to the supermarket"? Helen Keller springs to mind.   ( ) 02:01, 8 March 2009 (UTC)
But it might still be difficult to recognize a "Periodic Table" when we find one.  There are many ways of illustrating the periodic table, and it just got more complicated.
The essential bottleneck to get through may be that of naming geometric shapes, such as a triangle. A triangle could then be used to build up other shapes. The triangle could be named after being identified by its mathematical properties. If however they have no sense of the spatial, then you are stuffed.   ( ) 23:56, 8 March 2009 (UTC)