Note:  If you are seeing this page as a result of an attempt to re-nominate an article for deletion, you must manually edit the AfD nomination links in order to create a new discussion page using the name format of  .  When you create the new discussion page, please provide a link to this old discussion in your nomination. -->
The result was    '''speedy deleted''' by   CSD G10: Attack page or negative unsourced BLP.  The decision to delete is now being discussed at  . Closure by uninvolved admin --  ( ) 22:40, 15 March 2009 (UTC)
I am restoring this AFD discussion, and overturning its attempted closure by Sceptre. Sceptre is a POV participant on Talk:Barack Obama, and therefore his closure of this AFD is in violation of AFD.
I    created the subpage as a place to develop a possible article. It was nominted for AFD, here, but another user later changed that AFD to "speedy delete".   decided on his own to delete the subpage, claiming it to be an "attack page." That deletion is currently being reviewed at  . Discussion will continue there on the matter of the deletion, and the merits of the page are still being discussed here. 
Note: If you are seeing this page as a result of an attempt to re-nominate an article for deletion, you must manually edit the AfD nomination links in order to create a new discussion page using the name format of  . When you create the new discussion page, please provide a link to this old discussion in your nomination. -->
This repeatedly recreted article  has been speedied five times for reasons of   (no meaningful content) and   (attack page), and is now semi-salted to prevent new and IP editors from recreating it.  There has been considerable interest in creating the article voiced at   so a full discussion on this article is probably warranted.  
The article in its present form is a skeleton "working version", currently a list of links and unsourced disparagement, plus some disparaging comments about other editors, all created by a long-time Wikipedian who obviously intends that the article gets filled out and sourced eventually.  However, I am concerned that as a criticism article it is inevitably a   and will be impossible to maintain in a neutral, encyclopedic way.  The author has already commented about "whitewashing", so presumably the goal is not to present a balanced, fair biography of the President (which would be redundant with his bio article anyway) but rather to   criticism.  That would then become a   violation.  ( ) 17:28, 15 March 2009 (UTC)
Talk:Obama : This recent creation was tagged as an attack page for speedy deletion, and I just deleted it. I just wanted to make sure we're clear ... well-sourced, balanced information about anyone, including Barack Obama, is and always has been welcome in Wikipedia, but pages which exist only to disparage their subject will be deleted on sight, no matter who the subject is, per our policy on biographical material of living persons. As with any other deletion, anyone who disagrees is welcome to take the article to deletion review. - Dan Dank55 (push to talk) 20:17, 15 March 2009 (UTC)
Talk Dank55: You deleted a subpage article that is currently being discussed, citing your own POV assessment of what that article contains, characterizing such in a particularly POV way, and not having participated or given regard to discussion at Wikipedia:Articles for deletion/Barack Obama/Criticism of Barack Obama. Restore it now. Thanks. -Stevertigo 20:23, 15 March 2009 (UTC)
Talk: Stevertigo: Please see Talk:Barack_Obama#Barack_Obama.2FCriticism_of_Barack_Obama for my rationale. - Dan Dank55 (push to talk) 20:22, 15 March 2009 (UTC)
Talk Dank55: You appear to have certain opinions about the value of that particular subpage draft. You might also have similar opinions about the creation of such subpages, the usage of templates transclusion to aid article development, and the motivations of the creator. All of them are certainly valid opinions, in the context of discussion. To simply delete something outright requires more than rationale; it requires that such rational be accurate and have the support of other editors. We are discussing that issue now, and your deletion only serves to destroy and stigmatize that strange process of discussion first, delete after. You made some charachterizations on the Talk:Obama page, not rationales. Restore it, and join the discussion. -Stevertigo 20:31, 15 March 2009 (UTC)
Talk Dank55: As I mentioned on your talk page, the proper forum to review whether the deletion was appropriate is deletion review. Feel free to take the page there, and please let me know so I can watchlist the discussion. I'm always ready to learn if I've done something wrong. - Dan Dank55 (push to talk)