Currently Everus offers wireless high speed internet in Bruce County, County of Dufferin, County of Wellington, County of Grey, County of County of Perth, County of Oxford, Waterloo County and some surroundings areas.
In November 2008, Everus won the $1 million dollar bid with the County of Grey to initiate the info-structure initiative.  The availability of the $1 million as a one third contribution from the province to build $3 million in broadband infrastructure. It is projected that the County will have a 75% chance of access to affordable broadband Internet.  
January 2009, Everus also won the $1 million dollar bid with County of Wellington, as well as the County of Dufferin. 
Everus has announced plans on expanding into more areas within Ontario within the coming years.
Everus Communications    pilot project was a communications tower near the Rocky Saugeen River on Highway 6 near Durham. The solar panel was erected in July 2008 and has exceeded all expectations of the Everus management team. The solar project at the Rocky Saugeen tower site was such a success that another solar powered tower is in the works for residents in Priceville.The solar tower expansion will grow as Everus continues to build new tower sites in Grey and surrounding counties.
As of November 2008, Everus took on the task to start converting supplier and customer invoices from hard copy to electronic copy. This task was to help eliminate unnecessary paper waste for internal and external communications. 
Some rural residents had some concerns regarding health risks associated with wireless communications signals. There have been many studies conducted to prove that there are no great risks associated with wireless communications.
The World Health Organization investigated this issue due to persistent public misconceptions about it. They released a report on Electromagnetic fields and public health and their effects on health. Their conclusive findings showed that signal from wireless towers did no harm to health and the common radio signal was 5 times stronger. 
Barrett Xplore Inc. Purchases Assets of Everus Communications
Thursday March 3rd 2010
Acquisition Increases Barrett's Fixed Wireless Coverage in Southwestern Ontario
MARKHAM, ON     March 4, 2010     Barrett Xplore Inc. (BXI) is pleased to announce that it has added thousands of Everus Communications    subscribers to its growing base of Xplornet broadband customers. This acquisition was part of a court ordered and managed receivership process and includes the purchase of customer contracts, fixed wireless towers and network infrastructure and other assets.
Everus Communications supplied wireless Internet services, IP telephony, private network solutions over fixed wireless and Digital Subscriber Line(DSL) service over copper phone lines. The Everus network covers all or part of 11 counties in Southwestern Ontario including Grey, Wellington, Dufferin, Waterloo, Bruce, Huron, and Perth.
Over the next 90 days, Barrett Xplore Inc. will be working diligently to ensure a seamless integration of all operational functions, minimizing impact to its new customers, with the goal of enhancing their broadband experience. During the transition, it will be business as usual for Everus customers while BXI continues to operate the Everus brand. Customer contact information, service packages, pricing, and billing practices will remain unchanged. Barrett Xplore will keep Everus customers apprised of any updates.