I have reason to believe   is a sockpuppet of banned editor  . He was banned for sockpuppeting . User Tuesday has very similar  as  and his . A defining characteristic of Jersay was removal of cited material without rationale and bias towards certain countries, especially  Somalia. Here we see Tuesday removing entire incidents: , , , the list goes on and on. Editor approach is also very similar. At one point Jersay almost deleted all Somalia-related incidents because he believed they weren't terrorist attacks, this accusation as been thrown again but with Israel: . I'm not sure if this is enough evidence for a checkuser but I hope it is.   ( ) 17:28, 5 April 2009 (UTC)
I believe that Wikifan145 is making an accusation in "bad faith" as he/she does not want their own editing to be examined. I have deleted the Somalia terrorist incidents as it would be to time consuming to list each and every terrorist incident that occurs in Somalia. However, if Wikifan 145 wants to create a page on all incidents in Somalia, or a side-bar to the War in Somalia page I would be extremely happy to record incidents.
User:Jersay did delete alot of incidents without explaining his actions. I concur. However, I am open to using the Talk to discuss all incidents or an assortment of similar incidents. 
I would also like to point out that Wikifan145 deleted terrorist incidents in April (April 3 Phillipines, and April 5, Iraq) with no explanation given. Just like Jersay. I believe that Wikifan145 claims are not relevent to the case of sock puppetry. (  ( ) 14:59, 6 April 2009 (UTC))
I will admit as User:Tuesday2009, I use the same IP address as the User: Jersay as we are roomates at the same university. However, I have edited other subjects such as regarding Canada, Thailand-Cambodia border dispute, the World Baseball Classic long before I started editing list of terrorist incidents 2009, and only after the site fell into disrepair as shown by evidence submitted  that no activity occured from March 24, 2009 until I started editing at the end of March.(  ( ) 15:05, 6 April 2009 (UTC))
Wikifan145 continues to wreck havoc on this site. Not myself. The use of an IP address is not concerning of a sockpuppet investigation. Through the use of University computers it will be the same IP address. Therefore I am not going to answer that charge.
I make the charge again that Wkifan145 is causing vandalism by editing without discussion, the same exact way User:Jersay attempted to do, and does not want his/her editing to be examined. And once a person who refuses his or her ideas are terminated he/she will allow the list of terrorist incidents 2009 to go into disrepair. For example, terrorist incident occured in the West Bank, at an Israeli controlled settlement of Bat Ayin on April 2. However, Wikifan145 keeps putting it in Palestinian control. The Palestinian Authority only controls 60% of the West Bank at this time, and only Palestinian populated areas. Israeli police and army have firm control over the entire West Bank. As well he deleted April 3, terrorist incident in Philippines, and just attempted to delete a second terrorist incident in Iraq on April 6. He/she repeatedly commits vandalism by editing with incorrect links or claims to make an edit but submits a number of reverts that are not required. Therefore I have requested a vandalism investigation be open on Wikifan145(  ( ) 00:56, 7 April 2009 (UTC)).
I submit as evidence different sites I have worked on, besides the list of terrorist incidents 2009 site where I have gotten into conflict with Wikifan12345. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Toronto_Blue_Jays
I am interested in more then just list of terrorist incidents 2009, unlike User:Jersay and I have been able to work co-operatively with all users to these sites except in this one where Wikifan12345 is being unapproachable, using personal attacks as does not want anyone editing his/her work. Therefore, it is him or her that is to blame for the situation that has accord.(  ( ) 04:49, 7 April 2009 (UTC))
So after a few token edits to articles outside of his usual narrow set of articles, Jersay/Tuesday2009 carries on editing the same narrow set articles in the same way and, by his own admission, from the same IP address as Jersay, yet we are expected to believe they are two different people? Lock him up and throw away the key please someone.   ( ) 11:30, 7 April 2009 (UTC)
Tuesday2009 asks us to accept that a week after his roommate is indefinitely blocked for disruptive editing, he spontaneously decided that he wanted to edit the very site that had cast his roommate aside, that he wanted to edit the exact same articles, and that he wanted to edit them in the exact same way.
I afraid that despite all efforts to   here, this is  .   ( ) 06:53, 15 April 2009 (UTC)
Usual Jersay style concentration of edits on articles such as 2009 timeline of the War in Somalia, List of wars 2003   current, List of ongoing conflicts, List of terrorist incidents, 2009. Unfortunately he's alsop making up wars in the same way Jersay did, with the addition of his newly created Amazonas Land Conflict to List of wars 2003   current with . While it may be worthy of an article it isn't a war, and as usual his edits make a mockery of an encyclopedia.   ( ) 16:08, 7 June 2009 (UTC)
Usual narrow concentration of articles, usual editing style of removing terrorist incidents that don't fit his peculiar definition of terrorism, usual Canadian themed name, usual geographic location for the IP.   ( ) 14:58, 27 June 2009 (UTC)
AmerCana has the usual extremely limited range of articles edited, such as List of terrorist incidents, 2010, List of wars 2003   current and List of ongoing conflicts, and the same disputes about which "wars" or "conflicts" should or should not be included. The addition of a reference in  to the Canadian version of Yahoo matches Jersay's known location in addition.   ( ) 21:44, 11 January 2010 (UTC)
There are 34 million people in Canada, not just one person. My father is Canadian and my mother is American and we are currently living in Winnipeg Manitoba as my mom works at Boeing Technology. I believe you need to have more evidence then I get my sources from Canadian Yahoo News as I live in Canada and through Canada unless I request American Yahoo I will get Yahoo Canada. I have stated why in the conflicts page why some conflicts should be removed as they are non-existant even though posters keep posting them without supporting evidence that a conflict is ongoing in the "supposed" conflict zone. I posted my reasons on Talk and no one has posted a reasonable reason for the conflicts being posted. Signed AmerCana    Preceding   comment added by   (       ) 
I have long suspected Ryan Kirkpatrick to be a possible sockpuppet of Jersay. I was not sure due to an UK based (Jersay is in Canada) IP generally prefixed 80.47 editing List of terrorist incidents, 2010    (Jersay's main article, albeit he was editing the 2009 one before being blocked but was very active on the 2010 article with his last known sockpuppet) in a similar way to Ryan Kirkpatrick, but having closely inspected their edits I have concluded that they are in fact different editors. For example the  and  versions of the same incident are quite different, especially as the IP can spell and use grammar far better than Ryan.
Last known Jersay sockpuppet  was blocked at 01:42, 20 January 2010, Ryan Kirkpatrick's account was created at 13:15, 21 January 2010, which would suggest they may be the same person especially given their primarily terrorism-focused editing.   ( ) 17:18, 24 June 2010 (UTC)