Hi. The article on Supernovae states that type Ia supernovae are the result of star-dwarf interactions, type Ib and Ic are the result of truly massive stars, possibly Wolf-Rayets, and that type II supernovae have a mass of at least 9 solar masses. However, this causes a contradiction. The article on the Chandrasekhar limit states that stars with masses greater than 1.4 solar masses will collapse into a neutron star rather than a white dwarf, therefore initiating a supernova. Or, is this defined by the mass of the star in the ''late'' phase of its life, when it has burned the hydrogen and helium and begins to swell, thereby losing some of its mass? I see that most stars visible in the night sky do have masses greater than 1.4 Sol. Why are there not more supernova explosions in our own galaxy, then? Is it possible for stars to gain significant mass during their lifetime, other than by ingesting material from a companion? The article on black holes does not mention this, but I read somewhere that a star having a mass over 6 Sol is a good indication it may collapse into a black hole (assuming that any core remnant is not destroyed). Also, when two medium-mass stars with similar masses in a very close binary system collide (due to gravity in the system shrinking their orbits, not a by-chance collision), is the result a supernova or a hypernova? The article on supernovae does not mention this category, and apparently hypernovae refer only to hypergiants collapsing.
If the limit for a star to end as a supernova is indeed 1.4 Sol, then looking at the top ten brightest stars in the sky, it looks like that Arcturus and Vega will explode as supernovae; Sirius and Procyon will also explode as supernovae, but interactions with their companion dwarf star could initiate a type Ia instead; Canopus and Achenar will explode as supernovae, and are just massive enough to perhaps end as black holes, Rigel and Betelguese will be especially energetic supernovae resulting in black holes; Rigil Kentarus will have one star swell to red giant first, probably star A, then shed its outer layers, and if the explosion doesn't significantly disrupt the second star, then possibly its remaining material will migrate towards the remnant of star A; Capella appears to be a binary system of two stars massive enough to generate supernovae, perhaps the explosion of one will disrupt the other, or else we could have stellar matter being drawn towards a neutron star. Most of these stars will probably be well away from Earth, though, by the time the explosion occurs, because a positive radial velocity would cause the star to be farther away, and a negative one probably means the star will have long receded by the time the explosion occurs. Or, is there something I'm missing here? Would this mean that supernova explosions are likely to be common near Earth, and would they significantly affect our atmosphere?
Also, what exactly are the evolutionary phases of higher-mass stars (those heavier than 1.4 Sol, specificly)? Does a blue giant evolve to a red supergiant, does a blue supergiant evolve any farther before exploding, what about white and yellowish-white stars in this category, are they still the young versions of red giants or red supergiants? Also, in the case of supergiant-black hole interactions, such as with Cygnus X1, what is expected to occur when the supergiant itself goes through the end of its life cycle? Thanks. ~   (   ) 01:29, 20 March 2009 (UTC)
When it comes to the fastest on land, everyone bows down to the sprint of the cheetah.  But beyond the sprint, what is the fastest land animal over a substantial distance, let's say 50 miles or so?  I've recently heard an assertion that we, as a species, were very successful in our infancy because we evolved to be the best at tracking herds over very long distances.    ( ) 02:37, 20 March 2009 (UTC)
There are other animals besides horses to consider as well.  What about wolves?    ( ) 14:57, 20 March 2009 (UTC)
Let's play devil's advocate for a bit... Okay, so an average horse could beat an average human in a single race of 50 miles. How soon until it can go another 50? I imagine it would take a lot longer to refuel a horse than a human; in fact, if the human slowed to a walk here and there, it could refuel on the run to some degree, or at least take in some water. Quadrupeds can't do that. The horse is going to need enough energy to haul its 1,000 lb carcass across the plain, while the human only needs to haul its ~150 lb carcass, and gets to take in higher calorie foods to boot (including, er, horse, but that's a bit rude to your opponent...).  Sooner or later the issue of fuel quality and fuel consumption are going to overwhelm any short-term equine superiority. Maybe.   ( ) 20:14, 20 March 2009 (UTC)
IMHO one issue we're not addressing is the difference between what can be done, and what is done. Personally, it wouldn't surprise me if a number of animals can beat humans in general. However many of them are never going to do it in practice. Similarly while humans may have evolved endurance for long hunts, what sort of distance are we talking about here? Did humans really chase animals by running after them non stop for 50 miles?   ( ) 14:11, 22 March 2009 (UTC)
Without having read the article that Sappysap is referring to, I wonder if it's solely referring to our endurance or it may also refer to our intelligence etc. I presume one advantage humans have is that they have endurance and also intelligence. Let's say you are chasing something. Perhaps it's about the same speed as you so you don't really catch up to it and it doesn't escape. Eventually you tire and slow down (or perhaps you could go on but decide the current run is pointless). It 'escapes' and then slows down itself. Trouble for it is you may rest and 'refuel' and then go on. You can see it's tracks so you can easily still go after it. It doesn't know this so it's not necessarily running away from you any more. Eventually you may get close and it sees you and runs away again. Perhaps you repeat the same thing. It's easily possible you will ultimately win because you are chasing it in a direct line and wearing it down successful. It's not necessarily the case you have more endurance then it, you have good endurance sure but you are also smarter.   ( ) 14:33, 22 March 2009 (UTC)
About how long will it take for it to expand from its current size to red giant size (following the collapse of its core once the hydrogen there is used up)?   ( ) 03:09, 20 March 2009 (UTC)
Here we go again...
I thought the whole universe was in a hot dense state and then nearly 14 billion years ago expansion started? Wait...have i been misinformed?   ( ) 16:14, 20 March 2009 (UTC)
I was watching TV where i saw a man working in a high way project , this man was trying to crack a big rock , he kept hitting the rock with a hummer until and suddenly it just split into half , i asked about it and get some opinions like a potential energy is being stored in the mass until its enough to crack the mass,
Yes, wikipedia knows. Here's how you can find out what: copy your word into the white box underneath where it says "search" in the left hand sidebar near the top of this page. Then click on "search". If you can't find a relevant page or have trouble understanding some of the content, please feel free to come back with a specific question.   ( ) 14:23, 20 March 2009 (UTC)
If you put solar panels on windmills, could they help increase the energy given to the town or city or whatever the windmill's powering? What would you connect the solar panels to?    ( ) 17:38, 20 March 2009 (UTC)
Hi
Do you know the name of the surgeon who performed Russell Watson's brain tumor operation at the Alexadra Hospital in Cheadle (Greater Manchester) in 2007?  Many thanks  ( ) 18:34, 20 March 2009 (UTC)
This  caught my eye because I was just reading about other uses for Electrolyzed water. (Just ignore the snake-oil bits, I'm talking about mainstream uses like hospital disinfectants)
The Reuters article talks about using "electrolysis and ultra-low frequency waves" to raise sea water pH to 10 then spraying it in a scrubber stack to knock down soot, SoX, NoX and CO2 in ship exhaust. I wonder if it would also knock down heavy metal emissions, bunker oil being about the dirtiest thing in the world. The method described sounds very much like the process for producing electrolyzed water in commercial applications. (Again, I'm not talking about bottling it and scamming people into drinking it)
My request here is for some sage observers to look at the Reuters and wiki articles and tell me if it would be appropriate to add some verbiage and source to our wiki article to describe this use. And/or feel free to add it yourself!
And what the heck would ultra-low frequency waves have to do with this? Thanks!   ( ) 21:48, 20 March 2009 (UTC)