She was born in Norwich, England.
Jennifer Moyle is a biochemist born in Norwich, England in 1921. She is the daughter of S. H. Leonard Moyle and Olive M. Dakin. She also has a sister named Vivian, who also studied biochemistry.
Jennifer Moyle began schooling at Norwich High School in 1926 where she remained until entering Girton College of Cambridge University in 1939. While studying there she earned a "Title of Bachelor's of Arts Degree", the equivalent of modern day Bachelor's in Arts, in 1942. She specialized in Biochemistry, and also attended many lectures on philosophy.
Moyle is credited with having worked with Peter Mitchell on the chemiosmotic mechanism of ATP synthesis, and publishing papers on properties of purified isocitric enzyme.
Shortly after earning her degree, Moyle entered the Auxiliary Territorial Service. While there she went straight into military intelligence, where she soon become an intelligence officer in MI8. There she was promoted to second in command of a section dealing with intelligence obtained from ciphers breaking German codes by the British.
After World War II, she continued service for another year helping teach servicemen how to return to civilian life.
Jennifer Moyle published an article on the properties of purified isocitric enzymes in August 1956 with Malcom Dixon.
Jennifer Moyle was also a former research colleague of Peter Mitchell, and co-founder to a charitable research company known as Glynn Research Ltd.. She began working with Mitchell closely between 1948 and 1952, however it was a purely professional.
Moyle and Mitchell founded Glynn Research in 1964, to promote biological research, however actually laboratory work did not begin until 1965. 
Moyle worked for many years with Mitchell on his hypothesis on Chemiosmotic Theory. She proved to be an important associate, designing many of the experiments needed to test the hypothesis, and helped earn Mitchell the Nobel Prize in 1978.
There had been earlier work by Peter Mitchell and Jennifer Moyle that had indicated that the walls of Gram-positive bacteria contained phosphate derivatives.