A '''solar micro-inverter''', or commonly '''microconverter''', converts direct current (DC) from a single solar panel to alternating current (AC).  The electric power from several micro-inverters is combined and sent to the consuming devices. Micro-inverters contrast with the conventional "string inverter" devices, which support a large number of solar panels connected to a single inverter.
Micro-inverters have several advantages over conventional string inverters. The principal advantage is that shading of any one solar panel, or a panel failure, does not disproportinately reduce the output of an entire array. Each micro-inverter can act as a maximum power point tracker for its connected panel.
Their primary disadvantages are that they are generally more expensive per peak watt than the equivalent power in a string inverter, and are normally located on the panel, where they may be harder to maintain.
The key feature of a true micro-inverter is not its small size or power rating, but its one-to-one control over a single panel, and its mounting on the panel or near it. Small string inverters, like larger ones, control multiple panels and are generally mounted remotely, often indoors. The term is also commonly used to refer to small wind power inverters operating in the same way.
Solar panels produce direct current at a voltage that depends on the module's design and the lighting conditions. Modern panels using 6" cells normally contain 60 cells and produce a nominal 30 volts. For conversion into AC, panels are connected in series to produce effectively a single large array with a nominal rating of around 300 to 600 VDC. The power is then run to an inverter, which converts it into standard AC voltage, typically 240VAC/60Hz for the North American market, or 220VAC/50Hz in Europe.
The main problem with this "string inverter" approach is that the string of panels will act as if it was a single larger panel rated to the worst of the individual panels within it. For instance, if one panel in a string has 5% higher resistance due to a minor manufacturing defect, the string as a whole will perform 5% worse (or thereabouts). This situation is dynamic; if a panel is shaded its output drops dramatically, affecting the output of the string as a whole even if the other panels are not shaded. Even slight changes in orientation can cause mis-matches in output in this fashion.
Additionally, the efficiency of a panel's output is strongly affected by the load the inverter places on it. In order to maximize production, inverters use a technique known as maximum power point tracking (MPPT) to ensure optimal collection by adjusting the applied load. However, the same issues that cause output to vary from panel to panel affect the proper load that the MPPT system should apply. If a single panel is operating at a different point, a string inverter can only see the overall change, and will move the MPPT point to match. This will result in not just the losses from the shadowed panel, but all of the other panels as well. Shading of as little as 9% of the entire surface array of a PV system can, in some circumstances, lead to a system-wide power loss of as much as 54%.
A further problem, although minor, is that string inverters come in a limited selection of power ratings. This means that a given array will normally upsize the inverter to the next-largest model over the rating of the panel array. For instance, a 10-panel array of 2300&nbsp;W might have to use a 2500 or even 3000&nbsp;W inverter, paying for conversion capability it cannot use. This same effect makes it difficult to change array sizes over time, adding power when funds are available. With micro-inverters, different ratings of solar panels can be added to an array even if they don't match the original types.
Other challenges associated with centralized inverters include the space required to locate the device, as well as heat dissipation requirements. Large central inverters are typically actively cooled. Cooling fans  make noise, so location of the inverter relative to offices and occupied areas must be considered.
Microinverters are small inverters rated to handle the output of a single panel. Modern grid-tie panels are normally rated between 220 and 245 Watts, but rarely produce this in practice, so microinverters are typically rated between 190 and 220&nbsp;W. Because it is operated at this lower power point, many design issues inherent to larger designs simply go away; the need for a large transformer is generally eliminated, large electrolytic capacitors can be replaced by smaller solid-state devices, and cooling loads are so reduced that no fans are needed. Mean time between failures (MTBF) are quoted in the hundreds of years. , Enphase Energy
More importantly, a microinverter attached to a single panel allows it to isolate and tune the output of that panel. For example, in the same 10-panel array used as an example above, with microinverters the single panel that is underperforming will have no effect on the panels around it. In that case, the array as a whole will produce as much as 5% more power than it would with a string inverter. When shadowing is factored in, if present, these gains can become considerable, with manufacturers generally claiming 5% better output at a minimum, and up to 25% better in some cases.
Microinverters produce grid-matching power directly at the back of the panel. Arrays of panels are connected in parallel to each other, and then to the grid feed. This has the major advantage that a single failing panel or inverter will not take the entire string offline. Combined with the lower power and heat loads, and improved MTBF, it is suggested that overall array reliability of a microinverter-based system will be significantly greater than a string-inverter based one. Additionally, when faults occur, they are identifiable to a single point, as opposed to an entire string. This not only makes fault isolation easier, but unmasks minor problems that might never become visible otherwise - a single underperforming panel may not affect a short string's output enough to be noticed.
The main disadvantage of the microinverter concept is cost.  Because each panel has to duplicate much of the complexity of a string inverter, the costs are much greater. This offsets any advantage in terms of simplification of the individual components. As of October 2010, a central inverter costs approximately $0.40 per watt, whereas a micro-inverter costs approximately $0.52 per watt. Like string inverters, economic considerations force manufacturers to limit the number of models they produce; most produce a single model that may be over- or under-size when matched with a particular panel. With steadily decreasing prices and the advent of wider  model selections to match PV module output more closely, the latter problems are becoming increasingly less of an obstacle and may help micro inverters spread more widely.
Microinverters have become common where array sizes are small and maximizing performance from every panel is a concern. In these cases the differential in price-per-watt is minimized due to the small number of panels, and has little effect on overall system cost. The improvement in energy collection given a fixed size array can offset this difference in cost. For this reason, microinverters have been most successful in the residential market, where the limited space for panels constraints the array size, and shading from nearby trees or other homes is often an issue. Micro-inverter manufacturers list many installations, some as small as a single panel and the majority under 50.
The microinverter concept has been in the solar industry since its inception. However, flat costs in manufacturing, like the cost of the transformer or enclosure, scaled favorably with size and meant that larger devices were inherently less expensive in terms of price per watt. Small inverters were available from companies like ExcelTech and others, but these were simply small versions of larger designs with poor price performance and were aimed at niche markets.
In 1991 the US company Ascension Technology started work on what was essentially a shrunken version of a traditional inverter, intended to be mounted on a panel to form an "AC panel". This design was based on the conventional linear regulator, which is not particularly efficient and dissipates considerable heat. In 1994 they sent an example to Sandia Labs  for testing.Katz, pg. 3 In 1997, Ascension partnered with US panel company ASE Americas to introduce the 300&nbsp;W SunSine panel.Katz, pg. 4
Design of what would today be recognized as a "true" microinverter traces its history to late 1980s work by Werner Kleinkauf at the Institut fur Solare Energieversorgungstechnik (ISET). These designs were based on modern high-frequency switching power supply technology, which is much more efficient. His work on "module integrated converters" was highly influential, especially in Europe.
In 1993 Mastervolt introduced their first grid-tie inverter, the Sunmaster 130S, based on a collaborative effort between Shell Solar, Ecofys and ECN. The 130 was designed to be mounted directly to the back of the panel, connecting both AC and DC lines using compression fittings. In 2000 the 130 was replaced by the Soladin 120, a micro-inverter in the form of a AC adapter that allows panels to be connected simply by plugging them into any wall socket.
In 1995, OKE-Services designed a new high-frequency version with improved efficiency, which was introduced commercially as the OK4-100 in 1995 by NKF Kabel, and re-branded for US sales as the Trace Microsine. A new version, the OK4All, improved efficiency and had wider operating ranges.
In spite of this promising start, by 2003 most of these projects had ended. Ascension Technology was purchased by Applied Power Corporation, a large integrator. APC was in turn purchased by Schott in 2002, and SunSine production was canceled in favor of Schott's existing designs. NKF ended production of the OK4 series in 2003 when a subsidy program ended.Katz, pg. 7 Mastervolt has moved on to a line of "mini-inverters" combining the ease-of-use of the 120 in a system designed to support up to 600 W of panels., Mastervolt, pg. 9
In the aftermath of the 2001 Telecoms crash, Martin Fornage of Cerent Corporation was looking for new projects. When he saw the low performance of the string inverter for the solar array on his ranch, he found the project he was looking for. In 2006 he formed Enphase Energy with another Cerent engineer, Raghu Belur, and they spent the next year applying their telecommunications design expertise to the inverter problem.
Released in 2008, the Enphase M175 model was the first commercially successful microinverter; a successor, M190, was introduced in 2009. Encased in a lightweight aluminum enclosure, the M190 was designed to be mounted to the same "rails" used by the panels, typically located behind them where the DC cables emerged from the back of the panel. The M190 includes a CPU that uses power line communication to send status information when polled. A second device, the Envoy, periodically polls each inverter, then sends the information as a batch over the internet to Enphase. The data is collected and presented every 15 minutes on their Enlighten web site.
Backed by $100 million in private equity, Enphase quickly grew to 13% marketshare by mid-2010, aiming for 20% by year-end. They shipped their 500,000th inverter in early 2011. Manufacturing branched out, with Flextronics starting production runs in their factory in Ontario to supply the local market. In late 2010 they announced a re-designed version, tentatively called the M215, that reduces the cabling and ports on the inverters in order to further lower costs. A variant of the M215 can attach directly to the back of the panel, producing an "AC module". In early 2011, they announced that re-branded versions of the new design will be sold by Siemens directly to electrical contractors for widespread distribution.
Enphase's success did not go unnoticed, and since 2010 a host of competitors have appeared. Many of these are identical to the M190 in specs, and even in the casing and mounting details. Some differentiate by competing head-to-head with Enphase in terms of price or performance, while others are attacking niche markets. Larger firms have also stepped into the field. Many of the principles from Ascension Technology have re-formed as GreenRay Solar, and OKE-Services updated OK4-All product was recently bought by SMA, a major inverter manufacturer.
Another approach is the power optimizer, which is essentially a DC-to-DC version of the microinverter - everything except the actual "inverter". The power optimizer has all the benefits of the microinverter in terms of maximum power point tracking performance, module isolation, monitoring etc, but is even smaller and simpler than the microinverter. The arrays are then connected to a string inverter as normal. This approach minimizes the distributed costs, and theoretically produces a lower-cost system overall. However, the long runs of high-voltage DC wiring feeding the inverters remain, along with the need to group panels into acceptable groups to get those voltage levels. SolarEdge is leading the power optimizer approach; in 2010, the company shipped an estimated 250,000 power optimizers and 12,000 inverters     amounting to a total generation of 50 megawatts.