Nixle's primary publishers are local public safety agencies, municipal governments, schools and affiliated municipal agencies (e.g., emergency management, local government, public works, hospitals and recreation departments.)  Nixle plans to build the foundation for a comprehensive set of location based information, which is the core of Nixle for every location throughout the world.
Nixle was founded in 2007 by Firas Emachah and Craig Mitnick.
In June of 2008, Nixle partnered with the non-profit organization NLETS, a computer-based message switching system that links together all local, state and federal law enforcement agencies throughout the United States.
Under the relationship, Nlets houses Nixle servers in their secure facilities and integrates Nixle technology into their network.
Nixle tested its technology in the winter of 2008 in Chula Vista, California.  The test included publishers from the Chula Vista Police Department, Communications Department and various other Chula Vista municipal agencies.  After the 45 day test, the City of Chula Vista formally became the first municipality to adopt the Nixle platform. 
Chula Vista Mayor Cheryl Cox had this to say about the test:
In the Spring of 2009, agencies in eight states tested the new communication platform.  20 municipalities in California, following Chula Vista's lead, gained secure access to the service for testing, including Beverly Hills, Pasadena, Napa, San Diego, Sonoma, National City, Escondido and Walnut Creek.  
Shortly thereafter, Nixle partnered with VeriSign Messaging and Mobile media, a division of VeriSign, Inc.  VeriSign provides Nixle users with short message services (SMS), or text messaging that is built on authenticated and secure foundations.
Later that month, Nixle was one of four select sponsors at the 2009 Police Executive Research Forum's (PERF) annual meeting in Washington, D.C.  The conference was held on March 26th and 27th of 2009, hosting the nation's top 200 law enforcement executives from the largest cities in the country. 
Nixle partnered with the National Sherrif's Association (NSA) at the 69th Annual Conference held in Fort Lauderdale.  At the conference, users could text the word "sheriff" to a phone number and receive alerts to their cell phones throughout the Greater Fort Lauderdale Convention Center.
After some strategic partnerships with NLETS, VeriSign, and other firms, Nixle began rolling its service out to agencies nationwide.  
By the summer of 2009, Los Angeles, Baltimore, Chicago, Virginia Beach, Minneapolis, and another 800 cities in 43 states had either adopted the program or were testing it.
At the 2009 G-20 Summit, Nixle's services enabled the Pittsburgh police department to communicate with 30 agencies for the event, quelling protester hot spots and keeping the damage to the city at a minimum.
As of November 2009, over 3000 agencies in 49 states have adopted the service.
Nixle's public safety alerts have reached residents and communities across the country.
A senior citizen went out to check the mail and never came back in.  Her husband, worried about her recent episodes, called police. CVPD issued the first of two Alert messages, asking folks to keep an eye out for a disoriented elderly woman wearing yellow shorts. The message was sent within a 1/2 mile of her home. 45 minutes later, CVPD sent a follow-up message with a complete description of the woman and a picture, widening out the message distribution area to 2.5 miles. A citizen received the message and saw the woman, allowing CVPD to bring her home safely.
1,062 tips were received in 2009 by Amarillo Crime stoppers which resulted in the apprehension of 44 of the 48 fugitives highlighted by the program, as well as a 126 total fugitive arrests.
Cpl Sean Slover stated that Crimestoppers is working with the online crime-notification program Nixle for dissemination information about crimes and wanted fugitives to subscribers.  The city of Amarillo uses the free service to notify citizens about crimes, fugitives, and emergency situations.
County Sherriff Brian Thomas says "it's an awesome tool...It's a way for citizens to get involved without getting involved.  You have a lot of people in the community that want to help but they're afraid to get involved.  This gives them that avenue to do that."
After a mysterious racially charged death threat was scrawled on a college bathroom, frightened students turned to Dr. Ron Erickson, president of Hocking College in Ohio.
In order to keep the students safe, Dr. Erickson strongly encouraged students to register for Nixle Alerts, which sends messages directly to their emails or cell phones  
Nixle Alert helped Chatham Township police identify the "good samaritans" who responded to the fatal fire that occurred Monday April 12th, 2010.
Residents using Nixle were connected to the St. Paul police department and led the authorities to the arrest of graffiti suspects.  "Police are now using Nixle to build their case against these taggers and others arrested earlier."
Graffiti artists hit the citizens' organization building with the words 'RIOT' spray painted on the side of the building.
Since December 2009, the taggers have vandalized dozens of homes, garages, and vehicles in St. Paul causing thousands of dollars in damage.
With the help of a Nixle subscriber, Amarillo Police captured fugitive Adam Yeager, wanted for aggravated robbery and probation violation.  
A Nixle subscriber saw the suspect at the Westgate Mall and police were able to locate and apprehend Yeager based on the tip.
In Sioux County, IA, resident Trevor Schelling received a Nixle alert of a missing 5-year old girl.  While driving in Hull, IA, Schelling spotted the little girl and called the Sheriff's office.  The child was lost about a half mile from home.  She was safe and returned to her mother.
Sioux County Sheriff Altena said that "missing children are always a very scary situation for everybody.  It's great to have more tools, like Nixle, that can be used in situations like this.  The program worked exactly as it was supposed to-the Nixle report of a missing child was put out; a citizen received it on a cell phone text message, saw the child and called 911.  We're very thankful for people like Mr. Schelling."
The Fayetteville North Carolina Police Department sent out an alert to its residents about William Bruce Clark, a criminal wanted for armed robbery.  Soon after the alert was sent the police got a call from some Fayetteville residents.  Police responded quickly and apprehended Clark.
On June 9 2010, the Fayettville police sent out another alert regarding Willie Joseph Webb Jr., who is wanted for a number of crimes including assault with a deadly weapon and statutory rape.
In Reedsburg Wisconsin a man charged with lewd behavior was apprehended almost immediately after a Nixle alert was sent out to local residents by police department.  Upon arresting Gordon Fitzpatrick, the man charged with exposing himself to three businesses in the summer of 2010, Police Chief Tim Becker stated that Nixle "is free service that is obviously very useful."
Nixle's servers are all located at NLETS, providing added security from would-be-hackers.  This enables local police departments nationwide to send immediate alerts and advisories using their secure police terminals.
Nixle does not access Nlets' law enforcement information, they access their infrastructure.  Nixle is designed on an emergency-grade platform hosted directly at the Nlets data center in Phoenix, Arizona, which features an on-site diesel generator for power failover, a Cisco firewall system and highly secured and tightly regulated physical access to the facility.  Nixle's partnership with Nlets allows Nixle to provide access to police and fire agencies across the United States on their private network in their vehicle or handhelds without internet access.
Nixle's technology platform creates a database of community information that builds upon itself. As municipal and community oriented groups push out their location-specific information directly to communities, the system also archives. This creates the foundation for databases of local news and information.
Information is disseminated to any point or address in a desired geographic area.  This technology is also available to consumers.
The municipal wire delivers information exclusively from public safety agencies and municipal governments.  Advertising and other sets of information are not comingled within the Municipal wire so as not to diminish the integrity of public safety and government information.
Nixle's Private Messaging application allows agencies and organizations to use the same trusted Nixle platform for public messaging to communicate internally via private groups.  Agencies and organizations can define custom groups and use mobile phone texts messages (SMS) to keep group members up-to-date with real-time messages on mobile phones.  Nixle's Private Messaging application will be rolled out at the multi-nation/multi-agency G-20 Summit in Pittsburgh in September 2009.
In January 2011, Nixle released an iPhone application which periodically updates a user's location settings in its system.  This potentially allows for greater hyperlocality of messages, particularly in relation to users entering their home or business address.  While only a tiny fraction of mobile phones are iPhones that support background location updates, it's a notable step toward achieving the company's vision of being a hyperlocal, real-time messaging platform.
Nixle is partnered with:
VeriSign Messaging and Mobile Media 
United States Conference of Mayors 
Police Executive Research Forum (PERF)
International Association of Chiefs of Police (IACP)
National Sheriffs' Association (NSA)
The Council of State Governments (CSG) 