Mitchell was the developer of The Woodlands, an unincorporated community in Montgomery and Harriss counties, Texas, which he developed from timberland located 25 miles north of downtown Houston. He brought on the esteemed landscape architect Ian McHarg to consult on the project. The masterplan for the community called for preserving trees, protecting the environment, minimizing flooding and creating a pleasant urban environment. In 2010 The Woodlands was home to 92,300 people. When fully developed the population will have reached 130,000.
In an article discussing Mitchell's gift of US$10 million to the National Academies of Science, the organization's magazine InFocus described Mitchell's commitment to sustainability and the environment as follows.
Mitchell Gift to Endow Academies' Efforts in Sustainability Science, 
The National Academy of Science, InFocus Magazine, Summer/Fall 2002, 
An early admirer of the work of design and ecology visionary Buckminster Fuller, the young CEO Mitchell also realized that there were finite energy resources and raw materials for a world whose population was increasing rapidly. In the 1970s he helped sponsor the work of Dennis Meadows, whose Club of Rome study The Limits to Growth was a global wake-up call on the pressing need for sustainable energy technologies and food sources worldwide.|}} Working with Meadows and other national leaders Mitchell created The Woodlands Conference series and the International George and Cynthia Mitchell Prize, both dedicated to sustainable development. He was particularly interested in the role of the business community in creating sustainable societies. The Mitchells also underwrote the National Academies' Our Common Journey: A Transition Toward Sustainability, the 1999 report that defined the role of science and technology in moving toward sustainability. As a follow-up to Our Common Journey and with Mitchell's continued help the National Academies created a long term program committed to advancing science and technology in support of sustainable development.  Mitchell also founded the Houston Advanced Research Center that explores strategies for sustainable development at the regional level. He donated part of his wealth to the Cynthia and George Mitchell Foundation that supports programs for the efficient and wise use of Earth's resources. 
Through the generous donation by George P. Mitchell of $35 million, the Texas A&M University Physics department relocated to two new buildings in late 2009: The George P. and Cynthia W. Mitchell Fundamental Physics and Astronomy Building and the George P. Mitchell Physics Building. This donation by Mitchell and his wife, Cynthia, is the latest in a series supporting the university's scientific development and the physics department in particular. With previous gifts supporting important additions such as academic chairs, professorships and the Giant Magellan Telescope project, the Mitchells are Texas A&M's most financially supportive benefactors of the modern day, with donations now totaling $44.5 million for the physics department over the past three years.