The '''Potter's House Christian Fellowship''' is a Christian Pentecostal church organization founded by Pastor Wayman Mitchell in Prescott, Arizona in 1970. The official organisation title is '''Christian Fellowship Ministries''' or '''CFM'''.
The Potter's House is a fellowship of 1,716 churches in 110 nations throughout the world with 60 ministering evangelists.
The Potters House Christian Fellowship consists of members who identify themselves as being born again Christians. The church has an evangelistic program involving open air preaching, personal witnessing, door to door promotion, rock/rap concerts, Christian movies, skits and dramas. These events are used to evangelize to non-Christians. While the Potter's House welcomes those from other churches, it does not actively participate in proselytizing Christians from other evangelical groups (sometimes called transfer growth), but rather focuses on the conversion of unbelievers (those who have not repented of their sins and trusted Jesus Christ as their Lord and Savior or are not born again). The official mission statement of the Fellowship is to reach unchurched people, to fufill Christ's Great Commission through Evangelism, Discipleship and Church Planting both Domestically and Internationally. It was Christ Himself who commanded His followers to "make disciples of all the nations," and the simple obedience to this command is the passion and driving force of our church.
The Potter's House has its roots in the Jesus People Movement, a Christian revival (historically referred to as a spiritual awakening) that swept through America in the early 1970s. Wayman Mitchell originally began his churches under the affiliation of the International Church of the Foursquare Gospel and continued this affiliation until a disagreement with church leaders on ordination requirements for new ministers. Mitchell believed that a new pastor should be trained through discipleship (mentoring) rather than schooling, such as Bible colleges. By the mid-1980s Mitchell had a following of well over a hundred newly established churches, pastored by men who had been trained under him and sent out to minister after a period of discipleship. In 1985, Mitchell gave up his official affiliation with the International Church of the Foursquare Gospel and took up a practice under Christian Fellowship Ministries (C.F.M.), the church he had established in Prescott.
Potter's House Christian Fellowship is a Pentecostal church. Followers believe in the inerrancy of the Bible, with a particular focus on training and discipleship (mentoring), along with an emphasis on building relationships in the church. There are specific standards of personal conduct for those serving in ministry and the fellowship believes in teaching by discipleship.  Much of the official Potters House doctrine adheres to the book "The Foundations of Pentecostal Theology" written by two Foursquare ministers, and published by L. I. F. E. Bible College.
The church claims to hold to the following doctrines: a belief in the historicity of the Gospel narratives and an orthodox Christian understanding of Jesus and The Trinity, creation over evolution, that biblical standards of morality and holiness apply to all members regardless of stature or position they have in the church.  The church supports the doctrines of Original sin, speaking in tongues as the evidence of Baptism in the Holy Spirit, a pro-life stance to abortion, and an Evangelical belief in the Great Commission.  The fellowship supports an authority structure where members are called to have loyalty and obedience to those who have been given the authority eg     Pastor or leader.   The authority structure seems to be the governing body that extends throughout the fellowship and is hierarchical in nature, this authority originates with Wayman Mitchell  (Senior Pastor of the fellowship), the Board of Directors, and on an advisory level, the Prescott church council as a safe guard to ensure like practice and doctrine to all his churches.  However some fellowship churches state the belief in "The Sovereign Autonomous Government Of The Local Church", which both fit together as part of the overall authority structure.  The church also teaches that salvation can be lost because of sin.  Potter's House also hold strongly to members paying their tithe and that tithing proves the faith of the christian, provides finances for the operation of the local church and enables the believer to receive God's blessing. One of the Potter's House distinctions in their doctrine and practice is their discipleship program where they exercise a method of shepherding which would resemble elements of the Shepherding Movement.  Doctrinally evangelical, pretribulationist, and sola scriptura. They also believe in Premillennial eschatology. Drinking and tobacco are prohibited amongst its ministers and members.  The church also believes in divine healing and some of the lead Pastors have frequently done a healing crusade, as well as praying for the sick in their services.
Some official statements of faith the church follows are:
The church is classified as Pentecostal however the church does not participate in what they call "counterfeit themes", such as the Toronto Blessing or the Pensacola Outpouring. It also doesn't participate in "interdenominational services" (this is where several different denominations periodically have a joint church service together), though individual members are free to do so. The fellowship also is opposed to certain aspects of the Ecumenical Movement such as the attempts to reconcile Protestantism and Roman Catholicism, as it believes that the teachings of the latter are contrary to the Bible.
The Potters House Fellowship rejects Bible schools as a vehicle for church planting, and gives several reasons for this in its publication, ''We Can Take the Land (A Study in Church Planting)''. Reasons include a belief that Bible schools are not Biblical, a belief that Bible schools are unable to complete the job of world evangelism, that Bible schools isolates students from practical experience, that the requirements of attendance at Bible schools are too strict and that Bible schools violate the indigenous principle.
The name comes from an Old Testament verse of the Bible:
Because of its biblical origin, the name "The Potter's House" is often used by other independent church groups besides those affiliated with Christian Fellowship Ministries. Particularly well known is The Potter's House, Dallas, Texas, a largely African-American megachurch founded and led by T. D. Jakes.
Local churches of the Potters House also use other names, including: The Door, Victory Chapel, Christian Center, Crossroads Chapel, and La Puerta.
The Potter's House has sometimes been criticised in the media as having cultic characteristics.
In 1989, a father who accused the group of being a "mind-controlling cult", convinced social workers to prevent his 16-year-old daughter (who was in the custody of the state) from attending a Potter's House church. After several months, however, a Juvenile Court commissioner ruled that she could go unless her father or the county could show she was being harmed by the church. The girl's mother, Renee Collin, disagreed with the father, saying she had no objection to her daughter going to the church.
Ronald Enroth's book ''Churches That Abuse'' contains an account of abuse within a Potter's House church. His follow-up book, ''Recovering From Churches That Abuse'', also contained an account of abuse.
In January 2002, Charisma News, a Christian news magazine dealing mainly with Pentecostal and Charismatic Christianity, reported a major exodus of some 160 churches from the Potter's House Movement in the United States. The reason for the split, according to Charisma News, was "because of unhealthy control, and after (members) leave they are afraid to talk about their experiences." A former pastor interviewed in the Charisma News article, when asked about allegations of abuse, said "There are families who have not spoken for years, brothers who are pastors all the way to the Philippines who were separated by this group and had years of not even speaking, churches that have been deliberately split, children who don't talk to their parents."
In November 2010, Australia's Nine Network, reported that Potter's House in Tasmania, Australia was performing a theater stage-show involving "scenes of suicide and drug use, and ended with a pastor telling the audience that 'the devil's children' needed to give their lives to God to be saved from Hell."  Ads for the show stated that the performance was MA-rated, however it did not state that it was run by Potter's House or had religious content.  A pastor of the Potter's House, according to the report, stated that a press release warned audiences of "violence, mayhem, suicide, the occult and of course death."
In his biography, founder Wayman Mitchell responded to criticism of the group by the journalists, and by researcher Ronald Enroth: