Rechargeable batteries can contain metals that could potentially harm the environment, so recycling them minimizes their environmental impact while also reclaiming metals that can be used to make new materials.
The program launched in the U.S. in 1996 (1997 in Canada) as Charge Up to Recycle!  It was re-named Call2Recycle in 2004 to reflect the program   s expanded focus to also collect cell phones, which contain rechargeable batteries. 
Call2Recycle is operated by the non-profit Rechargeable Battery Recycling Corporation (RBRC).  According to it mission, Call2Recycle    promotes eco-safe reclamation and recycling of rechargeable batteries and cell phones in an effort to advance green business practices and environmental sustainability."
In September 2008, Carl Smith was appointed as president and CEO of RBRC .
Call2Recycle conducts a national public education campaign to generate awareness of rechargeable battery recycling and encourage participation. As of early 2009, these efforts have resulted in the collection of 50 million pounds of rechargeable batteries throughout the U.S. and Canada. In 2008, collections increased by nearly ten percent, totaling more than 6.9 million pounds. 
As a true product stewardship program, Call2Recycle does not charge any fee to recycle rechargeable batteries or cell phones. Anyone can deposit these products inside branded collection boxes available at tens of thousands of local retail, business and community collection sites. Likewise, it is completely free of charge for businesses, public agencies (i.e. hospital, police department or fire department), municipalities or retailers who sell cell phones and/or rechargeable batteries and battery-powered products to enroll as collection sites.
Call2Recycle collections are available at many national retailers, including:
In the U.S.: AT&T, Best Buy,  Black & Decker, DeWalt, The Home Depot, Lowe's, Milwaukee Electric Tool, Office Depot, Orchard Supply Hardware, Porter-Cable Service Centers, RadioShack, Remington Product Company, Ritz Camera, Sears, Staples, Target, US Cellular
In Canada: Batteries Experts, Battery Plus, Bell World, Black & Decker, Canadian Tire, FIDO, The Home Depot, Home Hardware, London Drugs, Makita Factory Service Centers, Personal Edge/Centre du Rasoir, Sears, The Sony Store, Staples, Telus Mobility, Zellers.=
Call2Recycle accepts the following battery chemistries: nickel cadmium, nickel metal hydride, nickel zinc, lithium ion and small sealed lead acid; which are found in many cordless electronic products, such as     but not limited to     cell phones, cordless phones, laptop computers, cordless power tools, camcorders, digital cameras, PDAs, two-way radios, remote control toys, electric toothbrushes and electric razors.
Rechargeable batteries can contain metals that could potentially harm the environment if disposed of in a landfill or incinerator. Recycling them creates new, reused materials (i.e. reclaimed metals) that can be used to make other products, while also preventing these metals from leeching into the ground over time as they decompose. 
In May 1996, Congress enacted federal legislation known as the Mercury-Containing and Rechargeable Battery Management Act  to phase out the use of mercury in batteries and encourage the establishment of free and accessible collection and recycling programs for nickel cadmium and small-sealed lead acid batteries.  
In addition to the federal law, nine states (California, Connecticut, Florida, Iowa, Maine, Maryland, Minnesota, New Jersey and Vermont) and New York City  currently require that free rechargeable battery collection and recycling programs are made available to consumers as a requirement of selling rechargeable batteries in the state. 
Call2Recycle collection boxes are sent to the INMETCO recycling plant in Ellwood City, Pennsylvania where the materials are separated and recycled to reclaim reusable metals, so that none of the broken down material makes its way into landfills. The cadmium is used to make new batteries, while the nickel and iron are used to make stainless steel products such as silverware. Cobalt and lead are also reclaimed. 
Cell phones collected through the program are recycled or refurbished and resold when possible with a portion of the proceeds benefiting select charities.
Typical rechargeable battery chemistries include lead acid, lithium ion, nickel cadmium, nickel metal hydride, nickel zinc and zinc air.
Rechargeable batteries are found in many commonly used electronic products such as cell phones, mp3 players, cordless phones, laptop computers, cordless power tools, camcorders, digital cameras, PDAs, portable printers, remote control toys, electric toothbrushes and electric razors.
Rechargeable batteries are used to power barcode readers, police radar guns, two-way radios, emergency medical and rescue equipment, portable heart monitors, defibrillators, vital sign analyzers, life support machinery, x-ray machines, wheelchairs, medical beds and medical crash carts.
Most rechargeable batteries can be recharged up to 1,000 times. Depending on frequency of use, proper handling and charging, a rechargeable battery can last between 2   5 years. 
To maximize battery life: 
Americans use an average of six wireless products and more than 16 percent of consumers own and use ten or more wireless products. The average American cell phone user has a total of 3 or more cell phones in their possession. More than 43 percent of American cell phone users replace their cell phones about every two years and roughly 20 percent replace their cell phones annually
However, when a consumer replaces the rechargeable batteries in these products, 61 percent either throw away or hoard the batteries no longer in use.