While researching to complete an article on a lock and dam, I searched Google this morning with the following words:"beaver county times" merrill lockNot finding anything useful, I added "dam" , and the number of results jumped from 342 to 367.  I thought the idea was that Google found pages that displayed all of the typed words; but as I can't imagine that there are more pages with all six words than with just five of them, I'm confused.  Can someone explain quickly what I'm misunderstanding?    ( ) 12:21, 9 April 2009 (UTC)
I'm having trouble booting a Knoppix CD with a virtual machine under Virtual PC 2007.  When I boot Knoppix 5.1.1, the Knoppix splash screen does appear, then the screen goes black and the Virtual PC window size gets larger, and a penguin appears in the upper left.  Usually at this point the system appears to hang forever.  Sometimes, it gives the "Welcome" string, says it's enabling DMA acceleration for hda and hdb, and then it gives an IO error when "Accessing KNOPPIX CD at /dev/hdb".
When I try typing "dos" from Knoppix's boot prompt, I get the error message, "Cannot load disk image (invalid file)?".
I've tried booting the physical CD and the iso image and gotten the same issue.  One odd thing is that I've used Virtual PC's disk wizard to specify that the virtual disk image should be 20GB, but Windows reports the .vhd file to be 42K in size ... but I hadn't thought this would matter with a CD-booting Knoppix.
Thanks in advance for any help -   ( ) 16:14, 9 April 2009 (UTC)
I have a Windows XP computer with an ADSL internet connection and I'm trying to share that wirelessly with my Windows Vista laptop. I'm pretty sure I have all the settings correct on the XP machine with the internet connection shared over the wireless connection, and the Vista machine is connected to the ad hoc network and it's aquiring an IP address correctly (with correct default gateway, etc.), but Vista apparently can't see the internet connection, it says the wireless network is "Local only". Any ideas? Is there something I need to do to tell Vista it should look for an internet connection on that wireless network? Thanks! --  ( ) 19:32, 9 April 2009 (UTC)
I recently installed and played Rome: Total War under . Because all the changes to the disk were sandboxed, nothing was written the rest of my hard drive and I easily wiped off 2 GB of data in the sandbox today. However, now when I open "Computer" from the start menu or look at "Computer" from any Windows Explorer window, my DVD/CD-ROM is displayed as "DVD RW Drive (F:) SEGAROME" and it has the Rome: Total War icon next to it rather than the standard Vista CD drive icon. How do I revert to the old name and icon? --  (       ) 21:27, 9 April 2009 (UTC)
Cheers!
I have a Dell XPS running Windows Vista. I work in an environmental consulting firm. I travel a lot. I connect to an average of 5 different networks per month. 2 of these networks do not have a DHCP router. To connect to these i have set up the Alternate configuration for my NIC. I am having a problem when i try to connect to one of my networks that does have a DCHP router. When first plug in the network cable my computer takes a while trying to get an IP address before it tells me that it has Limited Connectivity. I have to "repair" the connection before it will finely grab an IP address from the DHCP router. This takes about 20 minutes and it really getting annoying. There is nothing wrong with my network cable or the cable going to the switch. There is nothing wrong with the DHCP server as my computer is the only one that has this problem (maybe because i am the only one on the network that has an Alternate Configuration). But the other computers on my network does take about 5 to 10 seconds to grab an ip address. This problem with my computer only happens when i try to connect to this one network, does not happen on any other network i have tried. This includes my network in Peru, Chile, My internet at home, The internet in hotels, The internet at internet cafes; They all work just fine. I suspect that the problem is with my DCHP router, i think that it's taking it's time to issue an IP address. So my question boils down to this: Is there a way that i can make Vista wait longer before trying the Alternate Configuration? Thank you. &ndash;&nbsp; &nbsp;21:52, 9 April 2009 (UTC)
In ubuntu when i type in 'ifconfig' it lists my network conections. My question is; Is there a way that i can change the name of one of my network cards? Right now my wifi card is named "Wlan0" and i would like to change it to "eth2". Thank you. &ndash;&nbsp;  | &nbsp; 22:04, 9 April 2009 (UTC)
I've installed Ubuntu 8.10 in my Virtual PC 2007 setup.  I'm able to ping external websites by specifying their names ("ping www.yahoo.com" resolves to f1.www.vip.sp1.yahoo.com, for example, and it sends all the packets and shows the ping times) but Firefox and wget are never able to connect to websites.  Firefox is "Waiting for www.yahoo.com" forever.  Any ideas on how to troubleshoot this?  Thanks in advance -   ( ) 22:20, 9 April 2009 (UTC)
I've got an old handwritten text that I can only partially decipher. I thought that if I could find a way to generate all the possible combinations of words I could, by process of elimination, figure out what it is. Is there any way I could do this? I know roughly the length of the word, and what some of the letters are (It's something like "???ily", where the ?s have no ascenders or descenders). Is there any easy way of doing this?   ( ) 23:33, 9 April 2009 (UTC) 