On the bright side, although there was smearing both ways (mostly on the talk page of this RfC), this RfC has at least brought together these worries on one page.
I've reviewed this RfC as the unblocking admin and am closing it with the following restrictions and comments:
See his block log: 
There was no 1rr violation: 
Eg: 
Stop edit-warring. Use Wiki policies and guidelines in good faith. More transparency (not randomly deleting important sections of his talk page while archiving other sections).
My interaction with Collect has been primarily on William Timmons.  He seems to be very stuck on conservative viewpoints, to the extent that he denies the validity and relevance of what's in sources if it reflects badly on conservative personalities like Timmons.  He has been very forceful in tagging and removing perfectly ordinary well-sourced material.  I've been a bit too reactive in fighting him (and  ) there, to the point where I got blocked, twice, without actually violating 3RR, while Collect didn't get blocked even when he had, for some reason.  I initiated several RfCs and a 3O to get more input, but he continues to deny the sense of every input that he disagrees with, slaps lots of "relevance" tags on things that are clearly relevant, asserts that sources don't say what they plainly do say, etc.  He's quite difficult to reason with or work with, and quite disruptive.     ( ) 05:16, 16 April 2009 (UTC)
Users who endorse this summary:
Votestacking is an attempt to sway consensus by selectively notifying editors who have or are thought to have a predetermined point of view or opinion (which may be determined, among other ways, from a userpage notice, such as a userbox, or from user categorization), and thus encouraging them to participate in the discussion.   ( ) 20:41, 16 April 2009 (UTC)
3 people is canvassing? I needed one of them to sign this RFC.   ( ) 01:46, 16 April 2009 (UTC)
How could you have accurately assertained the situation on the DR and Fascism w/o having talked to other involved editors (Ratel, myself, CoM for DR; Slrubstein, Four Deuces, R-41 for Fascism)?   ( ) 20:41, 16 April 2009 (UTC)
Actions of others is not an excuse to edit war. And Collects tendentious editing is not isolated to Fascism.   ( ) 20:00, 16 April 2009 (UTC)
Could you please answer the question I asked? How could you know what the situation was like (did he think he had consensus, were there multiple editors blocked such as DR) w/o talking to anyone involved?   ( ) 20:41, 16 April 2009 (UTC)
I answered it.   ( ) 20:40, 16 April 2009 (UTC)
Alright, maybe I'll be more specific, how do you even know the edits in question were tendentious if you have not consulted anyone involved?   ( ) 20:54, 16 April 2009 (UTC)
In his latest '''edit war''' in Fascism, he deleted '''sourced''' material.  . A typical tendentious editor.   ( ) 20:58, 16 April 2009 (UTC)
Yes, but what about the other editors who agreed that the sources didn't back up the claims? Wouldn't they have informed you of that had you not asked them to participate?   ( ) 21:00, 16 April 2009 (UTC)
What? If you are so concerned about the behaviours of others there, you are free to open RFC's about them. As I said "Actions of others is not an excuse to edit war". You've been repeating yourself for a long time now, so I'll prolly ignore your further questions.   ( ) 21:03, 16 April 2009 (UTC)
How is consensus editing disruptive editing as in fascism?   ( ) 17:52, 17 April 2009 (UTC)
Edit warring and tendentious editing is disruptive editing.   ( ) 22:43, 18 April 2009 (UTC)
Yes tendentious editing is, but that doesn't seem to be the case at this point so is it truly disruptive if he's got concensus?   ( ) 22:45, 18 April 2009 (UTC)
Read:  . "Characteristics of problem editors - You have been blocked more than once for violating the three revert rule; you argue about whether you in fact reverted four times or only three, or whether 3RR applies to a calendar day or a 24-hour period." Collect did edit war on Fascism   ( ) 22:51, 18 April 2009 (UTC)
But there are other characterisics on the list and the majority of them aren't met, does breaking one means he gets the label? That doesn't seem to add up. And also, if Collect isn't allowed to cite an essay as a guideline how come you are?   ( ) 22:56, 18 April 2009 (UTC)
I'm not edit warring now and justifying that with an essay. Your questions doesnt make sense, so I will prolly not answer any further.   ( ) 23:04, 18 April 2009 (UTC)
Yes, I'll   and say it: even if there are other characteristics on the list and some aren't met, breaking one means he gets "the label".    ( ) 23:15, 18 April 2009 (UTC)
The other "users" were canvassed specifically for such an action here, and the proponent has been anxious to have such an action for a lon time despite there being no contact in any article edits between us for two months. The claim is stale, and meritless.   Complainant has abot a thousand edits, and has now made 29 edits to Rick Warren (3%).     I have made over 6,700 edits of which 23 were to Rick Warren (.3%).  There is an ongoing mediation on the topic to which Mike Doughney and Phoenix of9 have been party, and Mike Doughney sought to use the material from the mediation on AN/I.     with no contact after that time.   Phoenix of9's issuing of the RfC/U during mediation is questionable. 
Phoenix of9's canvassing and other acts:   and more on RfCs on others (many more diffs available on such canvvassing),   seeking to get a WQA on another editor,   solicitation of an additional party to join themediation,   comment about AN/I saying M D should wait a little,    showing his purpose in editing Rick Warren,   solicitation of Mattnad a month ago, and all of two weeks into mediation,   solicitation of Ikip,   solicitation of Mike Doughney, and again reerring to the mediation,   solicitation of Introman a "new user" will about a hundred edits.  
Posts on my user page: None.  (hard to give a diff for that) making it hard for me to believe he sought any resolution from me at any point.  Absent any attempt at any dispute resolution, I fail to see how this can procede. 
As to Phoenix of9's behavior:   fslse assertion of 3RR,  unconfirmed accusation of a person being a sockpuppet.
As to William Timmons note  for complainant Dicklyon.  For actual and substantial editwarring. My widely spaced adding of actually appropriate tags (note the talk page for verification of that) was not only not editwarring, not 3RR, but actually on the basis of consensus of the other editors (entire   is appropriate here unfortunately).   Working on his last 10,000 edits for speed,  he made  148  edits on William Timmons and  245 more on Talk:William Timmons.  I made all of  84 ever, and 139 on talk. About half his edit level. 
Then I am accused of citing an ESSAY of all things.  Amazingly enough, I find that many people do cite essays, and are not brought to an RfC/U for it. He asserts THF is my "friend" --but THF and I have had actually exceeding little overlap at all, and have remarkably different views.   Then again, THF and I were accused of being sockpuppets -- until the absolute impossiblility was pointed out.    and Dicklyon out of nowhere appeared to support the accusation by asserting THF and I  both lived in Washington, DC.     
As to the "new user"   who is used as the basis for the false claim of editwarring on Fascism,  I proffer: 
As to the discussion on    note  for the nature of Introman's contributions, asserting the US is fascist becasuse the Mercury Dime had the fasces on the reverse. 
Other than the AN/I filed by Mike Doughney, which is now hidden due to the privileged nature of mediation, I have had essentially no contact with him, so I can not see what he can "certify" at all. 
The complaint that I deleted an obsolete and inaccurate notice from another editor on my talk page makes no sense at all.  There is no requirement that such be retained, and many users delete all of them.  The history remains and is adequately findable, which means that this charge is just tossed in. 
As for "stop editwarring" since I have been in no editwar since the block, I consider that a claim made to allow the RfC to proceed.  It implies that I am actively editwarring, which is false.  As for using policies and guidelines, they have shown not a simgle example of me not using the policies and guidelines in good faith. Telling me to do so is meaningless unless they wish to claim I did not do so.  Barring me from editing my talk page? I regard than as not even a half-way serious suggestion.  I have never altered in any way the talk page history.  Nor could I.   
Noting material added after this was opened:  The diffs 9 and 10 (as currently numbered) from my userpage support me quite nicely. In the latter, the complaining editors admits to misciting facts, which was one issue I had with him. As for any accusation of ownership, that editor outedits the next edotor on Drudge Report and on Matt Drudge in each case by a factor of five or more.  And on the talk pages by about a factor of three.  He has  his top four pages being those four, amounting to well over 20% of his total edits.  My edit count on his articles is exceedingly small in comparison. Again - thanks for raising that issue.    ( ) 14:54, 15 April 2009 (UTC)
More stuff added: "Cause of concern 2.0" CONSECUTIVE edits do not count as reverts.  Ever.  And since the tag was not even a revert in the first place, '''he has now shown that I made zero reverts.''' So much for that one.  Is there a minus-1 revert rule for me to have violated?   ( ) 00:20, 16 April 2009 (UTC)
In regard to canvassing about this RfC/U:  The following were contacted at one point or another on their usertalk pages by Phoenix of9:  Introman, Anarchangel, Brendan19, Jim62sch, Mattnad, Dicklyon, Mike Doughney.  The following were contacted on their usertalk pages by Mattnad:  Jim62sch, TheRedPenofDoom, Bruno23, Tanthalas39, Brendan19, Steve Dufour.   
Specific reponse to Brendan19, who was canvassed to enter:   precisely shows your position on Joe the Plumber.  You had previous been given multiple 3RR warnings on Rush Limbaugh.   You mysteriously entered   to leave   His 3RR report on me (He was "newbie") at  was remarked on as "unhelpful commentary that has nothing to do with writing an article is routinely removed from talk pages."  His immediate second bite at the apple got "Can't see a vio here. Contiguous edits count as one. Last edit in particular seems to just insert }} - are you really complaining about that? Please read WP:REVERT William M. Connolley (talk) 15:32, 7 December 2008 (UTC)"   I ralize you were upset that adding curly brackets is ''not'' an edit violation, but we are supposed to AGF at some point.   ( ) 15:47, 16 April 2009 (UTC)
At this point, no evidence of any attempt by Phoenix of9 for dispite resolution with me has been entered on this page.   ( ) 14:49, 16 April 2009 (UTC)
Response to Firestorm: In the spirit of getting back to what we should be doing, I fully agree that I should review WP policies,  and  I trust that the noticeboard complaints will not be continued. Thanks!    ( ) 16:23, 16 April 2009 (UTC)
Response to Writegeist: I have always said I was a traditional northeast liberal.   I am a "conservative" when it comes to what an encyclopedia should have in it, and an "inclusionst" for what should be allowed in userspace. I have sought never to use politics as a reason for edits, and you will not find any such from me.  I regret that your animus to me continues.  As a point of fact, moreover, this discussion has not actual rational to discuss my politics, nor should claims about my politics be relevant in any way here.  My "deleted edits" ratio is about 1% (out of nearly seven thousand edits in over seven hundred articles),    while yours is about 8%.   Anything over 2% is unusual.    ( ) 19:34, 16 April 2009 (UTC)
Response about spurious sockpupet investigations:  One more example of misuse of noticeboards.  '''I have not been a sockuppet, nor had a sockpuppet anywhere in amy wiki of any shapet manner or form.'''    Raising it as an "issue" is a tad bogus as a result.    ( ) 20:43, 17 April 2009 (UTC)
Response to "evidence" of dispute resolution steps : Not a single one shows any evidence of a dispute resolution step at all, Mattnad includes basically all the various melane items presented by Phoenix without any "proof" of anything as to dispute resolution.  He has not shown his personal involvement with any dispute resolution steps.  He has, indeed, clearly shown this to be a melange of items none of which had disoute resolution steps.   And this is not a law brief where you say (essentially) "and the same stuff as above applies here too."  Mattnad has made zero attemps at dispute resultion at all, and his "Evidence" is not in conformance with the rules of an RFC/U at all.   ( ) 21:47, 17 April 2009 (UTC)
Alice in Wonderland covers this exercise in detail,  a votestacking and futile excercise where no normal procedures get followed:   'What do you know about this business?' the King said to Alice.
Some of the jury wrote it down 'important,' and some 'unimportant.'
Alice could see this, as she was near enough to look over their slates;
At this moment the King, who had been for some time busily writing in
Forty-two. ALL PERSONS MORE THAN A MILE HIGH TO LEAVE THE COURT.'
Everybody looked at Alice.
The King turned pale, and shut his note-book hastily. 'Consider your
And so I am off on a wikibreak, as the pack of cards is only that -- the votestacking and refusal to abide by rules is only that.   Take care all, and try to actually abide by the rules.   ( ) 16:30, 19 April 2009 (UTC)
And so I am on a wikibreak -- but one edotor has made repeated claims on my own user talk page which appear to need to be addressed. It basically shows the unclean hands of some of those complaining,  and I had earnestly sought to let sleeping dogs lie, as these have.
3 posts a day '''is''' a Wikibreak for me. Especially since the person I asked to be my proxy in mediation declined on account of time.   Ikip made the allegations, even though he is an admitted sockpuppeteer,  and had over a dozen blocks and innumerable warnings) ,  GreekParadise is an admitted sockpuppeteer, and so on.   
Buster7 wrote "Ferrylodge was "spring-cleaning" the Sarah Palin article 5 (FIVE) weeks before she was asked to join the ticket. A truly remarkable co-incidence!!! To pretend that operatives don't exist and to take editors to task for stating the obvious is improper behavior.--Buster7 (talk) 12:33, 1 October 2008 (UTC) "  Others who have butted heads are Abbarocks (banned) and Spotfixer (caught as sockpuppeteer), Tautologist, banned as sockpuppeteer and a host of other banned sockpuppets.  IIRC, Writegeist had an indef block at least.   " The topic of this mischievous alert should actually be Collect/Scramblecase, who is disrupting several pages on wikipedia at the moment as well as wasting my precious time.     RATEL     00:21, 17 April 2009 (UTC) " specifioally calling me a sockpuppeteer.   Thus showing that this band of friends are, indeed, admitted sockpuppeteers, and that I have been falsely charged several times (checkusered several times as well, as Lar can attest). For a person with over a dozen blocks and compaints to berate a person with 2 3RR violations in over 7K edits in seven hundred articles is astounding.   A person who wrote:  "And it led me to wonder who might be whose sock over there. Writegeist (talk) 20:46, 4 December 2008 (UTC)"    "The quiet patience of a saint illuminating a manuscript; the tenacity of a terrier hunting a rat.     Writegeist (talk) 07:02, 12 December 2008 (UTC)"   "I don't know whether or not "Fcreid" is a sockpuppet. It's plausible."  ""Warning" from one of a WP:TAGTEAM? That's rich. Writegeist (talk) 23:01, 3 November 2008 (UTC) "  Your friends? "I am a Cubs fan. The pain is unbearable at times. I would no more consider watching the "fillies" win the Whirrled Series than I would....um.....a......consider Collect a good faith editor...:')....--Buster7 (talk) 13:04, 30 October 2008 (UTC) "  "rIGHT....I have been the one that has been arguing with c_____t about paid operatives. It started 3/4 weeks ago...It just seemed like an obvious statement of fact that Both parties would be present to make sure that they had their say in matters. AND IT WASN'T JUST VOLUNTEERS, BUT PAID STAFFERS. I HAD NO PROBLEM WITH IT, I WAS MERELY MENTIONING IT..If I was running a campaign I would certainly want to know what was going into the Sara PALIN article. It just made sense. WELL>>>>>C_____t got all upset and said I was reprehensible for even thinking that. He/she made a big todo about it...in the hopes of shutting me up, I guess. She was the only Palin editor to have a problem with it. Ferrylodge was OK withit. No-one else got into a snit....just C_____t. Which made me suspicious. so......I started to sniff around and see if something fragrant would surface. You know the rest....see you at the Palin pages!--Buster7 (talk) 19:28, 14 October 2008 (UTC)"   '''"I am trying to improve the article by attempting to force Collect to stop having anything to do with it. --Buster7 (talk) 02:22, 21 October 2008 (UTC)"'''  So much for rational fairmindedness.   But wait -- there's more!  '''"It would seem that Cummulous Clowds was not alone in his paranoia. Maybe, had I known of our mutual situation, we could have compared notes.--Buster7 (talk) 05:50, 27 December 2008 (UTC)" '''   And then, of course, '''"Using a tag-team is not a way around 3RR, nor is 3RR a way around NPOV, Verifiability, etc. Warn away.Factchecker atyourservice (talk) 22:16, 3 November 2008 (UTC) " '''  '''"Thanks But I have a feeling these guys are getting a paycheck for this. I wonder how long they will try to keep it up.Factchecker atyourservice (talk) 22:47, 8 November 2008 (UTC)" ''' and of course, the "best of edit summaries" from him ... "Utterly, utterly ridiculous. Black is white! Up is down!)      This is pretty amusing, and around and round we go. Black is white! Up is down! Take the red pill.)      Undid WP:Tagteam This material was added by consensus in talk. It will not be removed unless there is a consensus to do so in talk.)      Undid Undoing vandalism. Persist in this and I will seek to have you blocked.)      This is now abusive vandalism and deliberate ignorance of consensus. You've been warned repeatedly.)      Lying" is not the same as "rebutting") "    Introman did over twenty reverts in his first twenty edits on WP -- a record.   And finally   showing Wrtoegeist's status as a meatpuppet at nest.  Thanks!    Now back to Wikibreak. 
More on Travb/Ikip/Inclusionist et al ...    and a slew more. You are known by the company you keep.  And I did not need to look at 7K eduits one-by-one for this. 
More from GreekParadise: "At any rate, I feel like you should check whether Kelly, Hobartimus, and/or Collect are sock puppets of each other or somehow connected with the McCain campaign. ... GreekParadise (talk) 16:11, 25 September 2008 (UTC)"   "But I'd simply ask that you check to make sure he is not a sockpuppet of Kelly or Collect, and if he's not--and there's no way to check if he's a political operative--I'd let it go.GreekParadise (talk) 20:32, 27 September 2008 (UTC) "  One more example of a totally false, egregiously false, sock accusation made against me.   Do you really want more such posted? I would be glad to post these anywhere you like. 
I was amazed thet Phoenix of9 with whom I had almost ZERO contact other than on the Rick Warren talk page and the Rick Warren Mediation page is the complainant -- especially since he pointedly LEFT mediation in order to bring this action.  And here I thought MEDIATION was a "dispute resolution process" from which he huffed away, and where I have been trying to reach compromise solutions.  Dicklyon  has repeatedly been warned about his "editing style" including "ownership" of articles, multiple AN/I reports,  multiple civility warnings (his response is "You guys are nuts"),  3RR warnings, including a block on the article where he was in a dispute with all the other editors, and RFC/U which had the most accepted statement be " Making remarks such as  "And Hfarmer, the transsexual black muslim physicist, seems to be in it for the attention" 29 January 2009 is completely unacceptable, and can't just be dismissed as a content dispute - there are clearly serious behavioral concerns."  And after his William Timmons block ...  "I noticed that you resumed edit-warring on this page soon after the block. I strongly advise you to stick to 0RR (reads zero revert) rule when editting this article, because if you do not a block of longer duration than 48 h may be applied to your account. Regards, Ruslik (talk) 13:05, 5 March 2009 (UTC)"   His big problem was my post  and for that he said " I've "ignored" Collect for a long time (for many months on this same paragraph, for nonsense like this), and you jumping in to support him as you do in so many places does't make his or your position any more sensible. "   As a third editor and fourth editor also agreed with my position, I suggest that Dicklyon has an ax to grind for sure.   See also   " Dicklyon acknowledges that he is a personal friend and a former employee of Lynn Conway. He has been blocked three times for edit warring on this and on other pages. He is under a topic ban for still other topics (see here). He entered into a mediated agreement with user:James Cantor not to edit the controversy sections of the problematic articles (see here), but he recently declared unilaterally that he was withdrawing from that agreement (see here) because it suited him in his dispute with yet another editor on the same topic (user:Hfarmer, see here). This suggests, at least to me, that there is little point to entering into voluntary agreements with him again."  "So I endorse DGG's suggestion. Though I wonder how long Dick Lyon would actually abide by it. In fact I would suggest based not just on this but how he has behaved in other areas Dicklyon be the only one barred from talk pages and such as well as editing. He seems incapeable of simply having a debate without needing to hurl insults."  Ought we give credence to a confirmed multiple editwarrior who was given topic bans and lots of 3RR blocks and the like that I was the only one (of three other editors who disagreed with him) who was nasty in William Timmons?   Dicklyon has now had five 3RR blocks, and a batch of warnings.     
Several more are susceptible to the same simple analysis -- while it took poring over '''every single one of my seven thousand edits''' to find these editwarriors and sockpuppeteers to complains, and make sure they complained first and loud so that others coming in would assume good faith on their part.     ( ) 11:14, 4 May 2009 (UTC)
In short -- those posting here not only have unclean hands, they know they have unclean hands.   Now back to my wikibreak (which can include several edits a day as opposed to my usual average)   ( ) 11:14, 4 May 2009 (UTC)
Currently from mid 2008  to November 13, 2008: 
Response: No it is not; it would behoove you not to abuse terminology, it undermines your point and makes real vandals look good. the skomorokh 20:44, 10 October 2008 (UTC) 
Sluggo
Collect Accuses   of calling Collect a "sock for Kelly, Ferrylodge, Fcreid, THF and a few more   , refuses to give edit diffs or apologize.
Argument about the past or present tense in the word supported/supports, which Collect had a several week edit war about.
Boy, you really do not understand WIkipedia's policies at all, do you? Slrubenstein | Talk 19:59, 2 October 2008 (UTC)
First of all, Collect, I did not call you a "boy." Please find a dictionary - "boy" is a common exclamatory term, like wow or golly. And your question runs counter to WIkipedia policy. I personally have no issue with that African prayer. Apparently you do not either. But you know what? Your view on the matter is irrelevant. So is my view. Editors' views do not go into articles. You throw around words like fact and false a lot, but Wikipedia is about notability and verifiability, and not about true or false. You ropinion that the controversy is false has no place in any discussion on this article. Someone lese's view that the controversy is "true" also has no place in this discussion. The only question is, is the controversy notable and if so, are there verifiable and reliable sources for providing an account of the controversy and the various views involved in, and about, the controversy. Then it is just a matter of writing an account of these notable views from verifiable sources. There is only one ground for excluding it from Wikipedia: that it is not notable and to include it would give undue weight to a non-notable set of views. And perhaps the controversy is not notable enough for inclusion (I never heard of it and I listen to and watch the news regularly). But this is the only grounds for exluding it, not the fact that you think it is false or silly. You really need to get over this belief you seem to have that your judgement that a one view is better than another, or one topic truer than another, is simply irrelevant. Boy! Slrubenstein | Talk 20:24, 2 October 2008 (UTC) 
First -- "Boy!" is an exclamation. "Boy, ..." is NOT an exclamation. Your message to me did not use "Boy," as an exclamation. Exclamation marks are not commas. A comma is used when you are addressing someone with the name you give before the comma. Yhe issue I was dealing with is the relevance of ANY statements which might inaptly deal with a subject's religion. This entire section about dinosaurs falls into that classification. Giving weight to a view which is notable only because of deliberate misinterpretation is improper. In the case at hand, I have sought to show that such wilful misinterpretation is errant. I am sorry that you only feel "notable" is your only concern. Thank you most kindly. Collect (talk) 20:35, 2 October 2008 (UTC) 
Exclamations in the form of "Boy, you ..." are quite rare. Since this seems to be degenerating into English grammar discussions, I think it has outlived its usefulness here. Rather like having a (sic) contest, or the like. Interjections generally are not followed by commas, at least not in any Manual of Style I have found. Collect (talk) 23:46, 2 October 2008 (UTC) 
Please don't fall into the same trap as others have done. 
Collect's response: Are you asserting that you are using this as a trap of some sort? 
See also: 
Response from Bobblehead:
Definition game:  An "allegation" is not a "conjecture    large argument over this.
Admin:   
I request you also refrain from further speculation or comments about others motives. I '''will''' enforce the probation if I see you commenting on another editor again.  (Thanks for this edit diff Ferrylodge) 
As, for example, . Let it go - do not continue the complaints and arguments.
Admin  
Enough. One more revert on Joe the Plumber, and you're going to be blocked for a week for long-term, persistent edit warring. After that block is up, any ''further'' reverts, we'll start at a month and go from there. '''Move on from that article'''.
Admin:  
Hello, I have blocked you for a period of '''48 hours''' for violating the   on the Drudge Report article. The article was locked for 3 days by  , and even after that time you and   still continued to edit war.
Admin   Declining block request 3 March 2009 
You were blocked a few months ago, and then unblocked after a similar promise. The lesson I fear, is yet to be learned. For that reason I feel I have to decline this request.
Collect...you've been edit warring. Stop it.  16 April 2009.
Edit-warring over tags is still edit-warring, even if the people removing the tags shouldn't be removing the tags. Raise it at BLPN rather than making multiple reverts.
Collect, can we avoid editing and reverting on the paragraph until consensus is reached on the talk page?
Unless you've got other examples, I don't think anyone's trying to annoy ''you''
Collect edit wars when he deletes the wikiquote template from the article.
Collect argues:
Collect's actions:
Users who endorse this summary:
Editors are required to  , but as someone more clever than myself has said,   is not a suicide pact.  In ,   declares himself to be a ''traditional northeast liberal''. I'd encourage any who are reviewing this RfC to examine  's edit history and form their own judgement about whether this was a frank, sincere, and good-faith self-characterization. It's not an investigation that will take a long time to complete. 
Users who endorse this summary:
Users who endorse this summary:
Users who endorse this summary:
In my experience of disputing a matter of NPOV/OR at Daily Mail,   fails to work in a collegiate way to reach compromise.  He seems to routinely revert to his preferred version contrary to  , fails to engage properly in dispute resolution and seems to just game in his use of sources and the opinions of other editors.  This seems quite unsatisfactory when the issue is one of misrepresentation.  Note also  . 
Users who endorse this summary:
As a fresh example, please see this .  In this,   makes a knee-jerk reversion of hours of work, undoing several well-sourced additions to the article in question.  These are mostly peripheral to the detail which he is warring over and so his action is overtly disruptive and damaging to the project.  As this RfC indicates that such disruption is his SOP, he should be blocked until he gives a satisfactory undertaking to behave better. 
Users who endorse this summary:
What we see here is some problems on both sides of the fence
Having thoroughly looked through the edits, talk pages, and other various bits of evidence, I have come to realize I made I mistake and rushed to judgement. I still believe that Collect is getting a raw deal on fascism and the Drudge Report. I also think that his edits on Rick Warren, Joe the Plumber, and Sarah Palin while driven by his opinion of policy weren't helpful and could be problematic. The problem is, that in each of these three cases the 'evidence' shows multiple editors involved and more often then not Collect wasn't alone in his opinion. Both Collect and the other editors show flashes of extreme POV, as well as bad faith remarks and edits. It doesn't seem like any of the above were clean and in positions to be slinging accusations. On all of the pages those asked to mediate said the same thing, that ALL parties involved were being stubborn and not getting anything done but arguing and causing problems, not just Collect. For instance on Joe the Plumber
This was the general attitude throughout, that it was Mattnad, Collect and a group of editors. And the story is basically the same on the other two pages as well. I don't know what to say other than it would seem much more took place than is being revealed. 
Users who endorse this summary:
I believe that I am of a view similar to Soxwon. 
Collect has freqently not demonstrated collaborative editing behaviors - which has frequently escalated differences to conflicts when editing with others (such as myself in our interactions at Joe the Plumber) who are also not demonstrating great collaborative editing behaviors. 
Users who endorse this summary:
I think you may want to also consider some of the more minor edits this user has made, for example, while I CLEARLY showed good faith and civility and appreciation for other user's opinions on an '''mfd''', .  I was offended by his implication and responded in the next edit there...but I worry about "good faith" edits and that this user is not showing collaborative editing behavior...especially with noobs (which, btw, I am NOT).  
Users who endorse this summary:
I lack social skills, some say, so I am certainly no paragon of virtue, but I have constructively edited a handful of pages on wikipedia for a few years and generally enjoyed it. However, I have come across one or two really troublesome editors who seem hell-bent on nothing but disruption and confrontation, and sadly, Collect ''is'' one of those, so I feel compelled to comment here. Admin Gwen Gale recently scolded Collect for blatant edit warring, which s/he seems to relish:  S/he started in on the Drudge Report page and has done almost nothing but remove data from it and winnow down the content, to the point of changing sources (we were citing a page at Online Encyclopedia Britannica as a source for the word "conservative", so Collect edited Britannica and changed the source's wording during the discussion). As soon as one issue is settled, Collect will start in on another. On and on, I've never seen anything like it. S/he also has worked out the times that I typically edit, and as soon as I start editing the Drudge page, Collect would start editing simultaneously so that I had numerous edit conflicts. This happened 2 or 3 days in a row until I asked on his/her talk page to please stop it, at which time I was told that s/he "outranked admins and had the equivalent of well over a hundred working for me at one time". Delusions of grandeur? I also found myself suddenly attacked by an SPA on another page, an account that joined specifically to attack me, and this new user had identical diction and style to Collect. Of course I cannot be 100% sure, but Collect then chimed in when this new user made a etiquette report on me. It's all too neat to be coincidence. In summary, a troublesome and immature editor who is disrupting the encyclopedia for sport. 
Users who endorse this summary:
Often he gloats....."If I were King......." (I"m searching for the diffs)   (at least two others) and then presents some oblique, dictitorial solution for a minor editing problem. I have yet to experience pleasure when attempting to collaborate with Collect. It is always TEDIOUS. Wikipedia is a labor of LOVE. Working with or around Collect brings out the opposite emotion.
Users who endorse this summary:
I was not invited to this Rfc. To those claiming canvassing, please note that the Rick Warren mediation is not the only article involving Collect. I am not a member of a Rick Warren Orchestra, or the William Timmons group or Saddleback or Joe the Plumber or The Drudge Report or Daily Mail or Helen Jones-Kelley or Union Banking Corporation or Rush Limbaugh or Facism. --  ( ) 14:12, 18 April 2009 (UTC).
I've had a number of encounters w/  , primarily on the Rick Warren and Saddleback articles.  While I've not always agreed with him 100%, I've not seen the issues described here.  In fact, he's kept a pretty cool head in a number of situations w/ ultra-fundamentalist folks trying to insert blog-sourced material, etc. into these articles.  As I look through the diffs and the pages cited, it seems pretty obvious that almost exclusively opposing editors, particularly those w/ axes to grind w/ Collect, were invited to comment, with the two primary exceptions being mediators in the current Rick Warren mediation, who were notified about this as we were starting to build consensus (in which Collect has been helpful in reaching compromises).
I don't think any action is needed against Collect, as this seems to be a baseless exercise orchestrated by those opposed to his POV in the Rick Warren mediation.
Users who endorse this summary:
It seems to me that this RFC got off on the wrong foot, and has stayed on the wrong foot.  It began with a lot of obvious  , which was very unfortunate because obvious convassing is much like the proverbial iceberg (indicative of what's below the surface).  Canvassing is a very serious issue, and can severely undermine an argument even if the argument is 100% valid.  It erodes trust, and skews outcomes, so I hope people will really try harder next time to avoid it. 
I'll just comment here about the canvassing.  I found out about this RFC from a notice placed by   complaining about Collect at  of an editor who had previously contemplated enforcement action against Collect.  Anyway, that's how I got here today, and it shouldn't have happened that way.
But getting back to how this RFC got started a few days ago,   certified the basis of this dispute, and then notified  (),  (who has not yet commented at the RFC project page),  (),  ( and who ),  (who has not yet commented at the RFC project page), and  ().  These were minimalist messages that Mattnad left, with little more than a link to the RFC, but    Votestacking is an attempt to sway consensus by selectively notifying editors who have or are thought to have a predetermined point of view or opinion." This was all very improper, and taints the whole RFC.  I'm not saying to do it more surreptitiously next time; better to not do it at all.  Thanks.
Users who endorse this summary:
I haven't had much contact with Collect outside of watching him and others wrangle endlessly on the Sarah Palin article's talk page (and a few user talks on my watchlist), but my impression of him from that is of someone who feels pretty strongly about keeping articles "lean" (see  to that effect). 
I do get the distinct impression that he's politically conservative (in the USAian sense), but haven't noticed his edits to be particularly political. He's certainly not one to back down often, but then again neither are his co-editors on that article. From what I've seen, editors of that political stripe are very much in the minority on Wikipedia, and editors of that stripe who edit a lot and don't "back down" tend to get accused of POV pushing. I do think some sort of mediation might help here, but the mediator(s) would need to be willing to warn both Collect ''and'' the editors he's struggling with, because from what I've seen there's always been at least two doing the tango, and I'm not sure he's any more deserving of being under the RFCU looking glass than a number of the folks commenting here. 
Users who endorse this summary:
This diff  typifies my repeated problems with Collect.  I had been working on the bridge section of the Sarah Palin article with dozens of editors prior to the Election.  We were involved in a very long and sometimes contentious discussion, over several talk pages and more than a month over exactly how much media coverage to put about Sarah Palin emphasizing her non-support of the Bridge to Nowhere (the Gravina Island Bridge), despite her earlier support of the bridge. (So many sources were deleted that one frustrated editor put up a warning not to delete any more facts or sources without asking for permission on the talk page.) A paragraph on this media coverage was originally in the Bridge to Nowhere section. It had been whittled down to its bare essence from a much larger paragraph. An editor then decided to move it to the campaign section. I opposed the move but acquiesced in the majority view that it should be moved there.  Three weeks after the election, when no one was watching, Collect deleted the ENTIRE PARAGRAPH, sources and all with not so much as a peep on the talk page  of this extremely contentious article. See .  Collect's only comment in the history was the extremely disingenuous "Bridges are fully covered supra. Unless we should delete the earlier section?)"  Now Collect knew full well that everyone thought the two portions (history of the bridge and history of the media reporting on the bridge) were necessary; we simply disagreed on whether they should be one section (my view) or two sections (the majority view).  Collect participated in those discussions. E.g. .  Now he was pretending he had forgotten all the prior discussions.  He deleted an entire paragraph replete with detailed sources and footnotes that many different editors had compiled over the previous two months.  He pretended it was redundant, while giving a facetious proposal to delete the earlier Bridge to Nowhere section.  "Divide and conquer" was the strategy, I guess. Split the bridge to nowhere material into two separate sections.  And then, months later when no one is looking, delete one of them as redundant (when in fact it was chock full of sources and different material) without any discussion on the talk page or warning to the many dozens of editors who agreed on the consensus in the first place. This is far from the only time Collect has done this on the Sarah Palin article.  Frankly, the actions Collect took on this article is the single greatest reason why I am strongly considering quitting Wikipedia permanently. 
Users who endorse this summary:
This RfC is not going to achieve anything.  There seem to be a few possibly legitimate complaints against Collect, but they are mixed in with large amounts of seemingly petty complaints.  There is a lot of back-and-forth going on, little of it civil, and there seems to be no proposed outcome that all parties will agree to.  An RfC/U is intended to solicit outside opinions on the behavior of an editor, in the hope that the editor will agree to change his behavior.  There seems to be no indication that the subject of this RfC will accept any restraints on his behavior as a result of this RfC, particularly with some of the poorly-thought-out sanctions proposed below.  This dispute has degenerated beyond the point where an RfC can accomplish anything.  The parties involved should take this to Arbitration; nothing will be accomplished here.
Users who endorse this summary:
I generally agree with all of the complaints about Collect listed above, re: ownership, absusive behavior, a conflict-seeking style, failure to accept compromise, insistence on edit warring as an alternative to discussion, agenda-pushing, attempts to push distorted readings of Wikipedia policies on other users, reliable use of nasty comments and sarcasm as a normal mode of discussion, issuing threats rather than engaging in discussion, constant accusations of bad faith COUPLED with accusations of failure to AGF, falsely pretending to be an authority figure, attempts to rewrite core policies such as Verifiability and BLP in order to suit what he would or would not like to be included in a given article. 
The list goes on and on. I could spend a hundred hours documenting behavior of Collect's that I consider to be flagrantly abusive, agenda-pushing, sarcastic, mean, bullying, or in bad faith, but in my view that's precisely the problem. Collect is not an idiot: he has a very good idea of where the line is, and is very good at standing right on the line and pushing everyone's buttons while wearing down other editors and drowning out reasonable discussion with filibustering, subject-changing, and outright unwillingness or inability to make an honest logical analysis or admit that plain English statements mean what they appear to mean. Earnest attempts to explain or demonstrate something to Collect will usually be met with flippant comments and total disregard; his own posting of a passage from Alice in Wonderland here on this page seems a perfect example of his generalized "everyone's against me" mentality and attitude that all complaints against him are trivial or insincere.
I find it impossible to AGF in Collect's case: he is either shrewdly and systematically gaming the system     or else he is genuinely ignorant of core policies and acceptable conduct, but will stop at nothing to ensure that his favorite views/sources get a superior reading in a given article, and wherever possible, the views/sources he doesn't like get no reading at all.
This is a generalized and permanent problem with Wikipedia, and I though I would wish never to have to deal with users like Collect, I find myself doubting that a ban could ever solve it. There is no accountability here, and unless I understand things wrongly, you cannot stop an interested editor from working on Wikipedia. Thus what I would suggest is some kind of long-term oversight or mentoring, in which somebody with Admin authority keeps a very close watch on Collect's activity     preferably an admin who has political views at the extreme opposite end of the spectrum from Collect's, and one who has strong experience taking disciplinary actions.
For now, I will leave you with a long-winded and thoroughly maddening discussion with Collect. Though it's far from a comprehensive documentation of the issues I take with Collect's behavior, it is something of a microcosm. In it, I believe you will see examples of numerous discussion techniques which are at best misguided or mistaken, and at worst dishonest and even malicious. The , which I have annotated with blockquote comments in '''bold''', is taken from  old revision of Collect's talk page, where I attempted to engage him in a continuation of a discussion which we had previously held but never resolved, after which I found him making the same mistaken assertions to another user in an effort to get that user to abide by Collect's own personal version of Wikipedia policy. How did the continuation of the discussion go? Pulling teeth, blood from a stone, camel thru the eye of a needle, all spring to mind.   ( ) 20:16, 26 April 2009 (UTC)
Users who endorse this summary:
Soxwon that reversed the deletion.  Collect then made a number of changes to the section without discussion including changing the section name and changing the description of one researcher from "psychologist" to "Associate Professor of Psychology at the University of Manitoba".  I assume this was done in order to challenge the credibility that the psychologist has.
This illustrates an unwillingness to co-operate with other editors and a combative and deceptive practice.    ( ) 20:00, 29 April 2009 (UTC)
Users who endorse this summary:
AMENDMENT: It has been suggested that Collect undergo mentorship in order to improve his knowledge of policy and his ability to work with others. I think this is a good suggestion, and if the community or Collect feel that this would be a satisfactory alternative to formal sanctions, then I would volunteer for the job. I have extensive experience in dispute resolution as part of MedCab and even less formal mediations, so I think that I would be capable of teaching Collect to collaborate more effectively.     18:59, 16 April 2009 (UTC)
I think this should be discussed and considered.  While Collect is clearly a user of a great volume of contribution, this also stands to show his great understanding of Wikipedia policy and guidelines.  The examples shown here reflect his willingness (if not his eagerness) to use (bend/break) those same rules in a hostile manner to promote his own POV and agenda.    ( ) 00:05, 19 April 2009 (UTC)
Per , it's sudden closure by Daedalus969, and the comments of support it received prior to that: Daedalus' suggestion that Collect's editing be referred to ANI...yet again...sounds like a perfectly valid solution and/or additional solution to any other decided upon.  
See , 
This newest referral to ANI should include a summary of the multiple times Collect has been referred to ANI in the recent past with a summary of and wholehearted review of each of the outcomes.  It will take some work to compile, clearly, but it would be worth it.  The combined group of past ANIs, regardless of outcome, seem to indicate some verification for and validity to the  of this RFC.   ( ) 05:15, 19 April 2009 (UTC)
Do not comment below. Please read the instructions above.