The community has several features that differentiate it from most others. For example, many traffic speed-reducing measures were put into use. Roundabouts, for example, are commonplace on smaller intersections. Narrow street widths are characteristics of Ladera Ranch's small residential streets. Landscaped street medians are common, even on two-lane collector streets like O'Neill, Crown Valley, and Sienna Parkways.
Within Ladera Ranch are two different types of areas: villages and neighborhoods. Individual builders produce an area that is called a neighborhood. There are ten or more neighborhoods per village, and there are nine villages. They are:
Five of the nine villages have clubhouses themed on a particular architecture style that is emphasized within that village. There are also parks, pools, playgrounds and open areas within each village. The Covenant Hills village is a gated community which is closed to the general public, but accessible to all card-carrying residents of Ladera Ranch. There are no other gated villages in the community.
In addition to the various clubhouses, the community has key-accessed private water park and skate park, 18 community parks, a dog park, six "plunges" (smaller neighborhood pools not connected to a clubhouse), many "pocket parks"/ green belts, a shopping district called Mercantile East Shopping Center, and miles of hiking trails that go all the way to Doheny Beach from its main starting point at the prestigious 'Vista Toscana' estate in East Covenant, in the Covenant Hills village.
Ladera Ranch is a 4,000 acre (16&nbsp;km2) master-planned community adjacent to Mission Viejo, Rancho Santa Margarita, and San Juan Capistrano. Located along Antonio Parkway and Crown Valley Parkway, construction of the community began in 1999 on portions of the O'Neill, Avery, & Moiso family's 23,000 acre (93&nbsp;km2) Rancho Mission Viejo cattle ranch, the largest remaining working ranch in Orange County.
An authentic El Camino Real Bell stands in front of Chaparral Elementary School donated by the Kruse family, as a reminder of Ladera Ranch's past history.
The 2010 United States Census reported that Ladera Ranch had a population of 22,980. The racial makeup of Ladera Ranch was 17,899 White, 335 African American, 54 Native American, 2,774 Asian, 27 Pacific Islander, 624 from other races, and 1,267 from two or more races.  Hispanic or Latino of any race were 2,952 persons.
At the 2000 census, the United States did not define a census-designated place called Ladera Ranch, but it did define a Zip Code Tabulation Area (ZCTA), 92694. Because Ladera Ranch is contained within this Zip Code Tabulation Area, it is possible to obtain Census data from the United States 2000 Census for the area even though data for "Ladera Ranch" is unavailable. Note however, that the community was significantly less completed in 2000 and that many more people now live in the community. These are the January, 2008 estimates based on the records for the area. The community has not reached buildout yet, however it is expected to within 2010.
The United States does not define a census-designated place called Covenant Hills, but it does define a Zip Code Tabulation Area (ZCTA), 92694. Because Covenant Hills is contained within this Zip Code Tabulation Area, it is possible to obtain Census data from the United States 2000 Census for the area even though data for "Covenant Hills" is unavailable. Note however, that the community was significantly less completed in 2006 and that many more people now live in the community. These are the June, 2009 estimates based on the records for the area. The community has not reached buildout yet, however it is expected to within 2013.
As a part of unincorporated Orange County, Ladera Ranch is governed by the Orange County Board of Supervisors as part of the Fifth District, supervised by Patricia Bates.  
The Ladera Ranch Civic Council (LRCC) is a precursor to a local incorporated government that provides input to the Orange County Board of Supervisors. The purpose of this organization is to encourage and gather public comment on a range of topics which may affect the community of Ladera Ranch and represent the interests of Ladera Ranch Residents as a volunteer non-profit public benefit council.  The seven member Civic Council board of directors focuses on municipal topics within Ladera Ranch that are traditionally associated with a City Government such as:
Only four directors were elected in the 2010 vote.  Lawson, McCormick, Hamilton and Sheets were sworn in on October 25, 2010.  Votes were cast online through the LRCC website.  The 2010 vote totals were 46% lower than in 2009 and the initial vote in September was not sufficient to make quorum.  A re-vote was held October 7-13, 2010.  
The community is served by the Capistrano Unified School District. A branch of the Orange County Public Library is located on the campus of Ladera Ranch School.
Within the community are the Chaparral and Oso Grande Elementary Schools and the Ladera Ranch School, which is home to both an elementary school and a middle school on the same campus.
Chaparral Elementary School received the "California Distinguished School Award" in both 2004 and 2008. Ladera Ranch School  opened in 2004, and the Middle School received the "California Distinguished School Award" in 2007 and has been nominated again in 2011.
Stoneybrooke Christian School is a private K-8 school that is also located in Ladera Ranch. Depending on which part of the community they live in, high school students attend either San Juan Hills High School in San Juan Capistrano, or Tesoro High School in Rancho Santa Margarita. Prior to its opening in 2007, students in areas currently served by San Juan Hills attended Capistrano Valley High School. A number of Ladera Ranch's students still attend Capo, either due to having begun attendance prior to 2007, or by virtue of having been "grandfathered" in through siblings' attendance.
The community's college-age students and adults are within a few minutes' drive of Saddleback College in Mission Viejo, California and Soka University of America in Aliso Viejo, California.
An authentic El Camino Real Bell stands in front of Chaparral Elementary School, donated by the Kruse family, as a reminder of Ladera Ranch's history.
Ladera Ranch is also home to a Mathnasium Learning Center.  The Mathnasium Learning Center of Ladera Ranch has won many awards from community organizations for outstanding supplemental education services including Best Educational Staff for 2009.
Law enforcement services in Ladera Ranch are provided by the Orange County Sheriff's Department and the California Highway Patrol.