Mitchell was the daughter of an African-American mother and a Jewish-German father from New York City's Lower East Side.D. C. Hine, ed., ''Black Women in America, An Historical Encyclopedia''. Carlson Publishing Inc., 1993. ISBN 0-926019-61-9. She was reared by a maternal aunt, Alice Payne, in Baltimore, Maryland, where she attended a convent school."", in ''Notable Black American Women'', Book 1. Gale Research, 1992. 
After finishing her school education in Baltimore, she started studying voice in New York in 1897. The next year composer Will Marion Cook and lyricist Paul L. Dunbar cast her in their musical comedy ''Clorindy; or, the Origin of the Cakewalk''. It was so successful that it ran for the whole season at the Casino Roof Garden. She married Cook a year later, and appeared in the lead role in his ''Jes Lak White Folks'' (1899). She also appeared in his production ''The Southerners'' (1904).
Cook and Mitchell had a  daughter, Marion Abigail Cook, in 1900, and a son, Will Mercer Cook, in 1903. Their daughter, raised by family members as had been Mitchell herself, married dancer Louis Douglas. Their son became a professor at Howard University and United States Ambassador to Niger and Senegal.
In London she premiered the principal role in the 1903 musical ''In Dahomey'', produced by the team of George Walker and Bert Williams, with music composed by her husband Cook. The cakewalk, considered old fashioned by the cast, was almost cut from the show, but proved popular with audiences and became a fad in the United Kingdom. Mitchell received international acclaim for her performance, and was invited to appear at a command performance for King Edward VII and Queen Alexandra at Buckingham Palace. 
Mitchell later performed with the Black Patti's Troubadours, and in the operetta ''The Red Moon'' (1908) by Bob Cole and J. Rosamond Johnson. In 1919, Mitchell went to Europe with Cook's Southern Syncopated Orchestra. In New York, she appeared on the concert stage and in opera.
Mitchell's 1935 appearance in ''Porgy and Bess'' was her last musical role on the stage, after which "she taught and coached many singers in New York and appeared in many 'spoken' dramatic roles on the stage." She performed in New York and taught at the Tuskegee Institute in Alabama. 
Mitchell died in New York on 16 March 1960.