The '''1986 Australian Touring Car season''' was the 27th season of touring car racing in Australia commencing from 1960 when the first Australian Touring Car Championship and the first Armstrong 500 (the forerunner of the present day Bathurst 1000) were contested. It was the second season in which Australian Touring Car regulations were based on those for the FIA Group A Touring Car category.
Touring Cars competed at 21 race meetings in Australia during the 1986 season, contesting the following events:
The second year of Group A in Australia saw the domination of the JPS Team BMW team fade with several other teams pushing forwards. Most spectacularly was the return of Nissan Motorsport Australia with the newly homologated Nissan Skyline RS. Lead by George Fury they were the main rival for another new team, the George Shepheard run Volvo Dealer Racing team, a factory supported team which succeeded the Mark Petch Motorsport Volvo team of 1985. The Touring Car Championship becme a two horse race between Volvo Dealer Racing's Robbie Francevic and Fury. Fury was never able to haul in Francevic's early points lead and Francevic was crowned champion, but left the team shortly afterwards, returning to the Mark Petch team as they began development of a Ford Sierra turbo. Defending champion, JPS Team BMWs Jim Richards picked up race wins during the season, claiming the Australian Endurance Championship. Peter Brock likewise returned to the winner list for Holden Dealer Team, claiming an ATCC win at Surfers Paradise Raceway. While Richards won the Endurance Championship, the big prizes went elsewhere, Sandown 500 was claimed by Fury and his new young team mate Glenn Seton for Nissan, while Allan Grice and Graeme Bailey returned from their attempt at the European Touring Car Championship to claim victory in the Bathurst 1000. John Smith claimed the debut tile for small touring cars, the distinction for the class was set at two litres leaving a field of Toyota Corollas, Isuzu Geminis and a Nissan Gazelle. The Amaroo Park based AMSCAR series was claimed by JPS Team BMW's number 2 driver, Tony Longhurst driving the team's secondary car, a BMW 325i, the forerunner to 1987's BMW M3.
The 1986 Australian Manufacturers' Championship was awarded to Nissan.
This race was a support event at the 1986 Australian Grand Prix meeting.
Linked articles contain additional references.