Mitchell attended Covington Catholic High School for his first three years.  He lettered as a sophomore and junior before transferring to Highlands High School in Fort Thomas, Ky., where he lettered one, and earned Kentucky All-Star honors, in addition to being selected honorable mention All-State as a senior. That year, he led the team to the state title, recording 87 tackles with three forced fumbles and two fumble recoveries, returning one for a touchdown.
Mitchell started 30 of 45 games at Ohio University   23 at strong safety and seven at free safety and recorded 212 tackles (126 solos) with three sacks, 15 stops for losses and one quarterback pressure and he recovered one fumble and caused four others. He deflected 13 passes and intercepted seven others. In 2008 he started 11 games at strong safety and had 62 tackles (36 solos) that included an assisted sack and 4.5 stops for losses and caused two fumbles and deflected five passes and led the team with three interceptions for 61 yards.  As a junior, in 2007, Mitchell started 11 games at strong safety, despite having several injuries. He finished with 74 tackles (47 solos) that included 1.5 sacks, four stops for losses and a quarterback pressure. He also recovered a fumble and deflected four passes. He led the team with a pair of interceptions for 49 yards in returns.  In 2006 he played in all fourteen games, starting the last eight contests that included seven at free safety before shifting to strong safety for the GMAC Bowl. He had 55 tackles (27 solos), including a  sack and five stops for losses a caused fumble, deflected two passes and intercepted two others for 30 yards in returns. As a true freshman in 2005
Mitchell appeared in nine games, recording 21 tackles (16 solos) with 1.5 stops for losses, caused a fumble and deflected two passes
Mitchell wasn't invited to the NFL Combine, but performed well at Ohio's Pro Day. He ran a 4.39-second 40-yard dash and he did 22 repetitions of 225 pounds on the bench press to go along with a 371/2-inch vertical and a 10-foot, 3-inch broad jump.
Mitchell's selection raised eyebrows on draft day, as most television commentators had never heard of him and could not find him in draft guides. Mitchell was generally expected to be a second-day pick or an undrafted free agent. ESPN analyst Mel Kiper said Mitchell's grade was somewhere between the 40th and 70th safety available in the draft, and the NFL Network's Mike Mayock had given Mitchell a seventh round grade. But after posting a 4.43 time in the 40-yard dash at Ohio University's pro day, he was selected by the Oakland Raiders with the 47th overall selection.  Later on draft day, it was reported that Mitchell was being targeted by the Bears (selecting at 49   two spots behind the Raiders).  However, after Mitchell was taken by the Raiders, the Bears ultimately traded their selection.  Upon report of this, Mike Mayock of the NFL Network apologized to the Raiders for his low grade.  Mel Kiper  later gave it "Most Likely To Make The Raiders Look Good Award,"  stating "Oakland took Michael Mitchell, OK?"  "I asked teams after the draft. The misnomer is it's all Mel Kiper's opinion, it's all Todd McShay. You have to ask other teams. We're not the end-all, be-all. Some said they had him as a free agent. One team told me they had Michael Mitchell in the third round. They had him as a Pro Bowler. They think it's a great pick by the Oakland Raiders. So Oakland wasn't the only team out on the island that saw something in that kid."
Mitchell is the highest Ohio player to be drafted since Gene Ruskowski's fifth-round selection (44th overall) by the Los Angeles Rams in 1948.  The last time an Ohio student-athlete was drafted in a higher round was the Bobcats' only first round selection, Art Lewis (ninth overall) in 1936 by the New York Giants.
Mitchell was officially signed by the Oakland Raiders on July 27, 2009