The '''Multidisciplinary Association for Psychedelic Studies''' ('''MAPS''') is a membership-based 501(c)(3) non-profit research and educational organization working to develop psychedelics and marijuana into legal prescription drugs.  MAPS was founded in 1986 by Rick Doblin, and is now based in Santa Cruz, California.
MAPS helps scientists design, fund, and obtain regulatory approval for studies of the safety and effectiveness of a number of currently controlled substances.  MAPS works closely with government regulatory authorities worldwide such as the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the European Medicines Agency (EMEA) to ensure that all of its sponsored research protocols conform to ethical and procedural guidelines for clinical drug research.  Included in MAPS    research efforts are MDMA (Ecstasy) for the treatment of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), LSD and psilocybin for the treatment of anxiety and depression associated with end-of-life issues, ibogaine for the treatment of opiate addiction, and alternative delivery systems for medical marijuana such as vaporizers and water pipes. MAPS states that their ultimate goal is to establish a network of clinics where these and other treatments can be provided together with other therapies under the guidance of licensed physicians and therapists.
In addition to its sponsorship of scientific research, MAPS organizes continuing medical education (CME) conferences, sponsors and gives lectures and seminars on the current state of psychedelic and medical marijuana research, participates in community events like music festivals and Burning Man, and publishes a quarterly Bulletin with updates about its ongoing research efforts, legal struggles, and educational initiatives.  MAPS has also published a number of books dealing with the history and culture of psychedelic medicine and psychedelic therapy.www.maps.org
The psychoactive properties of LSD were discovered in 1943 by Swiss chemist Albert Hoffman he accidentally ingested a small dose through the skin while studying the compound. Controlled research on human subjects began soon after and Hoffman's colleague Werner Stoll published his findings about the basic effects of LSD on human subjects in 1947.
After the earliest European and American research efforts investigated whether LSD could reliably induce psychotic disorders, some began to recognize the potential for LSD to assist in traditional Freudian psychotherapy the 1950s. Studies into the effects of LSD on human creativity and spirituality were also conducted during this period. 
The next major development in the history of psychedelic research was the rediscovery of psilocybin by Western society due to the appearance of an article in a 1957 issue of Life magazine written by R. Gordon Wasson detailing his experiences ingesting psilocybin mushrooms in a shamanic ceremony in Mexico. European studies into the use of psilocybin as a psychotherapeutic agent (Duche; Delay ''et al.'') were published as early as 1961. An article by Pichot about the basic effects of psilocybin on 137 normal and unhealthy subjects appeared in the medical journal Lancetin the same year.
In the early 1960s, Harvard University was the seat of two landmark experiments involving psilocybin. The first of these was the Concord Prison Experiment which began in 1961 under the supervision of principle researchers Timothy Leary and Richard Alpert. The purpose of the experiment was to determine if psilocybin-assisted psychotherapeutic techniques could permanently reverse the criminal and anti-social tendencies of 32 state prisoners nearing parole and prevent them from being incarcerated again. Leary's team combined the administration of synthetic psilocybin in guided sessions with a variety of tests and support sessions during and after release. The ambitious experiment provided important insight into how to conduct psychedelic treatment sessions and helped pioneer the technique of having one of the experimenters undergo the psychedelic experience along with the subjects. The study also yielded anecdotal reports from the subjects which hinted at the potential therapeutic power of psilocybin and encouraged further research in this area. 
The next Harvard experiment with crucial implications for the development of psychedelic research was Walter Pahnke's Good Friday Experiment of 1962. Pahnke set out to determine if psilocybin could be used to facilitate    mystical    experiences and if these experiences could cause permanent and beneficial personality transformation. In order to do so, he recruited 20 Protestant divinity students, 10 of whom would take synthetic psilocybin and 10 of whom would take a placebo. The experiment took place in a basement chapel in which the audio from a Good Friday service conducted in the main chapel upstairs was broadcast. Pahnke reported greater incidence of mystical experience among the group receiving psilocybin, and like the prisoners in the Concord experiment, they delivered stirring first-hand testimony of their experiences which would help inspire further research.
Throughout the short history of LSD research, people unaffiliated or loosely affiliated with the scientific establishment distributed supplies of LSD outside of laboratory settings. Soon the lines between legitimate research and personal experimentation began to blur for some, and as early as 1962 fellow faculty members at Harvard openly criticized Leary and Alpert for abandoning scientific principles and experimenting with LSD outside official research settings. A few months later the university would dismiss both professors for violating university regulations by providing LSD to undergraduates. The controversy at Harvard coincided with greatly increased FDA restrictions on the procurement of LSD for scientific research; although some research did continue, most studies underway before the new FDA restrictions did not. After restricting its manufacture and distribution in 1965, the US government fully criminalized LSD in 1968, after which the European nations which hosted psychedelic research followed suit.
In the United States, legal psychedelic research was reduced to only one program     the studies conducted at the Spring Grove Center in Baltimore which primarily focused on end of life therapy and continued through 1974. The study, which eventually came to be headed by Pahnke and Grof, resulted in the treatment of over 100 terminal patients, including 31 in a controlled LSD psychotherapy study. Grof argues that    the results... supported the clinical impressions of the often dramatic effects of LSD psychotherapy on the emotional condition and physical pain of cancer patients.    
The second wave of modern psychedelic research is associated with renewed interest in MDMA. Throughout the 1970s, the main source of information regarding the still legal MDMA came from independent research unaffiliated with traditionally scholarly settings led by the extensive self-experimentation performed by chemist Alexander Shulgin. Shulgin believed that as with LSD, the primary use for MDMA was to serve as an adjunct to psychotherapy, which prompted him to share MDMA with psychiatric practitioners. Shulgin published extensively in scientific journals with respect to the chemical properties of MDMA. 
Throughout the 1980s, MDMA was administered in psychiatric and counseling settings, but recreational use also became increasingly widespread. MDMA research was mostly halted in 1985 by the United States government's initiation of proceedings to ensure temporary classification of the compound as a Schedule I drug (a classification made permanent in 1988). As psychedelics gained increasing recognition as potential psychotherapuetic agents, so too did were they recognized within popular culture for their recreational use.
Anticipating that the Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA) would move to criminalize MDMA in light of the drug's increasing popularity in recreational use, Rick Doblin, Alise Agar, and Debby Harlow organized a non-profit group called Earth Metabolic Design Laboratories (EMDL) to bolster awareness of the therapeutic use of MDMA. By 1984 the DEA had announced its intention to designate MDMA as a Schedule I substance, a categorization that would greatly restrict and regulate the drugs availability, as well as indicate that it held no accepted medical use and a high abuse potential.http://www.maps.org/dea-mdma/ 
Noting that at this time a great number of psychiatrists, marriage counselors, and therapists were using MDMA to enhance the therapeutic process, EMDL organized the scientific and medical communities to petition the DEA for a scheduling hearing regarding MDMA. Dr. George Greer, Dr. Lester Grinspoon, Professor James Bakalar, and Professor Thomas Roberts contributed to the argument that MDMA belonged in Schedule III, a category that would more readily enable future research and permit the continuation of its use in psychotherapy. Despite such efforts, the DEA pursued emergency scheduling in 1985 citing an imminent risk to public health. Although this move was ruled illegal, the decision to place MDMA within Schedule I was reached in 1988 after the DEA overruled a DEA Administrative Law Judge's recommendation that it be placed within Schedule III.
As MDMA was now deemed illegal, held in the same category as such substance as heroin, the only way for it to be employed in scientific inquiry would be through the lengthy and expensive FDA approval process. Holding the belief that MDMA had the unique potential to both aid psychotherapy and eventually become a prescription medicine Rick Doblin sought to gain incorporation for MAPS as a 501(c)(3) non-profit research and educational organization. The founding of MAPS was a primary step toward the future envisioning of what Doblin has called, a "nonprofit psychedelic-pharmaceutical company." Chartered in 1986, MAPS has since contributed over 12 million dollars towards the scientific study of psychedelics and marijuana in therapeutic application.
Since 1986, MAPS has distributed over 12 million dollars to fund research and education. These include:
Currently, MAPS has been given a Schedule I license to conduct research with MDMA on veterans and survivors of physical or sexual assault who are suffering from post traumatic stress disorder, as well as with advanced-stage cancer patients who are experiencing anxiety associated with this diagnosis, the first licenses the DEA has granted for MDMA psychotherapy research.
On the 19th of July 2010, the peer-reviewed Journal of Psychopharmacology published the results of the MDMA studies pursued by Dr. Mithoefer and concludes that this work is very promising. It also states that "this pilot study demonstrates that MDMA-assisted psychotherapy with close follow-up monitoring and support can be used with acceptable and short-lived side effects in a carefully
A clinical study for treating cluster headaches using low doses of the tryptamine psilocybin (found in psilocybe mushrooms) is being developed by researchers at Harvard Medical School, McLean Hospital in conjunction with MAPS.
MAPS is governed by a board of directors whose members serve for free. They are governed by a set of bylaws that permits them to resign yet insures that they are immune from removal. The board members are required to convene annually via phone or conference call, and  meet every two years in person. Members of the board vote to confer a new board member or president and do not vote on the business of the non-profit. The president is elected to a two-year term and oversees the allocation of resources autonomous of the board. The current president and executive director of MAPS is Rick Doblin. MAPS has a staff of 11 people.
MAPS is a member supported organization funded by donations from individuals and foundations.  Donations made to MAPS can be either restricted to fund a specific project or unrestricted to enter a general fund that allocates resources to those projects most in need and to cover general operating costs. Aside from donations, the organization receives revenue from conferences and events, such as the Psychedelic Science conference, as well as from the sale of books, merchandise, and art. In accordance with a policy of transparency regarding all financial matters, MAPS makes available an annual financial report that evidences the organization's allocation of charitable contributions, as well as income and expenses.
MAPS is a non-profit 501 (c)(3) research and educational organization. It was incorporated on 4/8/86. MAPS was recognized by GreatNonprofits and GuideStar, which are both services that allow individuals to review non-profit organizations, as a winner among non-profit health campaigns in 2010.
MAPS has a primary focus in researching the effectiveness of using 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamin (MDMA) to assist psychotherapy in the treatment of Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD). MDMA's empathogenic effects may assist individuals in achieving successful results from psychotherapy, especially when suffering from PTSD. Extensive research has proven that moderate doses of MDMA taken a limited number of times are sufficiently safe for human consumption. MAPS is currently the only organisation in the world funding clinical trials of MDMA-assisted psychotherapy, as of little interest to commercial pharmaceutical companies. Ultimately, MAPS seeks to achieve FDA approval for the use of MDMA as a prescription medicine.  
MAPS completed a US Pilot Study in September 2008 that investigated the effectiveness of MDMA-Assisted Psychotherapy in the Treatment of Posttraumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD), which took place in Charleston, South Carolina. The study sought to determined whether MDMA-assisted psychotherapy would be effective in reducing the symptoms of PTSD in 20 subjects identified with treatment-resistant PTSD resulting from sexual abuse, war, violent crime, and other traumas. The randomized, double-blind and placebo-controlled study yielded results that suggest possible efficacy as over 80% of 20 subjects in the study no longer met the diagnostic criteria for PTSD, compared with 25% in the placebo group.  Furthermore, preliminary analysis of a long-term follow-up to the study suggest benefits were maintained more than a year after the final treatment.
MAPS is currently conducting a phase 2 pilot study to assess the effectiveness of MDMA assisted psychotherapy in the treatment of PTSD among veterans of war. The study is taking place in Charleston, SC and is conducting experimental treatment wit 16 veterans with war related PTSD, both male and female. The study will follow a randomized triple-blind and test three different experimental doses. 
Outside of the US, MAPS' is pursuing the implementation of MDMA/PTSD studies in Canada, Israel, Jordan, and Switzerland. The Candanian study has full approval from an Institutional Review Board (IRB) and from Health Canada, and is waiting to obtain an import permit to import MDMA into Canada. The Israel Study is awaiting approval from the Israeli Institutional Review Board as well as the Ministry of Health before it can proceed with enrollment. An Israeli Defense Force official has indicated a willingness to refer war affected soldiers suffering from PTSD, thus greatly enabling recruitment for the study. The Jordan Study is in development with limited approval from the IRB. A protocol amendment is to be submitted in the near future. MAPS is seeking to enroll both Jordanian nationals as well as Iraqi refugees living in Jordan who are suffering from PTSD. The Switzerland study has received full approval from SwissMedic and has been submitted and accepted by the FDA in the form of an Investigational New Drug application. The study is currently in progress and nearing completion as MAPS is collecting long-term follow-up data following the experimental treatment of all 12 subjects. The study represents in part MAPS' clinical plan to develop MDMA as a prescription medication with both FDA and European Medicines    Agency (EMEA) approval.
Aiding clinicians in their ability to lead more effective MDMA assisted psychotherapy MAPS has developed a training protocol that would allow therapists to take part as subjects in a phase 1 study on the psychological effects of MDMA-assisted psychotherapy on healthy volunteers. MAPS would thus administer one MDMA-assisted psychotherapy session to the therapists in an effort to offer them training as well as evaluate the effects of MDMA. The study has received approval to proceed by both the US FDA and the IRB. Mithoefer, the primary clinical investigator in this study, has received his Schedule 1 license from the DEA enabling him to administer MDMA within this study.
It is well evidenced that psychoactive mushrooms and a number of other plants containing psychoactive compounds have been valued for millennia by many indigenous tribes across the globe for their spiritual & therapeutic uses.   
Discovered by Albert Hoffman in 1938 and 1958 respectively, Lysergic Acid Diethylamide (LSD) and Psilocybin, a psychoactive compound found in    Magic    mushrooms, are both well known for their ability to induce deeply spiritual, insightful and often life-changing experiences.
Although early research into the use of LSD and Psilcybin in clinical psychology demonstrated positive results, an explosion of recreational use during the 1960s gained the compounds a great deal of notoriety and ultimately led to their categorization as Schedule I illicit drugs in 1970.
MAPS is committed to exploring the potential use of LSD and psilocybin-assisted psychotherapy in the treatment of patients suffering with the deep anxiety associated with life-threatening illness. Currently developing new research protocols to meet modern drug development standards, MAPS    pilot LSD and psilocybin studies will be used to guide development of future treatment methodologies.
Currently MAPS is conducting a study on LSD-Assisted Psychotherapy in the Treatment of Anxiety Secondary to Life Threatening Illness. The study is taking place in Solothurn, Switzerland and is the first study in 35 years to investigate the therapeutic use of LSD in human subjects. The study's primary focus is to assess the safety and effectiveness of conducting LSD-assisted psychotherapy with a population of individuals who are experiencing anxiety associated with life-threatening illness. The study has received approval from the BAG (the equivalent of the DEA in Switzerland), the Ethics Committee (the Swiss IRB), and SwissMedic. Enrollment began in April 2008 and is currently complete.
MAPS has also developed a protocol to study the effectiveness of psilocybin-assisted psychotherapy in treating anxiety related to the experience of having a life-threatening illness such as advanced stage cancer. This study is to be conducted in the US under the principle investigation of Sameet Kumar, Ph.D.
Ibogaine, a psychoactive alkaloid present in the root-bark of the West-African shrub Tabernanthe Iboga, has in recent years gained popularity as an effective treatment for severe alcohol and drug dependency.  
Traditionally used in healing and initiation ceremonies by followers of the West-African Bwiti religion, the drug has stimulant properties in low doses and can induce a hallucinogenic dream-like state in higher doses.  It is the higher-dose hallucinogenic effect which is widely credited with the ability to help users understand and reverse their substance-dependent behavioral patterns.
A number of clinics situated outside of the US currently offer ibogaine treatment for alcohol & drug dependency, yet with a relatively high estimated mortality rate of 1 in 300, ibogaine treatment is not without its risks.
MAPS is currently collecting observational data from two ibogaine treatment centers in Mexico to study the long-term effects of this treatment on opiate dependent subjects.  
MAPS has released a request for proposals (RFP) to find a research team interested in conducting clinical trials on ibogaine; a $25,000 grant has been made available to help fund such a study.
The National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) currently holds a monopoly on the supply of marijuana grown for research in the United States, as they fund the only laboratory licensed to grow it.  Since NIDA is solely interested in researching the negative aspects of marijuana use and abuse, studies to explore its potential medical benefit are currently impossible within the US.
MAPS is the only organization working to demonstrate the safety and efficacy of botanical marijuana as a prescription medicine to the satisfaction of the FDA. For nearly ten years, MAPS has been involved in lengthy and  ongoing legal battles with the DEA to end NIDA   s monopoly on research grade marijuana.  
Alternatively, MAPS has received full approval from the FDA to study the effectiveness of marijuana, both smoked and vaporized, in the treatment of individuals experiencing war related PTSD. This marks the first time the FDA has approved an outpatient marijuana study.
MAPS has pursued a number of other research studies examining the effects of psychedelics administered to human subjects. These studies include, but are not limited to, studies of MDE, Ayahuasca, DMT, Ketamine, LSA, Mescaline, Peyote, and Salvia Divinorum. 
MAPS has also conducted multi-drug studies as well as cross cultural and meta-analysis research.
The MAPS Newsletter began modestly in 1988, containing only a one-page essay by Rick Doblin entitled    MDMA Can Become a Legal Medicine.    Only one issue of the Newsletter appeared in both 1988 and 1989, and it began appearing on a tri-annual basis in 1991, a schedule maintained by the current Bulletin. For over two years as of April 2011, David Jay Brown or Randolph Hencken has edited the Bulletin. Design/Build is always credited to Noah Juan Juneau. 
In its earliest issues, the Bulletin focused entirely on psychedelic research projects and the associated legal struggles. As it expanded from a single page publication to one typically consisting of 40-60 pages, the Bulletin began to feature writings relating to a wider variety of subjects ranging from personal spirituality and inter-generational relationships in families which take psychedelics to ethnobotany and anthropological studies of cultures using naturally occurring psychedelic agents for entheogenic purposes. Other common features are summaries of international conferences, book reviews, interviews with notable users of psychedelics, and advocacy regarding the War on Drugs.
The Bulletin has provided an outlet for the voices of leading figures in the psychedelic research movement such as Richard Alpert (Ram Dass), Stanislav Grof, Rick Strassman, Ralph Metzner, and Albert Hoffman. Additionally the Bulletin often features representatives of other organizations involved with changing the social and legal status of psychedelic agents such as SSDP and DanceSafe. The Bulletin's cover artwork has featured numerous visionary and psychedelic inspired artists such as Alex Grey, Dadara, Naoto Hattori, and Martina Hoffman.
MAPS offers educational resources that actively promote psychedelic harm reduction. Psychedelic harm reduction is an approach to minimize harmful consequences and risks associated with the therapeutic and recreational use of psychedelic drugs. A harm reduction approach is an alternative to drug prohibition laws that criminalize users of psychedelic substances. Inexperienced or overwhelmed users of psychedelics sometimes have challenging emotional experiences that are resolved through law enforcement or medical intervention, which may lead to psychological damage long after the trip is over. A harm reduction approach to using psychedelics often includes attention to set and setting, a trip sitter, or be in the context of psychedelic therapy.
MAPS has provided psychedelic emergency services at festivals such as Hookahville, Burning Man and the Boom Festival. MAPS    model of psychedelic emergency services is volunteer staffed, peer based and relies on acute intervention. MAPS also provides trainings and an educational video, which empowers psychedelic users and their peers with therapeutic techniques for use in assisting others through difficult psychedelic experiences. MAPS    approach to psychedelic harm reduction encourages a new framework for looking at    bad    trips as opportunities for emotional and spiritual growth. 
Additionally, MAPS co-sponsors Ecstasydata.org, an online resource that provides laboratory testing of ecstasy tablets for a minimal cost. Laboratory testing of ecstasy tablets and other psychedelics allows users to know exactly what they are ingesting and to avoid taking mislabeled or impure substances.
National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) has a government granted monopoly on the production of medical marijuana for research purposes. In the past, the institute has refused to supply marijuana to researchers who had obtained all other necessary federal permits. Medical marijuana researchers and activists claim that NIDA, which is not supposed to be a regulatory organization, does not have the authority to effectively regulate who does and doesn't get to do research with medical marijuana. Jag Davies of the Multidisciplinary Association for Psychedelic Studies (MAPS) writes in MAPS Bulletin:
 including the Compassionate Investigational New Drug program. A Fast Company magazine article pointed out, "Based on the photographic evidence, NIDA's concoction of seeds, stems, and leaves more closely resembles dried cat brier than cannabis". An article in Mother Jones magazine describes their crop as "brown, stems-and-seeds-laden, low-potency pot   what's known on the streets as 'schwag'" United States federal law currently registers cannabis as a Schedule I drug. Medical marijuana researchers typically prefer to use high-potency marijuana, but NIDA's National Advisory Council on Drug Abuse has been reluctant to provide cannabis with high THC levels, citing safety concerns:
Speaking before the National Advisory Council on Drug Abuse, Rob Kampia of the Marijuana Policy Project criticized NIDA for refusing to provide researcher Donald Abrams with marijuana for his studies, stating that "after nine months of delay, Dr. Leshner rejected Dr. Abrams' request for marijuana, on what we believe are political grounds that the FDA-approved protocol is inadequate.}}
Boston Globe 2006:
In the most recent rejection of medical marijuana by the Federal Government, the DEA denied Professor Craker, Valerie Corral, and MAPS request to end the federal governments monopoly on medical marijuana production and research.}}
From an ACLU Press Release:
Major events in recent proceedings are notable, as in the 2007 ruling by Administrative Law Judge Mary Ellen Bittner, wherein she recommended that Craker receive a license to grow marijuana for research and that NIDA dismantle its monopoly. The DEA in response overturn the recommended ruling in January 2009, and later denied Craker's Motion to Reconsider in December 2010. Most recently, March 2011 saw Craker's lawyers submit their final brief in the case. MAPS is pursuing efforts to have the DEA's final ruling rescinded. A detailed timeline of MAPS' attempts to gain access to research grade marijuana is available on the MAPS website .