In 1999, Brecher placed 8th in the World Series of Poker $2.5K No-Limit Hold'em event for $15K. In 2004, he reached the final table of the World Poker Tour $25K No Limit Championship, finishing in 6th place and winning $232K.  In 2005, he finished 3rd in the $9.7K No Limit Hold'em event at the United States Poker Championship, pocketing $218K.
In 2009, Brecher took his first major tournament title by winning the WPT Bay 101 Shooting Star tournament. He beat over 300 other players to win more than $1 Million, defeating Kathy Liebert heads up after the longest final table in WPT history.
As of March 2011, his career cashes exceeded $2 million.
Before turning his hand to professional poker, Brecher was a renowned computer programmer and author who was instrumental in creating some of the earliest popular programs (and their product categories) for the Macintosh platform. He wrote ''Suitcase'', the seminal font management program for the Mac, which was originally self published under the brand Software Supply, later distributed by Fifth Generation Systems, and eventually acquired by Extensis, which still publishes a (greatly improved and rewritten) version of the program more than 20 years after Brecher's original release. He also, together with Billy Steinberg, wrote ''Pyro'', the original Mac screen saver application. In addition to application software, Brecher was a significant contributor to the FreePPP project, which brought Macintosh computers onto the Internet, and developed low-level driver software for some of the earliest Macintosh hard disk drives.
In the 1980s and early 1990s, Brecher was regarded in technology circles as a "programmer's programmer", and was a Contributing Editor of MacTech magazine, for which he wrote the ''Ask Professor Mac'' column, and answered technical questions from readers.  His later interest in professional gambling was foreshadowed by his 1980 book, ''Beating the Races with a Computer''.
Brecher is a licensed jet pilot and flies himself to poker tournaments around the country from his base in Carson City, NV.