Rosenberg graduated with honors from Rafael Landivar University in Guatemala City. He earned a Master of Arts degree in International Law and Comparative Law from the University of Cambridge and a Master of Arts in Commercial Law and International Law from Harvard University.
In 1987 Rosenberg co-founded Rosenberg-Marzano, Marroquin-Pemueller & Asociados, S.C., a law firm. He specialized in Business/Commercial, Corporate, International, Trademark, Constitutional, Tax, and Procedural Law. He was also on the legal staff of Rodriguez Mahuad & Asociados, another law firm, and was appointed Vice-Dean of the Law School at Rafael Landivar University. He also served as president of the Board of Directors of CENAC Foundation (Center for Arbitration and Mediation).
Rosenberg was shot dead on May 10, 2009, while bicycling in Guatemala City. He was approached by an assasin who came down a grassy knoll and shot him in the back.  The killer ran around Rosenberg   s left side, sending another bullet down his cheek and out his neck; an instant later another went through his neck and didn   t leave his body. The killer then knelt on his right side and placed the gun under Rosenberg's jaw, firing another bullet that tore through Rodrigo   s eye and went out his left temple.  Finally, the murderer moved the gun to Rodrigo Rosenberg   s forehead as it faced away from him and shot one final time.  This last bullet settled in his brain. 
In an 18-minute videotape recorded prior to his death he claimed that President Alvaro Colom wanted him dead and would be responsible should he be murdered: "If you are watching this message, it is because I was assassinated by President Alvaro Colom, with help from  Gustavo Alejos."
Rosenberg claimed his death would be due to his involvement with two clients: Khalil Musa, a prominent businessman, and Musa's daughter, Marjorie, who were both assassinated in April 2009. Khalil Musa had been nominated by members of President Colom's government to serve on the board of Guatemala's Banrural (Rural Development) bank.
 The video called for Colom to step down and Vice President of Guatemala Rafael Espada to replace him. It ended with, 
The airing of the video at Rosenberg's funeral, then uploaded to YouTube and broadcast on national television, precipitated a political crisis in Guatemala. Protesters demonstrated in Guatemala City   s Central Plaza, and opponents urged him to step down from office. 
In an interview with CNN Espanol, Colom asserted the Rosenberg video was "completely fake", thus challenging early reports from the International Commission against Impunity in Guatemala (CICIG), which validated its authenticity. 
On May 13, 2009, the United States Ambassador to Guatemala, Stephen G. McFarland, confirmed that FBI personnel had arrived in Guatemala to aid in the investigation.
At least one blogger, Jean Anleu Fernandez, was arrested on charges of "inciting financial panic" after he urged readers to withdraw deposits from Banrural. Anleu had suggested on the social messaging network Twitter that all account holders should withdraw their funds from Banrural.  He was placed under house arrest on May 14, 2009. Anleu's short message, ''"Primera accion real    sacar el pisto de Banrural    quebrar al banco de los corruptos,"'' resulted in a judge ordering his detention and suggesting a fine of up to GTQ50,000. Attempts to censor Anleu's message backfired, because of internet phenomenon called the Streisand effect.  A Guatemalan appeals court ruled on 10 July 2009 that the case lacked merit.  Some US$7,000 was spent on Anleu's legal fees, half contributed by Twitter users by Paypal.
By September 12, 2009, Guatemalan police arrested a total of nine men, among them two active policemen, two former policemen and an ex-soldier and three other gang members, who were charged with Rosenberg's killing.
In January 2010, the International Commission against Impunity in Guatemala (CICIG), a commission in charge of recommending governmental change backed by the UN and the Guatemalan government, announced the results of its own investigation, concluding that Rosenberg had arranged his own death. He allegedly asked two cousins of his ex-wife to arrange the assassination of a man he claimed was blackmailing him. However, the target was, according to the CICIG, himself. The cousins supposedly contracted eleven guns-for-hire, most of whom were former or current police officers and one ex-military.  
Rosenberg supposedly used an anonymous cell phone to call his personal cell phone number, creating the appearance of death threats and to call the hit men on the morning of his death. Investigators traced the phone to his driver from a sales tax receipt.
  In light of the discovery, Vice-President Rafael Espada (who Rosenberg had called on to replace President Colom) denied having any contact with Rosenberg or anyone close to him before the murder.  More recent information about the Musas' murder indicated that Khalil Musa had finally declined the board of directors nomination, and that a more likely suspect for his murder than government officials was "a criminal network" from whom he had purchased "contraband for his textile factory".  Several of the people arrested for the killing of Rodrigo Rosenberg were also arrested on 22 September 2010 for participating in the murder of the Musas, including one of the men who was freed for testifying against the Valdes brothers, Mario Paz Mejia.  Paz Mejia's brother Wilfredo Antonio Paz Mejia was also implicated in their murder. 
Not everyone agrees with Carlos Castresana's conclusion that Rodrigo Rosenberg killed himself.    
Mario Paz Mejia, a policeman with connections in high places in the Guatemalan Government, was one of the people captured and originally accused of the murder of Rodrigo Rosenberg in October of 2009, six months after the murder.   His version that Jose and Francisco Valdes Pais, relatives of Rosenberg   s ex-wife, were the masterminds in Rosenberg   s murder was seconded months later by the rest of the members of the band involved in the operation that ended in Rosenberg   s killing.   Paz Mejia was eventually freed for collaborating with the authorities. 
According to Lucas Josue Santiago Lopez, one of the other members who had no previous record, Paz Mejia threatened and at the same time offered money for Lucas    family, to force him to say that he, Lucas Santiago, had done the shooting.  Lucas Santiago   s testimony in court about Paz Mejia   s role in the killing, the threats and bribery were ignored and the original sentence increased for not collaborating. 
Paz Mejia was freed, in spite of Castresana   s guarantee during the presentation that no one would go free, that the judge would only reduce his sentence,  and he remained free until evidence of his participation in the killing of Rodrigo Rosenberg   s clients, Khalil and Marjorie Musa, could no longer be denied.  Interestingly, Lucas Santiago is once again the alleged hit man in the murder of the Musas.  
Months before Carlos Castresana publicly hypothesized that Rosenberg had killed himself, Ovidio Batz Tax, another self-declared witness, was given money to say that people in the opposition party had Rodrigo Rosenberg killed.   Journalists were taken in the first lady   s, Sandra Torres   , helicopter by Salvador Gandara, the minister of Gobernacion, the state ministry in charge of security matters, to hear the witness make his declaration.  Sandra Torres, along with her husband, the President of Guatemala, was one of the people accused in Rosenberg   s video. The minister was seen paying the witness and the journalists.  
Another alleged connection between the killers and Jose and Francisco Valdes came from a number in the memory of one or more of the phones confiscated from the intermediary of the group, Jesus Manuel Cardona Medina, alias Memin, cousin to one of the band members.  The number corresponded to a cell phone which belonged to the company owned by the Valdes brothers. The phone was used by Nelson Wilfredo Santos Estrada, the Valdes    chief of Security.  Nelson Santos has never appeared to testify.  
A year and a half after Castresana   s public conclusions, the cousins themselves are in jail, having been found guilty of     complicity    in the killing of Rosenberg.   The main link between them and the killers is the testimony of ten of the members of the band.  All ten of them, unanimously       confirmed for us that the only people implicated are the Valdes brothers, and no one else, no minister, no chief of police, and no official.     This is the same band that Castresana declared to have had a history of murder, drug trafficking, money laundering, kidnapping and extortion.  
The next linkage involves a check sent by the cousin of one of the men accused by Rosenberg in his famous video.  A check for $40,000 was sent by Luis Alejos, cousin to Gustavo Alejos    the president   s private secretary, and brother of the general secretary of the party in power.   It arrived in Rodrigo Rosenberg   s office three days after he was killed.  Rosenberg   s secretary testified she had instructions from Rosenberg to deliver the check to his ex-wife   s cousin, Francisco Valdes.  The check didn   t have either Rosenberg   s or Valdes    name on it, but was, according to Carlos Castresana, the payment for the killing, three days after the murder.  The check itself was never presented as evidence. 
Eventually, the band members, several of them ex-policemen, testified one by one that they had been payed Q300,000, the equivalent in dollars to the check supposedly sent by Luis Alejos.  One exception was the only alleged intermediary in custody, Jesus Manuel Cardona Medina, who refused to admit for a long time that they had been payed more than Q50,000.   This is the same man who refused to    ask for forgiveness    for the killing because he felt that eliminating an extortionist was a "humanitarian gesture."  For both cases of intransigence, he was threatened with having his status as collaborator removed.   Unlike Paz Mejia, the man who pulled the trigger in this operation, Cardona Medina was found guilty and never freed from jail, although he did receive a reduction in his prison term. 
The man who sent the check was head of the Ministry of Communications of Guatemala. 
The first direct association between Rosenberg and his killers is testimony by alleged experts 
Luis Lopez Florian was Rodrigo Rosenberg   s man Friday. He drove for him, was his
CICIG investigators  any of whom, at one time or another, could have had access to the records, especially before the suicide theory was settled on, nine months after the murder. 
Rodrigo Rosenberg spoke by cell phone with Lopez Florian two minutes before he left 
Approximately half an hour before Rosenberg rode away from his apartment to his death, 
The CICIG, however, was at the scene of the crime, together with the vice-minister of Gobernacion very shortly after Rosenberg   s death, while his body still lay in situ.  One of the top ministers in the government and a United Nations international commission investigating, on a Sunday morning, what should not have been anything other than one of fifteen ordinary murders taking place daily in Guatemala.   The video that made it national and international news would not come out until the next day. 