The first White House vegetable garden was planted in 1800, by the second president of the United States John Adams and first lady Abigail Adams.
The onset of World War I brought the onset of food rationing to the White House. In 1918, President Woodrow Wilson and First Lady Edith Wilson brought sheep to graze and fertilize the lawns. This was a way to save manpower, fuel, and money required to take care of the lawns, because all resources were needed to fight overseas.
Past efforts of growing vegetable gardens were not always followed through. Jimmy Carter, who was a Georgia farmer and a gardener, talked about how gardening was an important aspect of America   s future in his campaign, but declined calls in 1978 to plant a vegetable garden at the White House. Another unsuccessful attempt was made by President Bill Clinton, who was denied by the White House, saying it was not in keeping with the formal nature of the White House grounds. The Clintons later resorted to planting a small vegetable garden on the roof of the building itself, where produce was grown and used for cooking.
The Obamas planted a vegetable garden on the South Lawn at the White House on  March 20, 2009.
Mrs. Obama, who had no prior experience in gardening, was motivated to start a garden when she realized her daughters Malia and Sasha were not receiving daily nutritious meals. The young girls' diet that would sometimes consist of dining out three times a week with occasional sandwiches for dinner was recommended to modified by the family   s pediatrician. Mrs. Obama found growing a garden would be an easy way to get more fruits and vegetables in her daughters' diets. The emphasis on the vegetable garden movement is to encourage Americans to increase healthy food choices.  The First Lady believes that changes could be made by cooking more at home, eliminating unhealthy foods, and consuming more fruits and vegetables. Furthermore the garden will take a leading role in educating children about the benefits of local grown produce in attempt to decrease the rising cases of obesity and diet related health issues effecting the nation. Mrs. Obama is confident that by educating the children of this generation then "they will begin to educate their families and that will, in turn, begin to educate our communities.   
Foodies and Environmentalist are elated with the produce garden growing at the White House.  Michael Pollan, author of the "Omnivores Dilemma" and advocate of sustainable agriculture, believes the garden is not only practical and efficient "but just as important, it teaches important habits of mind -- helping people to reconnect with their food, eat more healthily on a budget and recognize that we're less dependent on the industrial food chain, and cheap fossil fuel, than we assume."  By growing a vegetable garden at the White house emissions set off through the transportation as well as the additional costs from the purchasing of food products will be reduced.  The non chemical fertilizers used in the plot are made with    White House compost, crab meal from the Chesapeake Bay, lime and green sand. Ladybugs and praying mantises will help control harmful bugs."  The project has also proved to be cost efficient by the roughly two hundred dollars spent on the cost of seeds which will provide a continuous supply of fresh produce year round.
The vegetable patch has become a symbolic representation that has encouraged change within current government policies.  For example, Secretary of Agriculture Tom Vilsack is now lobbying Congress to review The Child Nutrition and WIC Reauthorization Act in order to change current school lunches.  Vilsack will try to persuade the USDA to provide more funds to make more fruits and vegetables accessible to children. The vegetable garden supporters believe the Obamas' role modeling of local sustainable gardening will have a positive effect.  The White House   s Executive Chef Walter Scheib is enthusiastic about the fresh ingredients and states, "There has always been a small garden at the White House, but this commitment by Mrs. Obama to a local and freshly grown product is a progressive move forward that will raise the profile and awareness of local and sustainable food both at the White House and nationally to an unprecedented level.   
The Obamas' lawn conversion to a vegetable garden has resulted in some controversy.
The Obamas' choice to tear a  section of the South Lawn to start an organic vegetable garden has encountered some resistance.  The first vegetable gardens were created when nomadic tribes of early homo-sapiens discovered they could settle down and grow food instead of foraging.  However, sometime in the 17th century the vegetable gardens were either disregarded or were grown for practicality.  The front lawn then became the people   s choice for an aesthetically appealing formalism type of gardening (flowers and lawns) that were put on the forefront of properties. Ever since the 19th century Americans lawns have been a part of the great American Dream.  The White House front lawn has been the idealized form of that American Dream, representing the type of lawns Americans sought after. History shows that grass was once known to be the annual crop on which life depended.  It was the grain for food and beer, as well as feed for livestock.  The lawn today has become a symbol of success and not the crop life stems from.  Thousands of dollars every year are funneled into the up-keeping and beautification of this American icon, supporting a front lawn industry that last year grossed over $17 billion.  The cost to start and maintain a lawn is higher than an organic vegetable garden, and is the reason why lawns claimed social status.
  These victory gardens were organic and cultivated in one   s own backyard without the use of fertilizer or pesticides.  The victory gardens soon faded to memory after the war but recently have made a comeback.  As the health food movement becomes greater and more organic gardens are being planted, large agribusiness companies are starting to worry.  The day Michelle Obama broke ground on the new White House vegetable garden, a letter arrived for her from MACA, Mid-America Croplife Association, urging the Obamas to consider the need for traditional agriculture in America.  MACA went on to urge the use pesticides in their garden, to and increase crop yield so they could feed more people.  This idea was further satirized on "The Daily Show" by Jon Stewart. Jeff Stier of the American Council of Science and Health states that it is irresponsible to eat organic, locally grown food because not everyone can afford it., May 14, 2009 Stier also says that if the Obamas want to be responsible they should use pesticides and teach children to use chemicals wisely to get more produce from their land.  Large agribusinesses are not against vegetable gardens; they are against gardening without fertilizers and pesticides, otherwise known as organic gardening.  Sustainability denotes another controversy between the organic and non-organic gardening.  Non-organic garden practices are environmentally costly, while organic gardens slightly reduce carbon emissions.  Non-organic gardens use fertilizer which contains nitrogen compounds. Runoff from fertilized gardens causes biological dead zones in streams and rivers. In addition, organic vegetable gardens require no nutrient input or supplementary products and are healthier for the environment.