The '''Borgata Hotel Casino and Spa''' is a hotel, casino, and spa in Atlantic City, New Jersey owned by Marina District Development Corporation, LLC, a joint venture between Boyd Gaming and MGM Resorts International. Its name means "little village" in Italian. The $1.1 billion casino hotel features 2,000 rooms at Renaissance Pointe. 
The Borgata opened in July 2003, and is the only resort opened in Atlantic City since Trump Taj Mahal in 1990 (as of the year 2010). It is the top-grossing casino in Atlantic City.
The Borgata was part of a major project in Atlantic City nicknamed "The Tunnel Project" around 1999. When Steve Wynn had planned the new Mirage Resort in Atlantic City, he wanted to connect a $330 million  tunnel from the Atlantic City Expressway to the new resort, later named the Atlantic City-Brigantine Connector, which would funnel incoming traffic off the Atlantic City Expressway into the city's marina district.
This caused major controversy, as it would go through a middle-class African American neighborhood. Competitor Donald Trump sued Wynn for it saying that it was a "driveway" to his casino.
The Tunnel Project did go on, finally opening in 2001 to foot traffic.  Four days later it opened to vehicular traffic.  The Borgata opened on July 2, 2003 at 11:45pm. The main tower is the third tallest building in Atlantic City and is visible from many miles away.
In late 2005 and early 2006, the Borgata underwent a $200 million casino and retail expansion.  The new wing opened in June 2006. In June, 2008, the Borgata opened its new signature hotel, The Water Club.
On July 1, 2006, the Borgata opened its new poker room, the largest in Atlantic City.
On January 2010, it was reported that MGM Mirage may sell its ownership share in the Borgata. On March 12, 2010, MGM Mirage announced it would sell its stake in the Borgata and stop doing business as a gaming licensee in New Jersey. On March 17, 2010, MGM Mirage announced that the New Jersey Casino Control Commission (CCC) approved the settlement agreement between the Company and the New Jersey Division of Gaming Enforcement (DGE) under which the Company will sell its 50% ownership interest in the Borgata Hotel Casino & Spa and related leased land in Atlantic City.
Boyd Gaming has right of first refusal, but Boyd is also engaged in its own high profile bid to purchase Station Casinos, and may not be able to raise the capital to make two large purchases at the same time.
MGM Mirage's decision to sell its ownership share and exit the Atlantic City market is a result of New Jersey's plans to hold a public hearing on the suitability of its business partner, Pansy Ho. As part of an Initial Public Offering on the Hong Kong stock market to advance a new casino in Macau, MGM-Mirage would increase its business relationship with Pansy Ho. Her 88-year-old billionaire father, Stanley Ho, was granted a monopoly on all gambling activities in Macau in 1962 which lasted 40 years when licenses were granted to foreign operators as well. In the intervening 40 years, Mr. Ho allegedly had contact with Chinese organized crime. Nevada and Mississippi gaming regulators previously approved of the relationship.
Designed in the Modern architectural style with glass as a main material, the hotel   s 2,000 guest rooms and suites include six tiers of luxury accommodations     1,600 Classic Rooms (460 square feet); 313 Fiore Suites (700 square feet); 8 Studio Suites (900 square feet); 39 Opus Suites (1,000 square feet); 40 Piatto Suites (1,500 square feet); and two Residences (4,000 square feet). In-room amenities include floor-to-ceiling windows; 300-thread-count cotton sheets and cotton bath sheets; custom-made Sealy mattresses; large bathrooms with granite countertops; glass-enclosed showers with upgraded showerheads and body sprays; high-speed internet access, and three phones, each with dual lines.
The  casino floor incorporates 4,100 slot machines and 200 table games. Among the available table games are poker, blackjack, roulette, Baccarat,Mini Baccarat, Craps, Pai Gow, Pai Gow Tiles, Spanish 21, Three Card Poker, Four Card Poker, Let It Ride w/bonus,Texas Holdem, Caribbean Stud, Racebook. Borgata   s poker program features daily tournaments in the 85-table Poker Room, the largest in Atlantic City and high-stake tournaments in conjunction with the World Poker Tour.
Borgata   s 13 destination restaurants include Fornelletto Cucina & Wine Bar; the New York   landmark Old Homestead Steakhouse; Bobby Flay Steak; Wolfgang Puck American Grille; Seablue by Michael Mina; The Metropolitan Cafe, Oyster Bar and Gelato Bar; Roma; Borgata Buffet; Izakaya; Noodles of the World (N.O.W.); The Cafeteria; and Bread+Butter.
The 2,400-seat '''Borgata Event Center''' has been host to many famous artists, including David Bowie and Sting.
The Music Box, a 1,000-seat theater, hosts more intimate events and is home to the Borgata Comedy Club.
Live bands can be found at Borgata's four nightlife hotspots: Gypsy Bar, B Bar, MIXX, and mur.mur.
The clubs at Borgata include the Gypsy Bar, a rock and tequila bar; B Bar an ultra-lounge; MIXX; and mur.mur, an intimate nightclub with celebrity guest DJs.
Borgata   s European-style,  Spa Toccare is complete with salon, fitness center, an indoor pool and outdoor gardens.
The 11 specialty stores located in    Via Borgata,    are Whim, Misura, Carina, Borgata Jewels, Borgata & Co., Borgata Collection, Ciao!, Essentials, Starbucks, Bambino and A. Kadenn.
The resort boasts  of meeting space, with facilities including two glass-enclosed boardrooms, two additional boardrooms, and 9 meeting rooms.
In 2005, the Borgata issued a policy that it would fire any cocktail server who gained more than 7% of their body weight and did not lose it within 90 days.
On November 14, 2007, authorities charged twenty-three people in connection with an illegal sports gambling ring that was allegedly run out of the Borgata's poker room.  Six of the twenty-three were Borgata employees, and four of the others were known mob associates.
Several scenes in the 2010 film ''The Bounty Hunter'' were filmed on the premises of the Borgata,