Hello. I want to find the concentration of a copper(II) sulfate solution, using the most accurate procedure. Should I evaporate all the solvent and water of hydration, measure the mass, and calculate the amount of anhydrous CuSO4? Or should I add magnesium until no more can react, filter the residue, dry it, measure the mass, and calculate the amount of copper deposit? If I choose to conduct a chemical change, I must consider percentage yield as a source of error. However, I cannot see anything wrong with a physical change. My teacher, who likes my physical change idea, on the other hand, is more comfortable with a chemical change but I do not know why. Thanks in advance. --  ( ) 00:24, 31 May 2009 (UTC)
While looking at Feynman diagrams, I noticed that all interactions between particles seem to fit into three categories: a vertex with two fermions and a boson, one with three bosons, and one with four bosons. Why are there no other possibilities? I don't think any laws of physics would be violated by a four-edge vertex where, say, a gluon and a quark interact to form a new gluon and quark (though the same thing could be accomplished by two successive interactions). However, there are three-Higgs and four-Higgs vertices. Why are Higgs bosons allowed to compress two steps into one, but quarks and gluons cannot? Why are there no five- or even six-Higgs interactions? Thanks,   ( ) 04:44, 31 May 2009 (UTC).
Have aerial or satellite photos ever revealed any previously undiscovered islands?    05:47, 31 May 2009 (UTC)
This Question was given in our summer assignment.
What is the relationship b/w focal length and magnification of a lens and of a mirror?
The mirror formula is 1/u + 1/v = 1/f and m = -v/u
Putting v = -mu in mirror formula gives
1/u - 1/mu = 1/f or 1/u (1 - 1/m) = 1/f
Now is m directly proportional to f or inversely proportional?
I don't understand how hybrid vehicles can make sense. Okay, from what I understand, 90% efficiency for the generator is pretty good, and so is 90% efficiency for the motor at converting electricity to mechanical energy. So your generator wastes about 10% of your energy, and your motor wastes another 10% just to get the engines mechanical energy converted/stored and returned into mechanical energy. Also, most early and current production models DO NOT take advantage of solar panels or plug-in as an extra source of electricity. So that leaves what, ''just regenerative braking'' to recover ''more than that 20%'' of the energy lost? What about highway driving, when regenerative breaking is not going to be used. Didn't some models not even include regenerative breaking? So where does the energy savings come from? It sounds like a bunch of converting the energy into different forms for no reason. Am I missing something here?  Is there ANY source of electricity besides the engine/generator itself and regenerative breaking in the basic hybrid vehicle? I don't think popular models like the Prius and Insight come with any solar panels or plug-in options. How do they get better mileage? Just by comprimising power? If so, why not comprimise the power and still use just a gas engine? I have one possible explanation, but I'm not sure--does the electric part have a higher PEAK power, alowing the smaller engine to keep running at a steady power and the electric motor provide peak power? That doesn't work however if you need to ''sustain'' maximum power, such as when the car is loaded and climbing a mountain side or long hill at high speed.   ( ) 10:45, 31 May 2009 (UTC)
I often hear the argument that, while Australia is a vast continent, it is also arid and dry and cannot support much more than its current population of 20 million. (For the record, this argument is usually brought up by people terrified of non-white immigrants.) Is there any truth to this statement? While this is a pretty harsh country, there's plenty of spaces that are green and verdant - Tasmania, for example, is roughly half the size of Great Britain, which has a population of nearly 60 million.   ( ) 11:26, 31 May 2009 (UTC)
Australia's population per square mile is tiny. It could very easily support millions more people. Yes there'd need to be major developments to boost infrastructure, but there's no reason (certainly not food) why a developed nation such as Australia couldn't have a major increase in its population. Whether or not it is desirable is another question though, and more of a political question.   ( ) 12:54, 31 May 2009 (UTC)
Well I guess the simple way to answer this question would be to compare arable land.  This list gives arable land in Australia as being the 6th largest in the world.  The world as a whole has 325 people per square km of arable land, while Australia has 43.  This implies that Australia's population could grow to 7.5 times what is today (151 million) before reaching the ''average'' density of the rest of the world.  Note that many countries are far above this average and still largely self sufficient agriculturally, India and China have 753 and 943 people per square km of arable land respectively.  Were Australia to grow to the same density as China, it would have 438 million people.  Of course this comparison is not perfect: there is large variation in the "quality" of arable land in terms of supporting humans.  There is also the issue of water, as raised above.  It adds another complication and uncertainty, especially for a country such as Australia where there is quite a lot of water but it is nowhere near evenly distributed.    ( ) 18:04, 4 June 2009 (UTC)
The General Motors EV1 electric cars were leased to customers and later recalled by GM. Why did they lease these unsuccessful test cars to people in California and Arizona where the weather is always very hot? Was it a bad decision? Or did their batteries perform even worse in cold weather?
Only a number of these cars were not destroyed. In a few decades, can we install more advanced batteries to these museum cars and make them usable? --   ( ) 13:23, 31 May 2009 (UTC)
I was just out working in my shade garden, and noticed after a few moments that a Great Horned Owl was sitting on the wood pile about 8 feet away, staring at me. I of course went and got my camera and got some pix from about 12 feet away, which he didn't seem to have any problem with (even with the flash!). 
I'm just wondering whether I should worry about working so close to him... it's hot and sunny and I was really looking forward to shady work. My wife and daughter will also be getting home any minute now, and I want to show them. So are owls safe to be near? --  |   15:07, 31 May 2009 (UTC)
By the grace of G.od
Rechovot (Israel, 31/5/09
Peace and benediction!
In your article about muscle contraction, you write about "cross-bridge" in the myalin/actin action. It will be helpfull to add a few lines about the "cross-bridge" process.
Thank you very much for your wonderfull web.
Yehudah F.
Rechovot, Israel EMT-P learning     Preceding   comment added by   (       ) 19:19, 31 May 2009 (UTC) 
I read the cryptographically written articles Tokyo, Greater Tokyo Area, City of Tokyo, and Special Wards of Tokyo, and I couldn't for the life of me find a clear explanation where "Downtown Tokyo" is, i.e. in wich ward(s) or other subdivisions or administrative regions within Tokyo. When I say Downtown, I mean the cluster of skyscrapers you see when you Google Image Search "Tokyo Skyline". Where exactly are these buildings?   ( ) 23:32, 31 May 2009 (UTC)
Is La Defense basically Downtown Paris? Why is it outside the city limits?   ( ) 23:33, 31 May 2009 (UTC)