Puducherry State Road Transport Corporation, PRTC is the Govt Transport Corporation in Puducherry UT that includes all the 4 Regions of Puducherry namely Puducherry, Karaikal, Mahe and Yanam. 
Pondicherry Tourism Development Corporation Limited(PTDC) was incorporated during February 1986 to promote tourism in the Union Territory of
Pondicherry.  With the introduction of transport service from March 1988, the Corporation was converted into Pondicherry Tourism & Transport Development Corporation Limited(PT&TDC) with effect from December, 1992.  The Pondicherry Tourism & Transport Development Corporation Limited
Besides this, PT&TDC is operating 23 town buses in all the four regions as follows: Pondicherry    14, Karaikal    13, Mahe    4, Yanam     2. PT&TDC has paid up capital of about Rs.28.42 Crores and was incurring substantial annual loss on Tourism Sector. Hence, the Corporation was bifurcated with effect from 1st April, 2005 as Pondicherry Road Transport Corporation (PRTC) and Pondicherry Tourism Development Corporation(PTDC) for giving much focus on the diversification and expansion projects.
PRTC operates various Inter-state and Intra-State buses. The routes for Inter-State includes: 
PRTC has received a fresh batch of buses from JnNURM for the city operations.  Around 25 Semi-Low-Floor buses are being operated to various destinations in and around the District of Puducherry. It is yet to receive another fresh batch of 25 Semi-Low-Floor buses and 10 AC VOLVO buses.  They would be added to the fleet of PRTC very soon. 
There is also a proposal to replace all the Inter-State buses.  All of them have done more than 10 lakh km and are very old. 
PRTC also operates 2 VOLVO AC buses to two different locations. They are: 
The Chennai - Tirunallar VOLVO bus starts from Chennai at 12:10 PM and reaches Puducherry at 3:30 PM and reaches Karaikal at 7:00 PM. 
It starts from Karaikal at 11:00 PM in the night and reaches Chennai at 4:00 AM in the Morning. 
Fare Description for the above bus: 
Chennai - Puducherry: Rs 180
Puducherry - Karaikal: Rs 140 
The Bangalore - Puducherry VOLVO AC bus service was stopped 1 yr ago due to some problems in the bus. Now the problem in bus has been solved and  there is a proposal to re-run the service again in the same route. The fare in that bus is Rs 350.