The '''Bronx Community College of The City University of New York (BXCC)''' is a community college in the City University of New York system located in the University Heights neighborhood of The Bronx.
The college was established in 1957 through the efforts of civic-minded groups who felt that there was a growing need for more higher education facilities in the Bronx. Classes began at Hunter College, and later at the former site of the Bronx High School of Science.
In 1973, the Dormitory Authority of the State of New York acquired the University Heights campus from New York University, who had sold the campus under threat of imminent bankruptcy. Beginning in the fall of that year, the BCC moved its operations to the spacious and modern 55 acre () site overlooking the Harlem River. Among the distinguished early alumni of BCC is Richard Carmona, who served as the Surgeon General of the United States from 2002 to 2006.
In 2001, parts of the motion picture ''A Beautiful Mind'' that depicted MIT were instead filmed in the BCC, due to the film's low budget. The dome at BCC was also used in the filming of ''The Good Shepherd''.
The Meister Hall building at BCC by architect Marcel Breuer was also featured as a "Russian Embassy" in the "Burn After Reading" movie by the Coen brothers 2008
The BCC campus originally housed NYU's undergraduate college and now-defunct engineering school, and consists of a mix of neo-Renaissance buildings designed by architect Stanford White and brutalist concrete buildings by Marcel Breuer. Most notably, the BCC campus is home to the Hall of Fame for Great Americans, the first such hall of fame in the United States. This landmark, which was founded in 1900 by Henry Mitchell MacCracken, Chancellor of NYU from 1891 to 1910, was designed as part of the undergraduate college of that university. At the time, a number of prominent local universities had made the move to upper Manhattan and the Bronx in order to build bigger campuses, including Columbia University, and the City College of New York.
The Hall of Fame for Great Americans (on the National Register of Historic Places), which was also designed by Stanford White, was established to honor prominent Americans who have had a significant impact on the country's history and includes bronze busts of Alexander Graham Bell, Eli Whitney, and George Westinghouse along with many others. It was the original Hall of Fame in the United States and at one time enjoyed great national renown, though today it is largely forgotten and has not had any new inductees since 1973.
The college is also home to the Center for Sustainable Energy, which was founded in 2003 as an educational resource for students pursuing careers in alternative energy.
The college also offers a wide array of workforce community development and personal enrichment courses and programs through Continuing & Professional Studies (CPS, www.bcc.cuny.edu/cps  CPS also delivers customized training for local employers.  CPS works closely with unions, city, state and federal agencies and accepts vouchers and other forms of financial aid for individual students.