Apparently they do news bits? Specifically this  is in question from the Race in hip hop article. I'm guessing they're not too reliable, but does that mean everything from them should be considered just a rumor or outright lie? Anyways I'm still left wondering where this quote originated from. -- ''' ''' ( ) 13:14, 16 May 2009 (UTC)
Each individual page has a link to source information. The link specifies primary sources plus background sources and references. --  ( ) 12:30, 18 May 2009 (UTC)
Checked "Mark Twain" and clicked on "sources" -- got the "one size fits all" list including WP.  "Related links"? WP.  No way it is RS.   ( ) 13:07, 18 May 2009 (UTC)
I have raised the issue at WikiProject:Mathematics where it is most likely to be desirable for use. WikipProject Mathematics already makes extensive use of other Wolfram web resources, and also  many of its participants are familiar with the capabilities of Mathematica, which is the calculating engine behind the site. --  ( ) 15:43, 18 May 2009 (UTC)
Our RS guideline tells us to used published sources with a reputation for fact checking and accuracy.  The answers to wolfram queries don't fit the criteria of published, and Wolfram|Alpha does not at this point have a reputation of any kind, good or bad.  So I cannot see how it could possibly be considered RS.   ( ) 16:46, 18 May 2009 (UTC)
Reading this discussion, I can see it wouldn't be reliable, particularly when they base their information on sources such as Wikipedia. I could still see the site being useful, if its output is verified through the sources it cites before being used on Wikipedia.     19:14, 19 May 2009 (UTC)
Can the book 'Muhammad The Prophet' written by Maulana Ali http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maulana_Muhammad_Ali be used as reliable sources for editing Islamic articles related to the prophet Muhammad.The publisher(of Muhammad the prophet) claims that some boooks of Maulana Ali have been declared as authentic Islamic literature by Al Azhar university http://www.muslim.org/books/azhar-cert.htm
The foreword of the latest edition of the book was written by Sheikh Tantawi a reputed scholar from the Azhar University.--  ( ) 17:15, 18 May 2009 (UTC)
The Azhar university ( http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Al-Azhar_University ) represents mainstream islam.Books passed by this university as authentic literature should be considered as facts.Thank you--  ( ) 18:47, 18 May 2009 (UTC)
Lol you are quite funny french is a language Islam is a religion I think The book can be used as It has been verified by Al Azhar university .Al Azhar periodically endorses material (Books) as authentic Islamic 'literature' According to wikipedia peer reviewed books can be used    ( ) 12:41, 19 May 2009 (UTC)
This is what they say about it  "The Department hereby confirms that the above mentioned books contains useful knowledge and do not include anything that contradicts the Religion of Islam" As per wikipedia guidelines In significant world religious denominations with organized academies or recognized theological experts in religious doctrine and scholarship, the proceedings of official religious bodies and the journals or publications of recognized and well-regarded religious academies and experts can be considered reliable sources for religious doctrine and views where such views represent significant viewpoints on an article subject.The letter sent by Al azhar to the publishers is the only source in English and the foreword written by Sheikh Tantawi confirms it.--  ( ) 15:20, 19 May 2009 (UTC)
I would like some help on whether the source  fails the be a reliable source for the statement that "Straights tend to use an approach that focuses on the chiropractor and the treatment model, whereas mixers tend to focus on the patient and the patient's situation". Thanks in advance.   ( ) 19:39, 18 May 2009 (UTC)
It is factual that David Duke published the book, Finders-Keepers, under the pseudonym, Dorothy Vanderbilt. But it can't be substantiated that the book, Finder's Keepers, contained advice on "vaginal contraction exercises, fellatio and anal sex." Why? Because the book is unavailable and the secondary sources cited do not actually cite the primary source, Finder's Keepers.  If someone can link to the book, Finders-Keepers, the matter can be resolved. Until then, it's hearsay and does not belong on Wikipedia.
Even though David Duke is widely despised, Wikipedia ought to maintain its standards and require that extreme claims be backed by primary sources, especially when the secondary sources don't cite the primary source!
Shady References:
1. The 1992 article, "The Picayune Catches Up With David Duke", does not cite a primary source, it defers only to this mysterious book having received front-page play in the Shreveport Journal on August 21, 1990. The article does not provide any reference but claims the book deals with "Vaginal exercises, fellatio and anal sex."
3. The ADL article discusses Duke's pseudonym but cites nothing for the book's sexual content.
You have made an error.  The book ''Troubled Memory'' is available in its entirety.  The book, ''Troubled Memory'', does not cite the primary source, ''Finder's Keepers'', yet it characterizes the book with, "vaginal contraction exercises, fellatio and anal sex."  That's shady scholarship.  Again, I care not for publishing prestige, especially when negligence is involved.
Are you saying Wikipedia defers to notable/reputable publishing houses as the authority on the content of a book, and not the actual book itself?
Yes, asking for proof is silly.  So far, Wikipedia is relying on three sources which fail to backup a serious charge.
What is hateful to you, do not to your fellow man.     Hillel--  ( ) 04:38, 5 May 2009 (UTC)
Protonk,
BTW....I was directed here from the talk page by User: &nbsp;  &nbsp;  &nbsp;  02:50, 5 May 2009 (UTC) who seems to want to defer rather than fact check.
Also, good lord.  There are literally       noting the same connection.  I don't think this can be attributed to Powell, Tyler and the ADL making up the claim.   ( ) 06:49, 5 May 2009 (UTC)
Protonk,
I agree, there are half a dozen sources characterizing the book as giving sexual advice.  There seems to be two competing descriptions, one is dating advise for women and the other is "vaginal exercises, fellatio and anal sex."  Not one of these sources cites the book itself, not even a footnote in these scholarly works.
Perhaps these scholars are chasing each others' tail.  Perhaps they know they won't be held accountable because it's David Duke.  Or, perhaps Duke did indeed published a pornographic book.
I'm with Ordinary Person.  Should I contact Powell or is that the responsibility of the Administrators?--  ( ) 07:18, 5 May 2009 (UTC)
Treat it as true, until something contradicts it. -   ( ) ( ) 07:49, 5 May 2009 (UTC)
I did contact Professor Powell, explained the circumstances, and he gave a very helpful reply:
Ordinary Person, nice one.  I think Duke's pages needs a new section: Pornographer.  Can you forward me the photocopies or post them? I'd like to see.... since Powell went to the trouble of copying them.--  ( ) 06:28, 6 May 2009 (UTC)
Is the National Enquirer (in print since 1926 and not known for inventing stories) a reliable source? The issue in contention is material it published about David Copperfield, namely:
This is the revision containing the details taken from the National Enquirer  (See sections on '''FBI investigation''' and '''Children''').   00:24, 15 May 2009 (UTC)
The ''National Enquirer'' is possibly the prime example of the negative use of the word "tabloid". Not the physical size of the magazine, but the malicious ''and unreliable'' gossip magazine usage. Our own article uses it as such an example. Tabloid#As a sensational, gossip-filled newspaper says: "Supermarket tabloids are particularly notorious for the over-the-top sensationalizing of stories, the facts of which can often be called into question. These tabloids - such as The Globe and The National Enquirer - often use aggressive and usually mean-spirited tactics to sell their issues." Want examples of the National Enquirer being called unreliable? Here, the ''Washington Post''. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2009/05/08/AR2009050802092.html "The reputable media don't traffic in that sort of tenuous speculation about people's lives ... This is why "tabloid journalism" is used as a put-down..." The story is specifically about the rare case when the Enquirer may have gotten it right, but it's also a fine source on the general criticism of the magazine's tactics. Here's another, from the ''Daily Telegraph (Australia)'' http://www.news.com.au/dailytelegraph/story/0,22049,25424888-5001026,00.html "The previously unreliable celebrity gossip tabloid claims it brought in "experts" to review Winfrey's medical history. These anonymous sources say the star's battle with her weight is due to a faulty thyroid that will send her to an "early grave." Reportedly (i.e. not remotely accurately), she's considering surgery to have the thyroid removed." In this case the criticizing paper is similarly a tabloid, of course ... so it goes ... :-)--  ( ) 18:29, 18 May 2009 (UTC)
Is the following article reliable  for the following claim: "''The title of Griffin's bestselling book The New Pearl Harbor, published in 2004, makes a reference to the conspiracy theory that President Roosevelt allowed the Japanese to assault the U.S. fleet in 1941, in order to force America into World War II.''"?  The part that I am questioning is whether this book is a best seller.  This is a book promoting 9/11 conspiracy theories which are popular online but not so much in print.  The article cited is being used in World Trade Center controlled demolition conspiracy theories.  I searched the archives and the Daily Mail has come up before and the opinions were, shall we say, mixed so I'm just asking about this particular article.   ( ) 20:22, 18 May 2009 (UTC)
In order to check whether the 2009 film The Chinese Room is relevant to the Chinese room article, I contacted the director/writer of the film, and got this response:
Clicking on "pictures" on  starts a slide show, one of the pictures clearly showing a frame from the abovementioned depiction.
I think Rulf can be considered a reliable source for information on what the movie is about, in fact he is the top authority, but that view is  .   ( ) 21:55, 19 May 2009 (UTC)
From reading the talk page discussion,  , it looks like your main problem isn't showing that this film is about the Chinese room puzzle, it's that the other editors of the article don't think the film is   enough to be mentioned. In fact, I suspect that if you could show the film were notable, that you wouldn't even need the source that said that "this film is based on this puzzle", the film title and subject would be enough to make it clear that it was, unless reliable sources specifically said that it ''wasn't''. So it's not that this noticeboard can't deliver on its promise, it's that you're asking the wrong question, you don't want to meet  , you want to meet  . For that you want to show multiple ''unrelated'' reliable sources writing about the movie. Roger Ebert would be a great start, he seems to be the standard most other film critics are measured by ...--  ( ) 21:14, 20 May 2009 (UTC)
Is  a reliable source for documenting the location a Michael Jackson music video was shot in, the main page of the site being . I'm concerned that it cannot be used, particularly when the article in question is already a GA and the source might not be brilliant.        00:34, 20 May 2009 (UTC)
Thanks for the feedback.        14:42, 20 May 2009 (UTC)
Can a post on Facebook or Twitter ever be a  ? There's an ongoing discussion at  . The background (at least from my possibly slanted POV) is that on April 29 President Obama commented on the Tea Party protests. On the same day, former Governor Huckabee posted on Facebook and Twitter "Astounded Pres. Obama still doesn't know tea parties were led by moms, dads worried about future...that's serious and no game!" Huckabee's  links to both, so I assume they aren't fake accounts.   ( ) 15:33, 2 May 2009 (UTC)
Twitter is a micro-blogging service, and as such, anything there can be used in line with  .   ( ) 00:25, 22 May 2009 (UTC)
Does anyone here know what the story is with the  at the http://encyclopedia.jrank.org website? That seems to host Encyclopedia Britannica 1911 stuff, but also some more recent "contributed" articles. See  for examples of uses of this link. An example of an article is . The disclaimer says ''"Content on this website is from high-quality, licensed material originally published in print form. You can always be sure you're reading unbiased, factual, and accurate information."'', but I would like to have more information than that. The  says: ''"NEW Contributed articles     Articles from professional writers on a wide variety of topics."'' Should we need more details than that before using their articles as sources for ours?   ( ) 01:16, 20 May 2009 (UTC)
The writings of Jeffery M. Smith were used as a prominent source for this article, for example the book/website "seeds of deception" published by Yes! books and this news article
Are these appropriate sources for this article?   ( ) 17:42, 20 May 2009 (UTC)
I think the answer to this question is an obvious "No!" but that hasn't changed the content of Ammon, which cites nothing except the Old Testament and Webster's dictionary to establish the authentic historicity of this mythological nation. Apparently there are a great many other articles on Old Testament topics that need authentic sourcing, but I'm unaware of there being any   on this. If some could be produced, there'd be no problem of course, but I'm not happy with Wikipedia articles reflecting Old Testament mythology as if it were a source for history. --    18:35, 12 May 2009 (UTC)
Undent.  I've done considerable trimming - the page was rife with original research, improper tone, and very few sources beyond the bible itself.  I've integrated a couple claims to the Jordanian website with information about the Ammonites, but the page needs considerable expansion with real sources.  Assyrology might have something to say.        Wikipedia's rules: /  21:18, 12 May 2009 (UTC)
A specific translation of the Bible is only reliable for what that particular translation says. Not what it means, not for historical accuracy, etc.   ( ) 22:44, 12 May 2009 (UTC)
Just to return to an issue mentioned above, most modern translations of the Hebrew scriptures translate the same text, the Masoretic text, except where they think it's obviously wrong or unintelligible. This text is based on manuscripts about a thousand years old. The much older Dead Sea Scrolls and Greek manuscripts are gernally ignored.   ( ) 10:14, 18 May 2009 (UTC)
Some modern translations - esp. Roman Catholic ones - actually use the Septuagint instead for some passages (incl. the Septuagint's verse/chapter numbering, particularly noticeable for the psalms).
With regards to Ammon, etc. there are plenty of fairly reliable public domain encyclopedias that can be used as sources (as long as you take into account that they don't take into consideration archaeology discovered in the last 100 years or so - as they were written before this).
Just wondering if http://chucknorris2012.com would be a reliable resource in refrencing that specifi site's desire and attempt to get Chuck Norris on the next presidential ticket?  It seems like that site is specially suited to getting the point across that the site in question does want to work towards getting Chuck Norris on the ticket, yet the TALK page, not the main page, is being edited  to remove the link so that it cannot be discussed, talked about or mentioned - it was not reqeusted that the link be put on the main page due to its being a newer site, but I felt discussion was worth it   ( ) 06:47, 13 May 2009 (UTC)
The site is completly serious about Chuck Norris and his ability to lead the country, if you go to the site and review the "issues" page you will see where his views match our founding fathers views when forging the Constitution.  While there have been no "mass media" news articles about this you would have to agree that the media is generally biased in its views and I would expect only Fox to even whisper about it as the other news outlets are so far up the current administrations rears that the reports are slightly tinged   ( ) 06:04, 14 May 2009 (UTC)
Is  a reliable source for citing population data? My inclination is no since it  that some of the data is gathered from independent sources, but makes no mention of what the sources are (I assume by British Encyclopedia they mean Encyclopedia Britannica).   ( ) 16:58, 21 May 2009 (UTC)
A user recently added information to Polish areas annexed by Nazi Germany based on this source:
I say sources published in Communist Poland are unreliable, at least in regard to all aspects of politics and history which were likely politically abused by the regime. Though of course the scholars were not all dumb nor solely politically motivated, it has to be taken into acount that free research did not take place under Communist regimes, and that censorship ensured that noone could publish something not in line with the contemporary political agenda - furthermore, one was unlikely to even become a scholar if one was in any conflict with the stance of the regime. Since German-Polish relations and Polish territorial claims were of central importance to the regime, no Communist Polish sources should be used for these topics, if at all on wikipedia.   ( ) 12:12, 11 May 2009 (UTC)
OK, I commented on the general question of reliability of communist era sources, not on the specific problems of the article. E.g. Polish areas annexed by Nazi Germany#Segregation seems to be based almost completely on one such source. What the section says is plausible, but a bit surprising in its full extent. I would expect that for every single claim, such as Poles not being allowed to use public phones, there is at least a grain of truth, and possibly but not necessarily much more than that. Was it true in practical terms for the full time of the annexion? Or was it true only theoretically because of a law that wasn't widely followed? I guess the truth is somewhere in between. 
I still think that what I wrote above holds as a general principle; but I am not at all sure that this general principle of double-checking etc. has been followed here. It seems that the large number of facts cited to the sources in question amounts to embracing its opinion, in a situation where it would be best to compare the opinions of present-day Polish, German, and other scholars to get the current state of the discussion, and then perhaps use the old sources to provide specific details that support this. --  ( ) 10:34, 12 May 2009 (UTC)
It is true that totalitarian countries' sources tend to lie.  However, they don't ''always'' lie, which means that they can be used, with caution.  In general, it is best to back up claims derived from a totalitarian source with other, more independent sources.  Also, matching the claims against two basic criteria: ''Does this make sense?'' and ''What reasons would these propagandists have had to lie about this topic?'' is useful.  For example, should Stalin have said that the sky is blue, it should not be discounted in a swift knee-jerk motion merely because he was Stalin.  But if Stalin were to claim that the Red Army has painted the sky blue, any reasonably calibrated bullshit meter should take notice.    13:03, 17 May 2009 (UTC)
As the scholar and historian Andrzej Friszke noted in IPN Bulletin fom 4th May of 2004 Czeslaw Madajczyk remains the best author and scholar in regards to studies on Nazi Germany's policies in Poland. Also Friszke did write that most of Polish research on Nazi Germany is based on publications before 1989 as post-1989 researches focused on Soviet era and territories, amd there is no doubt that this sources are considered reliable. In fact even modern historians from Germany use Madajczyk's works and praise him which can be sourced.
The obvious criteria here concerning sources published in Communist Poland (and other Communist countries) is how they are viewed by sources not published in Communist Poland (or associated regimes). If a post-1989 scholar, or a Western scholar, says that a source is reliable (not necessarily using that exact terminology) then that source should be treated as reliable. A mark of reliability could be just the fact the original source is quoted or cited without criticism or major qualification in later and/or Western work. By that standard Madajczyk definietly passes the test. I don't know about Drewniak.  ( ) 23:36, 18 May 2009 (UTC)
How to properly use and attribute these sources and apply the suggestions above is now subject to an RfC:
The ''Chicago Sun-Times'' is being disputed as a   by , who removed it from the article Ma Anand Sheela , and stated 
I would like to hear some feedback from previously uninvolved editors as to the reliability of the source the ''Chicago Sun-Times''. Thank you for your time, ''' ''' ( ) 20:22, 18 May 2009 (UTC)
I would like to know if a T.V. serial (which is not a fiction and is totally based on facts, with contribution by noted historians associated with it) based on history could be provided as a reference for an article. Can you please tell me how to write such a reference in terms of its layout, syntax? Also tell me how to find the publisher, year of pubication for a particular edition of a book if i currently don't possess that book. Kindly help. Thanks  ( ) 14:12, 23 May 2009 (UTC)
An editor has  a somewhat controversial claim to a BLP, citing  website. The original article can be found . My question is whether or not the ''Roanoke-Chowan News-Herald'' source is an   (example: the opening sentence states "What the prosecutors did in the first Alan Gell trial is criminal."). The claim may be true (I don't know anything about the case), but the 'Controversies' section already accounts for ~40% of the BLP.     02:34, 24 May 2009 (UTC)
Need verification of something.  Assume a wiki uses a nightclub's Myspace page as a particular reference.  On that Myspace page, there is an embedded video hosted on Youtube.  The Youtube video was not filmed, uploaded nor owned by the nightclub.  There's no way of confirming how the video has been edited, or where it was shot.  Is the video thus a reliable reference for a Wikipedia article?   ( ) 00:10, 14 May 2009 (UTC)
Unregistered user 74.248.89.150 has abandoned his original claim that the   linked video on the Jagerbomb article is a copyright violation and now attempts to claim that the video is an unreliable source.
A second link to the video in question has since been supplied; this one goes to the website of KETV channel 7 in Omaha.  This website provides additional information about the event recorded in the video.
Full information about the ownership and production of the video is found on the video at its end.
The video is a legitimate and reliable source, and furthermore it provides   for the world-record claim that is made in the Jagerbomb article.
Are we all expected to believe that the management of a trendy bar, KETV of Omaha, and everybody else were completely suckered and taken in by a fake video that was made about an event that never actually happened?  The video appears on the bar's own MySpace page!
Whatever happened to common sense in editing?    ( ) 03:38, 18 May 2009 (UTC)
The two links appear in the Jagerbomb article at the bottom of the subsection titled "Jager-trains."   ( ) 22:59, 19 May 2009 (UTC)
I don't know anything about nxtbook, except it seems to be just some way for print material to get posted onto the web.  Is it a reliable source for Awake (Skillet album)?  I'm thinking not...   ( ) 19:01, 21 May 2009 (UTC)
Nobody has said whether or not this source is reliable.    ( ) 05:51, 24 May 2009 (UTC)
Hi all. I asked this   and didn't get an answer on whether it qualified as an RS or not. So, here it is again. :) It's the only really good source I have found online.
There's a very good Spanish source for ''Rivadavia'' on this site, http://www.histarmar.com.ar/, but I'm not sure if it is a reliable source. Can anyone here help me out? ()     &nbsp;        02:51, 22 May 2009 (UTC)
This article was deleted on the grounds of insuffient reliable sources in the refernces.  In respect to the closing admin and the Wikipedia users who have opposed this article, there were also many who wholeheartedly disagreed with this decision. However the closing admin has stated that if even 2 of this articles references can be established as reliabe sourses this article will be un-deleted http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User_talk:Xymmax. Many of the refernces listed are Low Power FM, College & SHOUTcast listed Internet Radio Stations.  Definately not the "Cream of the Crop" in corporate radio, but listed on Wikipedia, Radio Locator http://www.radio-locator.com/ and SHOUTcast.  The deletion consensus was that a mere listing on a radio station's program schedule did not constitute a reliable source, however this article displayed more references than other syndicated Christian Radio programs on wikipedia.  So is it possible that there has been an oversight in the deletion of this page?  Is it possible that there are sufficient refernces for this article to stand? If not, specifically how would the references need to be better to qualify? 
Is the following source admissible for this statement, per  ?
The organization claims to have received the support of Edward Asner, the actor and political activist, in a letter dated Oct. 6, 2008. ()
Any advice is welcome!&nbsp;  21:49, 23 May 2009 (UTC)
A number of secondary sources assert that the encyclical Mit brennender Sorge described Hitler as "an insane and arrogant prophet' but the official English translation  contains nothing like this. I deleted it (as another editor did previously) but another editor has restored it, citing  . How should a situation like this be handled?  ( ) 10:09, 19 May 2009 (UTC)
Agree with Schulz, that for "interpretation of a lengthy document written in a ritualistic and stilted style, competent secondary sources should trump interpretations of editors" ... or ''even literal translations of primary documents''. Note that the primary document does not even mention Hitler by name, and we need to rely on secondary sources to even say that the extract refers to him. Of course, if reliable secondary sources disagree, we can mention that (keeping   in mind). Finally, Google translations (and translations by Schulz :) ) are useful for talk-page discussions, but should not be used in the article itself.   ( ) 16:48, 19 May 2009 (UTC)
Thanks very much for this, everybody. I changed the text to read "It include criticism of "an insane and arrogant prophet" ("Wahnprophet"), taken by some scholars to be a reference to Hitler", with citations to Botenkotter following. My impression is that, while no one has explicitly disagreed with Botenkotter, and some subsequent writers (general church histories rather than specialists) have followed him, the absence of  anything like this in other writers and the differences with the Vatican translation suggest that this is a rather tendentious and polemical interpretation. I think the phrasing covers this, and avoids OR.  ( ) 22:13, 19 May 2009 (UTC)
Is this a reliable article?    ( ) 16:26, 25 May 2009 (UTC)
WP:RS Statements of Opinion allows ''news'' organization publishing in a "blog" style format to be considered equally reliable as if it were published in a more "traditional" 20th-century format of a classic ''news'' story. What about a credible published author who publishes a monograph on his own blog site? Example: '''Witherington, Ben. "The Lazarus Effect," http://benwitherington.blogspot.com/2007/03/lazarus-effect-part-one.html''' I suggest this contemporary 21st-century format should be allowed as a blog exception in addition to news organizations.  ( ) 04:32, 26 May 2009 (UTC)
Thanks to both of you.   ( ) 18:32, 27 May 2009 (UTC)
I feel that the website must still be used as reference, due to lack of any alternative reliable sources on the Mafia articles. If we discontinue using gangland as a reliable source, then a vast amount of info in a lot of articles will have to be removed. This will invariably depreciate the qualities of these articles and reduce them to stubs. So, here is my solution to the problem. Since Capeci also writes for the NY daily news, replace those gangland links with NY daily news links in the case in which the same articles being found there. The remaining inactive links can simply be converted to offline references.  ( ) 12:26, 26 May 2009 (UTC)
Gangland News is a gossip site for gangsters.
It uses a lot of words like "reputed", "reportedly", "alleged" And "according to anonymous sources" 
As Joyson Noel states there are no "alternative reliable sources on the Mafia articles"
This proves that most of the information on Gangland News is simply not noteworthy nor to be used as a reliable source.
Using words like "reputed", "reportedly", "alleged" and even "according to anonymous sources" do not necessarily make a source uncredible. You claim that since there are no alternative sources on the Mafia articles, most of the information by the site automatically becomes un-notable and unreliable. How does that happen? What possible relation exists between the lack of alternative reliable links to the reliability of content provided by ganglandnews? Moreover, how does the research by a notable recognized expert on the field become insignificant, simply because the website became pay-per-view? Please elaborate.   ( ) 16:02, 26 May 2009 (UTC)
I would also like to add that Gangland news is not a gossip site or forum, but a credible news source. In fact, Mafioso's and law enforcement themselves use it for reference and daily updates. In one interesting incident, the New York Daily falsely reported that a Mafia Capo Ralph Galione (who was in jail at that time) had become an informant. Shortly after, his mother phoned Jerry Capeci and informed him that this was false and requested him to state that it was false in his website, since she knew that it was frequently visited by law enforcement and mobsters alike.   ( ) 16:16, 26 May 2009 (UTC)
In both these AFDs on Spider-Man comics, a user has pulled out reviews and news articles from sites like comicbookresources as to prove the subject's notability. I was wondering if someone well-versed in this area could tell me if these count as reliable sources that alone prove notability. Thanks.--  ( ) 16:26, 27 May 2009 (UTC)
Could this  be a RS for Rick Warren?   ( ) 17:40, 27 May 2009 (UTC)
I keep trying to add Stereo Subversion (http://www.stereosubversion.com) as a reliable source for album reviews, due to the fact that: 1) the site has a staff of writers who are the only people to post content; 2) the site is edited -- all reviews go through editors and are posted BY editors, so nothing gets posted without total approval. But every time I post anything regarding the site, it tends to eventually get deleted, often quite quickly. Can I get a consensus as to whether I've followed the rules? Because it would seem I have, and the quick deletions without explanation have served to confuse, violating the idea of not biting newcomers.
I was told on the WikiChat program to post here. I certainly appreciate responses. (  ( ) 19:39, 27 May 2009 (UTC))
I'm trying to find  on , but am having no luck.  With such an explicit search term, it should be easy.  Am I missing something?        Wikipedia's rules: /  13:51, 26 May 2009 (UTC)
I have concerns about the way a source is being used. The way it is being used is consistent with the way it has been used in internet conspiracy theories regarding the supposed myriad dangers of aspartame, but I believe it grossly misrepresents the nature of the original source. I would appreciate more eyes on the matter. This is a medical and scientific matter, so to some degree   would apply to any interpretation of the scientific matters discussed in the source. The original source seems to bear evidence of being influenced by the fringe conspiracy theories, while fortunately noting the mainstream POV from governmental and medical sources. --   ( ) 04:23, 28 May 2009 (UTC)
Hi - I brought to AfD an article about a piece of free software, and the author has produced a   as evidence that the subject has received substantial independent coverage. I'm quite prepared to be convinced that it has, but I'm not sure about some of these sites.  is a blog without editorial oversight, and I'm assuming that our   guidelines rule these out. But what kind of traits should I be looking at when assessing the rest for reliability? Is there a point at which providing    the software under review crosses over into promotional territory? I'm not familiar with the area, and would very much appreciate more opinions.   ( ) 13:03, 28 May 2009 (UTC)
The article http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Joe_Capilano is not referenced and has not been verified for several years, and I am wondering what the historical implications could be if information like this is never challenged and verified.  What are the steps to take, and should this be taken given the information is simply many peoples opinions or stories they have been told.    ( ) 16:41, 24 May 2009 (UTC)
The true Squamish Capilano family claims that there is no Joe Capilano in their lineage or family tree and to list his name on Wikipedia as "Joe Capilano" is to imply a firstname, lastname individual existed within the Capilano family.  There is no evidence of anyone giving him the name - during these times names were taken and changed quite frequently by the Canadian Governments Indian assimilation departments, names were also taken by transients who attempted to create a place for themselves by using other family names.  If a true identity for this individual cannot be found, and without a reliable source as to who gave him the name, we request this posting to be deleted from the system or at a minimum all references of the Capilano family name be removed.  The Province newspaper reported on August 30th 1906 "Capilano Joe visits King Edward VII", this article states the following " He was "Capilano Joe" before he went, after he came back he was Chief Joe Capilano".  Actually he was not a "Capilano" at all - not by blood."  This is similar to Mike from the city of Seattle calling himself Mike Seattle.   ( ) 05:16, 27 May 2009 (UTC)
This is the point precisely.  He was only famous because he "took" the Capilano name and tried to use it to his advantage to be admitted to see King Edward VII, however he was refused to see him but when he returned he was somehow then a Chief.  Historically and traditionally, this does not add up.     Apparently, he received the title of    Chief     (via recieving the name Kiyapalanexw (Capilano), in order to facilitate his trip to Ottawa and to London, to meet King Edward VII.    One blogger writes from past information listed in Wikipedia http://qmackie.wordpress.com/ 
The Capilano name is a sacred name and as tradition goes is only passed along from father to son throughout the Capilano bloodline, it is not given for the convenience of meeting arrangements as done with Sa7plek by unconfirmed sources.  The tradition of passing the name down to the son is common among all patriarchal societies. There are people with an interest in distorting this families true history because they have never signed a treaty or amalgamated into any of the Canadian Government's Indian Band corporations.  If Sa7plek is was his name, then this page should be changed from    Joe Capilano    to    Sa7plek   , otherwise the name is used in fraud and Wikipedia continues to regurgitate a historically incorrect  fact.   ( ) 15:50, 27 May 2009 (UTC)
Paul B you seem to take this personally.  I am simply trying to correct historical inacuracies.  If J.S. Mathews is not a "relevant source", considering he was a historian for the area, then what would be?   ( ) 01:00, 28 May 2009 (UTC)
Would it be acceptable to change the page name to Capilano Joe, rather than Joe Capilano, as to show he was a man named Joe from the Capilano area.  Several references actually use this naming convention for the individual. Please advise as to your thoughts.   ( ) 22:22, 28 May 2009 (UTC)
A section has been readded several times over several months on ghosts at Fort Mifflin.  The Fort is a national landmark near Philadelphia.  The rational for including the material is that it appears in the sources:
I don't see anything in the website to suggest that it is a reliable source, and it certainly uses a lot of weasel words in making its completely bizarre claims.  The book is obviously self-published.  Please leave comments here or at  .
Just to be clear - there are some reliable sources on Clifton Hall - the local BBC, Telegraph and Independent.  I had left those in, summarized them, and trimmed the rest.  I think three good sources on one event is fine, but any part of the article that relies on "I never saw anything myself but everybody used to talk about it," is akin to rumor mongering and has to go.  Fort Mifflin was worse, and I like the way it's been trimmed to a couple of lines.    ( ) 16:41, 29 May 2009 (UTC)
I have edited the entry to reflect the fact that the Fort Mifflin official website supports (to some extent) the paranormal angle; a secondary if not reliable source.    ( ) 16:59, 29 May 2009 (UTC)
And please indicate when you emend your post - someone might not realize you added to it after my reply. Thanks!   ( ) 22:11, 30 May 2009 (UTC)
I came upon several articles by these people recently and have become suspicious that they may be PR in disguise. Take a look at , for instance. There were several articles by this group, and they didn't strike me as particularly critical. They also were contradictory to some more routine newspaper publications. Anybody familiar with them? Have they been discussed before? (For more on them, see ) --    00:25, 30 May 2009 (UTC)
Perhaps this has been brought up before, but the archive search didn't turn up anything: is the Internet Broadway Database a  , particularly for   information (DOBs, etc)?       ''' ''' |'''  ''' | 02:58, 30 May 2009 (UTC)
Is this a reliable source? Seems like little more than a collection of self-published promotional material.   ( ) 15:21, 31 May 2009 (UTC)
Can I ask for a review of  used as a reference for The Increment please.  I have concerns in the articles at the moment over single sourcing, circular reporting and speculation being reported as authoritative.  Other sources used that bear similar concerns are  and a report by something called AFI Research, that appears to be a group of private individuals conducting ''open source'' investigation.  The only contact is a ''supanet'' (domestic UK ISP) email address.
The diff where the dubious material starts being inserted is 
ETA - AFI Research appears to be , same principles - civilian, no credible experience and open source research. 
Thanks
Correction - AFI Research is Richard M. Bennett - a journalist with over 40 years' experience. He acts as a consultant to www.secret-bases.co.uk and that is the only reason the "afi-research.htm" page is there on my site. You can use it to get in touch with Richard and his team of international researchers whom I'm sure will explain things to you all.
Alan Turnbull
Please see  where I reverted two links as not academic sources for an article on a Haplogroup. All I can find about this Rodney Jowett is at  and  -- I don't think these links belong in any DNA article myself. Thanks.   ( ) 08:26, 1 June 2009 (UTC)
Oxford English Dictionary is a RS, right? A reliable tertiary source and can be used in LEAD's?   ( ) 01:59, 28 May 2009 (UTC)
As I understand it, dictionaries are "tertiary sources" and those secondary sources he removed are preferable.  Is the OED a "reliable source" for the absolute statement he is using it for?   Were all the other twenty sources he has they have removed (all of which were secondary sources) better sources for statements about Fascism?   Many thanks!   ( ) 02:00, 28 May 2009 (UTC)
I am the one who said "Oxford English Dictionary is not a RS? Dont be ridiculous." And I'm the one who added the OED quote. Yet I havent removed anything unlike you claimed. I'm asking you one last time to retract false accusations.   ( ) 02:32, 28 May 2009 (UTC)
Note that this is also being discussed in   and at village pump    ( ) 17:00, 28 May 2009 (UTC)
I do not find credible the idea that someone could in good faith suggest that the OED is not a reliable source for the definition of words.   ( ) 17:21, 28 May 2009 (UTC)
OED is a reliable source. However, whether some source should be used in the introduction is a matter of  . From what I can tell, Wikipedia articles usually don't use OED for defining words.      18:34, 28 May 2009 (UTC)
OK, looking over all the points made:
I read in a reliable source (which I might even be able to find if it seems important) that sample surveys of actual English usage corpora find 10-25% of words are either not in standard dictionaries or obviously used in senses not given in them.   ( ) 15:30, 2 June 2009 (UTC)
Does anyone know anything about the reliability of ? Im not sure if the web site complies with  .        10:39, 31 May 2009 (UTC)
Over at   (the last two sections) an editor is arguing that an authorised biography is self-published (the publisher is Harrap) more or less by defintion. He's twice tagged the article and I and another editor removed the tag (the first time he didn't say what was self-published). Interestingly enough, he's found an article -- see the bottom section on sources -- that I think we might be able to use even though it is self-published to reflect what the author, who more or less founded the Bilderberg Group, said -- any comments on that also? There seems to be an agenda here to make this group seem even more mysterious than it is and to state that it's purpose is unknown.   ( ) 11:47, 31 May 2009 (UTC)
Hello,
I listed this a while back and didn't get any answers so I am back with it again. I am currently writing an  on a video game. Would the official  be a good reference? The Wiki was written by users, checked over by the game developers,  so nobody other then staff can edit it. Your input is appreciated!--  ( ) 16:23, 31 May 2009 (UTC)
A self-published critique of the EB's coverage of Hinduism written by an electrical engineer has been used as a reference in this article (see ). This letter has been referred to by at least one website  but I'm sceptical as to if this satisfied  . Opinions?   ( ) 20:36, 1 June 2009 (UTC)
Are press releases from a U.S. State goverment, for example , considered reliable?   ( ) 20:34, 31 May 2009 (UTC)
Thomas Streissguth's childrens' book 'Charismatic Cult Leaders' is quoted in the L. Ron Hubbard article as source for the statement '...Hubbard once checked himself into a psychiatric hospital.' I've never seen this data before in any reliable source. 'Charismatic Cult leaders' is published by Oliver Press in their Profiles series, which is for grades 5 and up, the book has no bibliography:
OK to remove this dubious info and source?   ( ) 06:57, 2 June 2009 (UTC)
Excuse me if this has been discussed previously, but I tried to do a search in the archives and all I got was any variation on the word "examine" (examining, examined, etc.) in previous discussions here, which, as you can well imagine, was extensive.
I've been seeing a few articles lately linking to pages on examiner.com as if they were published stories from the ''San Francisco Examiner'' or some other paper in that chain. Editors here should be aware that most of these links that I've found are actually to blog pages by people completely unaffiliated with the paper other than they passed a very brief initial test to set up a blog there. Content in these articles is posted by bloggers with no editorial oversight (they can write about any topic they like as long as there is at least an attempt to tie it to the topic area they were assigned to blog about) and they share in the ad revenue hits to those pages generate. It's similar in concept to Associated Content or Suite101. Based upon its set up and similarities to other prohibited sites it's pretty clear that these blogs fail   standards quite dramatically. Unfortunately it appears that examiner.com is blurring the lines between actual news articles from the parent media corporation, so I don't know if there's some easy way to differentiate the two.   ( ) 14:50, 29 May 2009 (UTC)
I actually personally know one of the local bloggers, who complained to me about other bloggers' work there being full of errors and that it was obvious no editor had ever looked at them, and also saw the kinds of things being posted as sources to Wikipedia, so that's where I got the info. It's pretty obvious if you look into it at all. But for links on the web giving more info to support these conclusions:
For details, see   and  . The source is here ; it lists its publication date as 2008, but an editor has identified several sentences as first appearing in WP during 2005. Its publishers look reliable otherwise.   ( ) 20:45, 2 June 2009 (UTC)
The fact that a source takes something from WP doesn't mean it doesn't have a proper fact-checking procedure. After all, ''some'' statements on WP ''are'' factually correct.   ( ) 10:34, 3 June 2009 (UTC)
Well, I think the fact that the author didn't credit WP in any way discredits the paper. It looks actionable under  . It also makes it extremely difficult to check possible   - articles change - someone would need to sift thru article history for every citation to check that it wasn't here first. Supposing editors here agree it's an OK reference - on whom does the burden of proving or disproving circularities rest? 
As far as the author of the paper having earlier edited the WP article - rather unlikely. The following sentence was inserted by  , who edits under his own name, in December 2004: "Over the 16 years following the battle (the so-called Great Turkish war), the Turks would be permanently driven south of the Danube River, never to threaten central Europe again."  Compare to the paper's "Over the next 16 years (during the "Great Turkish War"), the Turks would be permanently driven south of the Danube River, never to threaten central Europe again."  in , p.242. And now the article is using this paper as a reference for the sentence...  ( ) 17:25, 3 June 2009 (UTC)
The paper also contains several sentences taken verbatim from the WP Miedzymorze article - see its talk page. These sentences were inserted by   in September 2005 . Logo has been inactive since November 2007 and his/her email is not enabled, so it could be hard to find out whether he/she is actually the paper's author.   ( ) 17:39, 3 June 2009 (UTC)
Technical note: I think this question is applicable to more than this single source, so the issue should be noted and/or discussed primarily at the talk of WP:RS. -- |  20:29, 3 June 2009 (UTC)
Well, I guess the heading says it all. Are posts by an expert in a discussion forum an acceptable RS? Obviously it would be better to find a widely available dead tree reference, but in my opinion so long as the point is consistent and sensible, and reevant to the larger discussion in which it is posted, and posted under his own name, it is probably easier for people to check a web reference than an article in some technical magazine. I'm not madly fussed either way, I just haven't seen it discussed.   ( ) 00:42, 4 June 2009 (UTC)
Would  be considered a reliable source, as on the Sathya Sai Baba page? It is used to detail possible mismanagement of funds of the Sathya Sai organization. However, when I searched for the supposed name of the article, I found nothing. It has a circulation of about 120,000, which is minute for a country the size of India. From what I can tell, the majority of the information on the website is opinion, and all (that I read anyway, the articles that came up under a search for Sathya Sai Baba) of the articles on the page regarding SSB were critical of him, which would hardly be considered objective/neutral. Any help on the matter would be appreciated. Thanks,   ( / ) 02:43, 5 June 2009 (UTC)
Hi a question of this online site is it a reliable source ?
Chris Baker he author says this about himself - As far as historical things are concerned, I was Chairman of the Western Front Association for two years and a member of the WFA Executive Committee for six; I was also a founder member of the WFA's Heart of England Branch. I am a member of the University of Birmingham Centre for First World War Studies and of the Douglas Haig Fellowship. In December 2007, I proudly graduated with a MA (with Distinction) in British First World War Studies from the University of Birmingham. My dissertation was on the Supreme War Council 1917-1918.
I really would appreciate some help here, where I am running up againt 3RR against what looks like one editor with several IP addresses (one-off so 3RR difficult if not impossible to enforce) challenging the sources that say that the magazine is, or at least has been, considered paleoconservative. Calling it paleoconservative should be in no way controversial, but various excuses have been used to remove the word and the sources, all of them revolving around the sources which is the only reason I am here. Thanks.   ( ) 13:48, 5 June 2009 (UTC)
Hi,
I'm doing a   for a dispute at Raw milk and would like more opinion on the use of the Weston A. Price Foundation () as a source for the article here. I'd be grateful for comments here. I'll collect a diff in the next day or so and add to the talk page.
Cheers,   ( ) 15:44, 5 June 2009 (UTC)
Would either  or  ever be considered reliable sources, like in the Gretchen Carlson article? There is a question on this at  .--      20:30, 22 May 2009 (UTC)
Sources do not have to be politically neutral, they have to be accurate and reliable. It sounds like the only objections to the use of this source have been made for partisan reasons. No source is 100% free of opinions or world view. As long as those views do not get in the way of the facts then the source is reliable.   ( ) 13:58, 4 June 2009 (UTC)
Hi! I'm wondering about the reliability of a number of websites which don't yet have any information on reliablity at  .
Thanks!      ( &nbsp;   &nbsp; &nbsp;   &nbsp; ) 22:46, 5 June 2009 (UTC)