. The author's decision to break with tradition and offer a first release of a new novel as a digital book received worldwide media attention, including coverage in ''The New York Times'', ''The Times'', ''The Los Angeles Times'', and on National Public Radio.
The media coverage led to offers to created a printed version. On August 31, 2009 Numina Press published the first hardcover edition, which instantly hit the San Francisco Chronicle's bestsellers list, premiering at #5 for that week.
Written as a pastiche of the thriller novel genre, the storyline employs international intrigue that takes the plot around the world to exotic locations, including the San Francisco underground, the catacombs of Paris, a yacht on the Amazon river, the Vatican in Rome, and a bedroom in the U.S. presidential retreat Camp David. Villains in the story include highly fictionalized parodies of controversial evangelical minister Rev. Rick Warren, pop star Madonna, and president George W. Bush.
In October 2010, a second digital edition of was released: The Sower 2.0. Debuting exclusively on Scribd, the new version was reimagined by the author and updated with topical references for late 2010. Considered the first version 2.0 of a novel, the second digital edition was also enhanced with advanced reading technology from Apture, which allows readers to get more information on any word or phrase in the novel via pop-up screens of videos, text, and graphics.  On November 15, 2010, a digital edition of The Sower 2.0 became available for Amazon's Kindle. 
Oil worker Bill Soileau is a reckless hedonist based in San Francisco and well acquainted with the city   s notorious sexual underground. He long ago contracted HIV but seems unconcerned about exposing his partners.
On assignment at what appears to be an oil refinery abandoned by Soviet occupiers in a remote part of modern day Armenia, Soileau meet Dr. Quif Melikian. She   s conducting a health safety inspection of the plant and has discovered a hidden laboratory.
An accident in the mysterious lab infects Bill with a manmade virus, later identified as a mutated form of phage. It instantly cures Bill   s HIV, unbeknownst to anyone. Eventually the doctor and oil worker discover the existence of the phage and learn it   s a type of miraculous retrovirus that rewrites diseased cells back to their original configurations, a potential cure for all diseases.
The two also learn the phage cure can only be passed to others via sex. This sets in motion a plot to destroy or control the phage and Bill Soileau.
In an age where victims of AIDS and HIV continue to face moral condemnation, ''The Sower'' twists the notion that morality can be assigned to a disease. In the case of the phage virus, the disease becomes a cure and promiscuous unsafe sex has the potential to save millions of lives.
But    love conquers all    is not so easily executed. Dearly held American values are put in peril by the idea of sex as a cure.
The protagonist is an anti hero. He   s a member of a suspect sexual underclass, a Southerner with racist tendencies, and an unrepentant cheerleader for the business of big oil companies. This makes him an outcast on some level with most political, social and religious ideals, and yet fate has chosen him to be the possible savior of all mankind.
The issue of genocide emerges throughout the novel. Dr. Melikian is a descendent of the Diaspora that fled the Armenian Holocaust. The Roman Catholic Church   s opposition to distributing condoms and safe sex information to people infected with AIDS in Africa is equated to genocide, as are efforts to destroy the phage before it can be used to heal the sick.
Most the characters names are double entendres referring to sexual acts.