Scoble was born in New Jersey in 1965, and grew up about a kilometer from Apple Computer's headquarters in Silicon Valley. 
In 1989 while studying in West Valley Community College he met Steve Wozniak, co-founder of Apple Computer, and persuaded him to donate $40,000 worth of Macintoshes to the college journalism department. 
In 1993 he dropped out without finishing his degree in Journalism from San Jose State University's School of Journalism and Mass Communications (he still has one class to complete).
Scoble began his career in the 1980s helping run a discount camera store in San Jose (LZ Premiums). He sold cheap cameras with small or no profits, but made money from accessories.
After college he was working for Fawcette Technical Publications (as anything man - design, editing, helping plan the conferences like VBITS and VSLive!). His current wife Maryam was also working for Fawcette.
During the mid-90's Scoble helped co-chair the Visual Basic SIG for , and was a frequent attendee and organizer for numerous local tech user groups.
In the late 90's Scoble worked for Winnov (a manufacturer of webcams) supporting webcam users. During this time he was named a Microsoft MVP for his activity in Microsoft's NetMeeting support newsgroups, and for maintaining a NetMeeting information website. 
He later left Fawcette and joined Dave Winer's UserLand Software, which was a content management and blogging software startup. He worked as a Director of Marketing. After the startup ran out of money, Robert worked for free for a month and eventually had to switch jobs. 
He found a job at NEC Mobile Solutions as Sales Support Manager for TabletPC. His job responsibility was to answer all the phones and all the emails with support/sales requests. He had started using blogs to provide tech support and listen to feedback from NEC customers.
His blog was noticed by Vic Gundotra (then General Manager of Platform Evangelism at Microsoft), and Scoble accepted his offer to work at Microsoft.
Scoble joined Microsoft in May 2003. He was part of the Channel 9 MSDN Video team, where he produced videos that showcased Microsoft employees and products.
Although Scoble often promoted Microsoft products like Tablet PCs and Windows Vista, he also frequently criticized his own employer and praised its competitors (such as Apple Computer and Google). He was unusual in the level of access he offered to his users, which included publishing his cell phone number on his blog and urging people to contact him directly with issues, as well as accepting comments on his blog. His support for Microsoft in his blog, however, drew controversy and in February 2005, he became the first person to earn the newly coined moniker of "spokesblogger."
The Economist described Scoble's influence in its February 15, 2005 edition: An article that describes Scoble's role at Microsoft
 he was leaving Microsoft to join Podtech.net as vice president of media development with a higher salary accompanied by "a quite aggressive stock option" offer that could make him wealthy if his new company succeeded. According to Alexa Internet that day had the biggest traffic to his blog and PodTech over their lifetime. June 28, 2006 was his last day at Microsoft.
In 2006 Scoble joined PodTech with the title Vice President Media Development. On Monday, September 25 he released his first episode of the "Scoble Show" at http://www.podtech.net/scobleshow/.
On December 11, 2007, while taking part in a panel discussion at the LeWeb3 Conference, Scoble inadvertently leaked news (by loading up a post on TechCrunch) that he would be leaving PodTech on January 14, 2008, and was likely to join Fast Company. He acknowledged the news on his blog on December 12 but stated that he had not yet signed on with Fast Company. He did a video interview about his plans  and leased studio space from Revision3.
On January 31, 2008, Scoble dedicated all his photos to the public domain.
On March 3, 2008, Scoble launched FastCompany.tv with two shows: FastCompany Live and ScobleizerTV.  He characterizes the first as "a show done totally on cell phones."  The second is similar to his previous show on PodTech, only with better equipment and a camera operator.  The show is recorded with two cameras in 720p HD.
Though he no longer produces videos for FastCompany, he continues to write articles for their magazine.
On March 14, 2009, Scoble announced via his blog and on the Gillmor Gang that he was joining Rackspace.  As part of his work there, he teamed up with the company to develop , a new content and social networking website.
On April 1, 2008, The Register ran an April fool's spoof claiming Robert Scoble was actually an IBM bot.
On November 14, 2007, he was a contestant on a game show at NewTeeVee Live featuring other internet celebrities such as Veronica Belmont, Casey McKinnon, Cali Lewis, Kevin Rose, Justin Kan, and others.
On November 6, 2006, Scoble  appeared as a panelist on a CSPA event called "The New Age of Influence: The Impact of Social Computing on Media and Marketing".
In September 2008 , a website which calculates how annoying it will be to follow anyone on Twitter, invented the milliscoble unit of measurement defined as: "1/1000 of the average daily Twitter status updates by Robert Scoble as of 10:09 CST September 25, 2008." At that time, Scoble was averaging 21.21 tweets per day, so a milliscoble is 0.02121 tweets per day. A person with a milliscoble rating of 1000 will be as annoying to follow as Scoble.