When he was seven years old, he founded the organization to aid the 1.3 million homeless children in the United States. Bonner said that, "These kids don't have a home, they don't have a safe place to sleep at night. They're out on the streets not because they want to be, but because it's out of their control."
In 2007, Bonner began his three-stage "My House to the White House" project. The project's purpose was to raise money and awareness for homeless children. In 2007, he walked 280 miles from Tampa to Tallahassee, Florida, while in 2008, he covered 250 miles from Tallahassee to Atlanta, Georgia. In the final leg of the trip, he walked 668 miles from Georgia to Washington D.C. Upon the completion of the "My House to the White House" project, Bonner planned another project, March Across America. From March 23 to September 14, 2010, he walked 2,448 miles from Tampa to Los Angeles.
Bonner has done a variety of volunteer work since he was six years old. In 2004, when Hurricane Charley hit neighborhoods, he collected 27 pickup trucks of water in his little red wagon. He established the Little Red Wagon Foundation to "continue helping kids more efficiently". Bonner teamed up with the StandUp For Kids and collected 400 backpacks of supplies, nicknamed "Zachpacks", for homeless children. The Zachpacks were filled with donated snacks, toys, and toiletries.
Bonner organized Christmas parties for homeless children living in Baker, Louisiana, and he gave Christmas presents to Hurricane Katrina victims.
In April 2007, he organized 24 Hours, an event that simulated being homeless for 24 hours. During that period of time, students in high school stayed in their own separate boxes for 24 hours.
 The second leg in the fall of 2008 covered over 250 miles from Tallahassee to Atlanta, Georgia.
The third leg of the trip began May 11, 2009. The 668-mile, 59-day walk from Georgia to Washington D.C. was completed on July 10. On the final stretch of the walk, 500 people, among them 300 homeless children, walked with Bonner down the National Mall. Bonner met with Saxby Chambliss and spoke with several other U.S. Senators on Capitol Hill. He slept at the Sasha Bruce emergency shelter.
In 2010, he walked from Tampa to Los Angeles. Calling the trip "March Across America", he began the 2,478-mile walk on March 23, 2010. Bonner walked an average of 17   22 miles every day. During his walk, he gave gift cards to people in need. Lee Cowan of ''NBC Nightly News'' "Making A Difference" profiled Bonner in early August; Cowan called Bonner a "pint-sized philanthropist". On the show, Bonner said that "When you're having a bad day you (have) to realize that someone else is having a lot worse of a day than you."
Bonner planned to complete the walk by September, after 178 days of walking. On September 14, 2010, Bonner completed the nearly 2,500-mile-walk to Los Angeles.
In 2006, Zach has received the Presidential Service Award from President George W. Bush. In the same year, he was honored with the Points of Light Award by Florida governor Jeb Bush for his volunteer service. Bonner has met George W. Bush and Bill Clinton. He has been featured on ''Good Morning America''.
 On March 19, 2008, he received the Alexandra Scott Butterfly Award from the Volvo for life Awards, hosted by Volvo on 42nd Street. In 2009, the readers and editors of Beliefnet chose Bonner as the Most Inspiring Person of the Year. Receiving 22% of the vote, Bonner defeated the "hero pilot" Chesley Sullenberger and students in Iran who protested against a rigged election despite considerable jeopardy to their lives.
Elton John donated $25,000 to Bonner's cause after Bonner completed the 1,200-mile-walk from Tampa, Florida, to Washington, D.C..
 Michael Guillen, the CEO of Philanthropy Project, plans to make a $5 million movie about the Little Red Wagon Foundation. Bonner's story was selected from among a pool of 6,000 candidates. After the number of candidates was narrowed to 12, Bonner's story was unanimously chosen. Praising Bonner for his philanthropy, Guillen said that "e's sincere. He's humble. He's generous. He's everything that is good about our country. So... when I see Zach, I see the future of our country, and I think we're going to be in good hands." After Bonner was told that Philanthropy Project would create a movie about him, he hung his head and sobbed, replying, "But I'm so small."
Patrick Sheane Duncan is the movie's screenwriter, and David Anspaugh is its director. The John Templeton Foundation funded the film which was produced by Michael Guillen of Philanthropy Project, Barbara Kelly, and Steve Golin and David Kanter of Anonymous Content. ''Little Red Wagon'' was filmed in May 2010.
 was born in Arkansas on November 17, 1997. He lives in a single-parent household and now resides in Valrico, Tampa, Florida with his mother Laurie, sister Kelley, and brother Matt. Bonner's mother is a real estate agent and investor.
Bonner takes classes on the Internet through the K12 Florida Virtual Instruction Program. The online program allows him to keep up in his studies by outside of the typical school day.
In his free time, Bonner plays little league baseball. He also plays tennis and goes on bike rides with his friends. He wishes to go to college at Harvard University and attend Yale Law School, so that he can become a prosecutor.