The degree of orbital shadowing an object in LEO experiences is determined by that object's beta angle. An object launched into a polar orbit at local noon or midnight results in an initial beta angle of 0 degrees (\beta = 0o) for the orbiting object. This allows the object to spend the maximum possible amount of its orbital period in the Earth's shadow, and results in extremely reduced absorption of solar energy.  At a LEO of 280 kilometers the object in orbit is in sunlight through 59% of its orbit (approximately 53 minutes in sunlight, and 37 minutes in shadow.) On the other extreme, an object launched into an orbit that follows the terminator  results in a beta angle of 90 degrees (\beta = 90o), and the object is in sunlight 100% of the time. An example would be a polar orbit initiated at local dawn or dusk on an equinox.  These orbits can be taken advantage of to keep a satellite as cool as possible for instruments that require low temperatures, such as infrared cameras, by keeping the beta angle as close to zero as possible, or conversely to keep a satellite in sunlight as much as possible for its solar panels or to study the sun by maintaining a beta angle as close to +90 or -90 as possible.
The above discussion defines the beta angle of satellites orbiting the Sun, but a beta angle can be calculated for any orbiting three body system: the same definition can be applied to give the beta angle of other objects.  For example, the beta angle of a satellite in orbit around Mars, with respect to the Earth, defines how much of the time the satellite has a line of sight to the Earth - that is, it determines how long the Earth is shining on the satellite and how long the Earth is blocked from view.  That same satellite also will have a beta angle with respect to the Sun, and in fact it has a beta angle for any celestial object one might wish to calculate one for: any satellite orbiting a body (i.e. the Earth) will be in that body's shadow with respect to a given celestial object (like a star) some of the time, and in its line-of-sight the rest of the time.  This is however a minor detail, as so few satellites are in orbit anywhere but around the Earth. Beta angles describing non-geocentric orbits are important when space agencies launch satellites into orbits around other bodies in the solar system; that said, because of how rare such launches are, beta angles are almost exclusively understood to describe satellites in low ''Earth'' orbit with respect to the sun (the solar vector).
The effect of the beta angle on shuttle missions is an important consideration for shuttle missions to the International Space Station, resulting in time periods referred to as "beta cutout".  When the orbiter is in-flight (not docked to ISS) and it flies to a beta angle greater than 60 degrees, the orbiter goes into "rotisserie" mode, and slowly rotates around its X-axis (nose to tail axis). For flights to ISS, the shuttle can launch during an ISS beta cutout if the ISS will be at a beta less than 60 degrees at dock, and throughout the docked phase. Therefore, the mission duration affects launch timing when the beta cutout dates are approaching.