In 2009, Graeme Willy and Clive Gollings (Simon Pegg and Nick Frost) are two English comic book nerds and best friends who have travelled to America to attend the annual Comic-Con convention and to take a road trip in their RV to visit all the sites of major extraterrestrial importance. At night along the highway they investigate a crashed car and they meet and discover an alien named Paul (voiced by Seth Rogen) who is in desperate need of their help.
Although shocked by the appearance of Paul, Graeme agrees to give Paul a ride, but Clive is not happy about the idea. Later, Lorenzo Zoil (Jason Bateman), a shady government agent, arrives at the site of the crashed car and informs his mysterious female superior over the radio that he's closing in on Paul, and she recommends using local law enforcement as back-up. Zoil then recruits two inept FBI agents, Haggard (Bill Hader) and O'Reilly (Joe Lo Truglio), to aid in his mission, without telling them the nature of their target.
Graeme, Clive and Paul pull into a motor park run by Ruth Buggs (Kristen Wiig), a creationist Christian, and her controlling father, Moses (John Carroll Lynch). The trio bond around their campgrill and Paul reveals that since he was captured by the government, he had been advising them in all manner of scientific and sociological achievements.  Yet Paul had outlived his usefulness as a receptacle of knowledge, and his captors were intending to surgically remove Paul's brain in an attempt to harness his abilities. With help from a friend inside Area&nbsp;51, Paul sent an S.O.S. to his home planet, and he was escaping to meet up with them. The next morning, Paul inadvertently reveals himself to Ruth, and the trio are forced to kidnap her and make a hasty escape. Paul then shatters Ruth's faith by sharing his knowledge of the universe via telepathic link; at first horrified, Ruth suddenly becomes eager to sin, which her father had raised her to fear doing. She initially doesn't trust Paul, but he heals her eye, as she has been blind in it since the age of four.
Eventually, Paul reveals his intention to return to the girl whose dog he crashed his ship on in 1947 and who subsequently saved his life, who is now an old woman, Tara Walton (Blythe Danner). After spending her life being ridiculed for what she said she saw, Tara seems grateful to see that Paul simply exists. She turns her gas cooker on to make tea, but is interrupted by Haggard and O'Reilly on one side of the house, and Zoil on the other. As the motley crew escapes and drives off with Paul, O'Reilly shoots at them, and the gas ignites, destroying the house. A winded Zoil tries to follow, but Haggard takes off first, running Moses (who'd also been tracking the RV) off the road, and catching up to the RV. However, thanks to an error of judgement, Haggard accidentally drives off a cliff, and is killed, leaving Zoil in hot pursuit. He reassures his superior that he'll have Paul within an hour, but she declares herself tired of waiting, and informs Zoil that she's ordered a military response.
When Paul, Graeme, Clive, Ruth and Tara arrive at the rendezvous, they set off a signal and wait. Eventually, eerie orange lights show up over the surrounding trees, and everyone believes that it is Paul's race. However, it is an army helicopter, with 'the Big Guy' (Sigourney Weaver) on board, Zoil's shadowy superior. As she and three troops move to shoot Paul, Zoil arrives, and it's revealed that he was Paul's inside contact who had helped him to escape. Zoil disarms the men, but is shot in the shoulder. Tara punches out 'the Big Guy', but Moses appears with a shotgun and shoots Graeme dead. Paul heals him and then collapses, exhausted.  'The Big Guy' regains consciousness, but is immediately crushed by the arriving alien ship. Paul begins to depart and informs Tara that she is going with him to live a better life and bids farewell to his friends hoping to meet them again one day.
Two years later, Graeme, Clive, and Ruth are shown again at a comic convention, promoting their new mega-successful comic book, "Paul".
Pegg and Frost have described the film as a love letter to Steven Spielberg. Mentioning the project to Spielberg, he suggested he might make a cameo appearance, and a scene was added to include him.
According to Robert Kirkman, he, along with ''Invincible'' co-creator Cory Walker and current ''Invincible'' artist Ryan Ottley, had a cameo in the film.
To help with the script, Pegg and Frost went on their own road trip across America and used ideas from it to add to the script.
Principal photography wrapped on September 9, 2009, with additional scenes filmed in July 2010 at the Albuquerque Convention Center, which was designed to look like the 2010 San Diego Comic-Con. After obtaining permission to use the Comic-Con brand, the settings had to be changed to avoid crowds, and extras were used to portray attendees since there had been some issues regarding filming inside San Diego's actual convention center. As a result, only exterior shots of the San Diego Convention Center were filmed on the streets of Downtown, San Diego.
During filming, Joe Lo Truglio was a stand-in for the character Paul, the only character who was created by CGI. Seth Rogen did some motion capture in pre-production and voice work during post-production.
A teaser trailer was released on October 18, 2010. The teaser trailer featured the song "Just the Two of Us" by Grover Washington, Jr. and "Run With the Wolves" by The Prodigy. It was shown before certain screenings of ''Vampires Suck'', ''Let Me In'', ''Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - Part 1'', ''Burke and Hare'', ''The Green Hornet'' and ''The Social Network'' in the United Kingdom.
The trailer featured "It Came Out of the Sky" by Creedence Clearwater Revival, "Human Rocket" by Devo, and "All Over the World" by the Electric Light Orchestra. 
The film had its world premiere in London on February&nbsp;7, 2011.
The film was released on DVD and Blu-Ray in the United Kingdom on 13 June 2011 and is due for release in North America on 9 August 2011. There are three versions of the film. There is an exclusive sleeve version that is only released in HMV, a steel metal DVD case containing four posters and lastly, the original version of the film with two discs.
Nick Frost has stated he would like to return for another film. Simon Pegg also stated he wanted to do another on The Graham Norton Show on June 10th 2011. He also said if there were to be a sequel then it would be called Pauls.
The film has received generally positive reviews; Rotten Tomatoes gives the film a score of 71% based on 161 reviews, with an average rating of 6.3 out of 10.
In North America, the film opened at #5 with $13,155,000.