Note:  If you are seeing this page as a result of an attempt to re-nominate an article for deletion, you must manually edit the AfD nomination links in order to create a new discussion page using the name format of  .  When you create the new discussion page, please provide a link to this old discussion in your nomination. -->
The result was    '''delete'''.    ''' '''&nbsp;&#124;&nbsp;  16:59, 24 June 2009 (UTC)
The article does not conform to the title. Rather than discussing her contributions or influence as a whole (which, alone, would not be very long) the article is solely about her bare arms. The editor who created the article ( ) has been pushing for more mention across Wikipedia on Mrs. Obama's arms, and his attempts have been decried by many as simply unencyclopedic (see: ,,,  ,  ). The creation of this article only furthers that opinion, especially since much of the material is copied verbatim from the article that he attempted to create a while back entiled Michelle Obama's arms (as an admin, I checked it out). In addition, the Michelle Obama article is rather short and any/all influences on style/fashion should go in there. Furthermore, both Jackie Kennedy and arguably Nancy Reagan had more of an impact in three and eight years, respectfully, than Mrs. Obama has had in six months. Perhaps in time, if there is a "Michelle look" like there was a "Jakie" and a "Nancy", then this topic would hold some water. But for now, all should go in the Michelle article because there isn't a reason to create a new one (especially one which focuses solely on her arms).   ( ) 06:32, 17 June 2009 (UTC)
Given those sources, I think that Michelle Obama's arms should be restored.
The consensus to delete Michelle Obama's arms was against wikipedia policy.
During the discussion  , the arguments for deleting the article went against wikipedia policy. The consensus itself went against wikipedia policy. I cited 11 articles about the subject, all from mainstream sources. That makes the subject notable. Just because the subject was silly is not a justifiable reason for deletion.   ( ) 15:16, 17 June 2009 (UTC)
I think we should delete this article, but only if we restore Michelle Obama's arms. The discussion of   did not cite any official rules to delete the article. Instead, the only arguments were attacks against the subject. But I cited 11 articles about the subject from mainstream sources, and that makes the subject notable. I want Michelle Obama's arms restored.   ( ) 15:33, 17 June 2009 (UTC)
Just like in the previous deletion discussion, no one who favors deletion has cited any actual wikipedia rules that the article violates. They have called the article "fetish," "drivel," "ridiculous," and "crap," but those are all personal insults, not an argument for deletion.   ( ) 23:08, 17 June 2009 (UTC)