Will and Rick hike a kilometer away from High Bluff to survey the Mist Marsh, which the Pakuni shun. Realizing it is quite large, they decide to explore it another day, but are surprised by the arrival of Spot, pursued by Grumpy, forcing them to take shelter in the marsh.
While searching for another way out of the marsh, the two are startled by the sound of tinkling bells. Following the sound, they discover a large structure made of white pinpoints of light, which they liken to a dirigible.
Will begins to get the sensation that someone is "picking through" his brain. He tries to convince Rick to leave, but in the end they approach the ship, discovering that while it is solid, apart from the lights both it and its contents are invisible. Unnoticed, a manlike form shaped from pinpoints of light (Marvin Miller) watches them, twinkling as it moves.
Will and Rick enter the ship and discover a woman who introduced herself as Sharon Williams (Brooke Bundy), who claims to be from Earth who asks for their help. Sharon explains that while on Ford Street in Indianapolis she heard a thundering sound, and only just awoke to find herself here. Rick is flabbergasted because Ford Street is where he was raised.
Will and Rick take Sharon back to High Bluff, where Holly has prepared dinner. Sharon elaborates that she attended Fillmore High School, just as Rick had.
The next morning Will and Rick leave to get water, and Sharon tells Holly a story of how as a little girl a dog ruined her white dress. Holly is surprised, having experienced the same sequence of events herself. Holly also takes note that even though the weather is sweltering, Sharon does not seem affected.
Will and Holly begin to grow highly suspicious of Sharon, but recognizing how pleased their father is to have a peer, they are unsure what to do. That night, the figure from the ship arrives at High Bluff and draws Sharon out of the cave. Rick awakens to see the two departing, and follows them. Will and Holly awaken moments later and begin to follow their father, but a feeling of "cold fingers poking through" their brains stops them.
Rick follows the two into the Mist Marsh, and calls out for them to stop. The figure introduces himself as a Zarn, and claims that Sharon is his research assistant. He elaborates that he perceives his surroundings through emotion, and that Sharon can read people's thoughts. The Zarn uses her to study the "31,000 human being types in this universe", all of which have been too emotional for him, as certain human emotions, including anger, cause him physical pain. He believed that the Marshalls, isolated in Altrusia, might be different, but was proven wrong.
Rick demands Sharon's return, but the Zarn threatens him with violence mediated by telekinesis. When Rick responds by growing angry, the Zarn gives in and takes shelter in his ship. Sharon bursts apart as a pile of broken mechanical pieces, including a robot hand. Zarn laughs and retreats into his ship. Rick returns to High Bluff and apologizes to his children for having been blinded to the evidence that Sharon was not a real human by his need for adult companionship.