The '''modern use of flags from the German Third Reich''' (1933-1945) is subject to legal restrictions in a number of countries.
Whilst legal in the overwhelming majority of countries, the display of flags associated with the Nazi regime (see: Nazi flags) is subject to restriction or an outright ban in others, particularly those with a direct involvement in the Second World War, and Germany itself. 
Many Nazi flags make use of swastika symbols; however, the swastika is not inherently associated with the Nationalsozialistische Deutsche Arbeiterpartei movement or of the German Third Reich or German military of 1933-1945. Use of swastikas pre-dates the German Third Reich by some 3000 years. It is possible to display certain non-Nazi swastikas even in areas where Nazi swastikas are prohibited.
Cyprus has no legislation designed to restrict the ownership, display, purchase, import or export of Nazi flags, nor does the Criminal Code of Cyprus expressly allow for racist or other bias motives to be taken into account when sentencing.
However, use of Nazi flags in a manner likely to cause discrimination, hatred, or violence may be dealt with under Cyprus' ratification of the UN Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination. This allows for the prosecution of anyone who expresses an idea (in public, using almost any medium including flags) which insults another person's race, religion or ethnicity.
Although there is no specific law dealing directly on the issue of flags (as prescribed in your letter) indirectly the definition of the offences under article 2A of the Ratification Law of the U.N. Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (Law No. 11(111)/92) provides inter-alia the following;
The Czech Republic has no legislation restricting ownership, display, purchase, import or export of Nazi flags; indeed Czech legislation makes even the banning of protests involving such flags very difficult.
The police may cancel such events only once it becomes clear that protesters are inciting hate, which is deemed illegal in the Czech Republic. Legal regulation of hate crimes in the Czech Republic is contained in Act 140/1961 The Criminal Act  (amended by Act 175/1990).
The use, ownership, sale, supply, etc, of the flags listed in your letter is not specifically dealt with in Czech legal system. However, as stated in the Czech Penal Code (Act No 140/1961 Col.), it is a criminal offence against humanity to support or advertise movements leading to suppressing human rights and liberties.}}
As you asked about the legislation related to symbols and flags of the German Third Reich, we do not have any legislation that forbid the ownership of these symbols in Finland. This has been a question of the freedom of speech, but if these symbols are used as instruments of propaganda the criminal law interferes into these situations - as it interferes to any kind of fomentation. Ownership itself is not prohibited}}
In France, it is illegal to display Nazi flags, uniforms and insignia in public, unless for the purpose of a historical film, show or spectacle.
Under Article R645-1 of the French Penal Code, it is a crime, unless required in a film, a play or historical exhibition, to wear or exhibit in public a uniform, insignia or emblem reminiscent of the uniforms, insignia or emblems worn or exhibited either by members of an organization declared criminal pursuant to the statute of the International Military Tribunal annexed to the London Accord of 8 August 1945 or by a person found guilty by a French or international court of one or more crimes against humanity.
The article does not, however, cover the sale of such items and memorabilia, including flags. This falls within the remit of consumer law (''droit de la consommation''), and is a specialist matter.
In April 2000 the International League against Racism and Anti-Semitism and Union des etudiants juifs de France (the Union of French Jewish Students) brought a case against Yahoo! which objected to the auctioning of Nazi memorabilia, in France, via Yahoo!'s website on the basis that it contravened Article R645-1. Though a French judge did initially order Yahoo! to take measures to make it impossible for users in France to reach any Nazi memorabilia through the Yahoo! site, in December 2001 the US District Court for the Northern District of California ruled that Yahoo! would be shielded from the judgement of the French court.
We wish to inform you that the laws of the Republic of Hungary forbids that the images of the German Third Reich such as Swastikas, Flags of the Nazi Party, Flags of different kinds of Military Units of the German Third Reich and also the images of Communism such as red star, hammer and sickle be sold, bought, or owned, used or put them on display in any form.
The law permits, however, that those images can be used for scientific, historical or educational purposes.}}
However, it needs to be emphasized here that recently Polish MP and Minister of Health Elzbieta Radziszewska from the Civic Platform party has proposed the amendment of the existing law. In the proposed amendment, the Minister, postulates to ban possession and promotion any materials related to both, Nazism and Communism. The project is being currently discussed in the Polish Parliament.}}
As it stands, there is no current legislation that prohibits the sale, use or possession of flags of the Third Reich and similar.
Existing legislation in Portugal prohibits only organizations, political or otherwise, that manifest a fascist ideology.
In summation, there is no governing law that opposes the sale, possession or use of these flags by an individual under the guise of his or her political freedom of expression. The sale, use and possession of such flags is only prohibited when it is undertaken by an organisation with a fascist agenda and objective.}}
The public display of Nazi flags in the U.S. is protected under the First Amendment to the United States Constitution.  The U.S. State Department acknowledges restrictions imposed under the laws of other countries, however.
Flags of Nazi inspiration are banned in the following countries;