The character was first introduced in the first of a two-part episode titled "As Long As We're Together" in the fifth season.  He was found as a street orphan when the Ingalls move to Winoka. The family, particularly Charles, grow attached to him and when they decide to go home they take Albert with them. Albert becomes one of the family and changes his name to Ingalls in the seventh episode of the fifth season, "Fagin." He is officially adopted in the third episode of season six, titled "The Family Tree."
Albert's character is first introduced in the Season 5 season premiere "As Long As We're Together." Here, he is a street urchin in Winoka, where (as part of a multi-episode story arc) the Ingalls family     along with their friends, the Garveys and Olesens     have relocated due to an economic crisis in Walnut Grove. Charles meets the orphaned Albert and realizes he is without a family. By the end of the story arc, the Ingalls, Garveys and Olesens decide to move back to Walnut Grove, and Albert is invited along.
Albert becomes a prominent member of the Ingalls family, and calls Charles and Caroline "Pa" and "Ma" for the first time in the episode "Fagin." Initially insecure about his place in the family, he runs away, but Charles quickly finds him and convinces him to stay. Albert quickly grows close to his family, particularly his new sister, Laura, and makes friends with schoolmates Andy Garvey and Willie Olesen; although Albert and Willie frequently antagonized each other, their relationship was not nearly as adverse as that of Laura and Willie's sister, Nellie Oleson.
Albert quickly proves to be resourceful (as depicted in the episode "Men Will Be Boys"), sensitive and loyal (as in "The Craftsman," where he befriends an elderly Jewish coffinmaker who is the object of racism), very clever in giving his antagonists a taste of their own medicine (as depicted in "Harriet's Happenings," where he teaches Mrs. Olesen a lesson in printing gossip as fact in the town's new newspaper) and funny (as in "The Halloween Dream," where he dreams that, while dressed as an Indian, he and Laura are taken hostage by a hostile Indian tribe).
Charles and Caroline agree to adopt Albert, and he's adopted in the Season 6 episode "The Family Tree," and successfully fight off a challenge by Albert's biological father, Jeremiah Quinn, who had abandoned him two years earlier but has decided to take him back. The Ingalls are able to expose Mr. Quinn's true motive to use Albert as a farm hand, while Albert     wishing to stay with the Ingalls     pretends he is blind when they meet.
Several of the series' most prominent two-part episodes featured Albert as a central character. Some examples include:
His last appearance is in the television movie "Little House On The Prairie; Look Back to Yesterday." Albert and Charles return to Walnut Grove after passing through the medical school which Albert may attend to fulfill his childhood dream of becoming a doctor.  It is also the seventh and last time he falls in love, when beautiful young student, Michelle, catches his eye. However, all dreams are stunted when he discovers he has a form of leukemia. The end of the story is left open.
The character of Albert appeared in a total of eighty-six episodes and two of the five television movies. 