The school was established by then-governor Lawton Chiles in 1991, although the site of the university was not chosen until 1992, and construction pushed back even further still (until 1995). The school first held classes in August 1997.  Roy McTarnaghan was named as the university's founding president.  Under McTarnaghan, the school was originally intended to be a commuter university that focused on providing classes principally through the internet.  In August 1998, the university completed its first phase of student housing, which featured traditional dorms in which two students shared a single room and cohabited together.  On May 1, 1999, McTarnaghan announced his decision to step down from his position as President of FGCU.
In July 1999, William C. Merwin was named as FGCU's President.  Merwin brought with him a different vision for FGCU.  Instead of being a commuter school, which dealt mostly with non-traditional students who took classes online,  he envisioned a traditional four-year university that leveraged modern-day technology to enhance both the learning and day to day experience of the FGCU student body.  New apartment-style dorms were constructed, which allowed for FGCU students to have a greater degree of privacy.  Every student would have his or her own room and there would be a kitchen that would be shared by the four other students in the apartment.  The internet was not seen as the exclusive means by which students took classes, but as an additional supplement to the traditional classroom environment.
Under the new university structure, students would attend small, in-person classes that used an online system to increase communication between the professor and the students.   Merwin engaged in an aggressive fund raising effort in order to make the construction of the highest quality facilities a reality for FGCU.  In an eight year period, he raised more than $250&nbsp;million for the university and engaged in a rapid expansion of the student and faculty populations.  Multiple state of the art buildings were constructed, including: Lutgert College of Business, Holmes Hall (U.A. Whitaker School of Engineering), Whitaker Hall, Academic Building 5, the student union building, Alico Arena and a massive expansion of on-campus housing.  As a result of the fund raising and aggressive construction, student enrollment at FGCU has annually increased in double digits, from approximately 2,000 students in its first year to over 12,000 today. Over the next three years, undergraduate enrollment is expected to increase to more than 15,000 students.  In 2007, Merwin was forced to step-down as the university president as a result of an inappropriate relationship that took place between a faculty member and himself.  Later in 2007, Wilson G. Bradshaw was named as the university's third president.
Under Bradshaw, the years from 2007 to 2010 also saw an aggressive expansion of the campus facilities.  Two new dorm buildings that could house over 800 additional student were built, and two more large dorm buildings are currently under construction.  There was also a 24,700 square foot expansion of the fine arts building, the construction of the 60,000 square foot academic building 7, the addition of a solar panel field, a 20,000 square foot expansion of the student union building, the purchase/donation of more than 530 acres of land and the acquisition of the college club apartments.
Bradshaw also began a serious exploration as to the possibility of football at FGCU.  He commissioned an independent consulting firm to explore what the costs of football would be at the university.  The consulting firm revealed it would cost as much as $144 million, and would not be feasible for the university in the near future.
FGCU's campus is located south of Fort Myers, Florida and  from Naples, Florida. FGCU is located on  in Southwest Florida.  The campus site was originally donated by the Alico corporation after the Board of Regents reviewed 22 prospective sites. The campus has two entrances: the main entrance which features the "Florida Gulf Coast University" sign, and the north entrance.  Both roads connect to FGCU Boulevard which is a circular road encompassing all of the academic buildings.  The center of the campus is considered the "academic core" it is located over 150 acres and contains all of the academic research and parking buildings throughout the university.  There are two separate housing villages located on periphery of the campus: North Lake and South Lake Village.  North Lake Village overlooks a massive lakes which allows for students to engage in recreational activities such as boating, and water skiing.  North Lake is unique because of its apartment style housing.  South Lake Village is located on the opposite end of the campus and currently has two five story buildings which features individual rooms for all of the students.   
The  Lutgert College of Business building and the  Holmes Hall     U.A. Whitaker School of Engineering Building have recently been built. In addition, the  Herbert J. Sugden Hall     Resort & Hospitality Management Building has been completed.  The university recently completed  Academic Building 7 for the College of Arts and Sciences and has published plans for Academic Building 8:  a $24&nbsp;million,  building for use by the College of Health Professions to be completed in July 2011.    Other current construction projects on the campus include the  expansion of the student union building, the  addition to the fine arts building (which will be a  addition at build-out)  and the construction of one of the largest solar panel fields at any university.  The university recently broke ground on the construction of new dormitories which will house an additional 400 students on campus. The university has also announced that they will build a shared-use facility at the Naples Botanical Gardens.   In 2008, FGCU became one of the first academic institutions in the country to include the metric system on its roadsigns.
There are three other satellite campus locations:  Naples, the Cape Coral Center and the Charlotte Center in Punta Gorda, which are yet to be expanded.  FGCU recently purchased 12 acres adjacent to the main campus from Miramar Development for $3.8 million.  The FGCU board of trustees voted in January 2010 to assume ownership of  in Buckingham.  Located between East Fort Myers and Lehigh Acres, the land already contains over 60 buildings and housing for 300 people. Originally, the piece of land was controlled by the Florida Environmental Protection Agency, but was abandoned and given to FGCU.
In 2007, the university purchased the former Bonita Beach Plantation Resort in Bonita Springs for use as a marine research laboratory.  The Norm and Nancy Vester Marine and Environmental Science Research Field Station site has 10 boat slips and is located on Estero Bay.  The site includes laboratories, offices, apartments for visiting researchers and a classroom.  In addition, the university has been preparing plans for a research center at the Rookery Bay National Estuarine Research Reserve which is mid-way between Naples and Marco Island.
In October 2006, a 12-person panel of leading Charlotte County citizens was tasked with selecting the future location of an FGCU-Charlotte Satellite Center.  There were five respondents to the Invitation to Negotiate (ITN).  Each respondent met the minimum criteria of the ITN (although one was later removed from the process for falling short on (2) of the requirements) of  of land, $5M in cash to the university.  In a unanimous vote by the panel (notably including Charlotte County Board of Commissioners Chairman, Tom Moore), only one was chosen, Hudson Sun-River. In their proposal to the FGCU, Hudson Sun-River offered $5M in cash, 150ac of land (located within their 2,458ac 'University Village' master-planned development), $750,000 in annual operating funds and up to $70M of built-out infrastructure.
Since its founding, 400 acres on the main campus has been set aside for environmental preservation.  FGCU also has constructed a number of lakes on the campus which are home to large numbers of wild life; the lakes also help promote the ecology of the area.  Environmental sustainability is the principal goal expressed in the university charter.  Academic Building 7, the new facility housing science laboratories and classrooms for the College of arts and sciences, achieved platinum certification, the highest level awarded by the U.S. Green Building Council   s Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design.  The University   s 15-acre solar field supplies about 85 percent of the energy needed to operate Holmes and Lutgert halls as well as Academic Building 7, reducing FGCu   s reliance on Florida power & light Co. by 18 percent. An ice thermal storage plant sends chilled water through an underground loop that cools campus buildings, saving more than $1.64 million over 
The Fall 2010 acceptance rate for FGCU is 60.4 percent, more selective than previous terms. US News ranks FGCU as first-tier among Regional Universities in the South. The Lutgert College of business is an AACSB accredited institution, offering undergraduate degrees in Accounting, Computer Information Systems, Economics, Finance, Management and Marketing.  In addition, the college offers the following graduate degrees:  Accounting and Taxation, Computer Information Systems and Business Administration (both traditional and executive). Princeton Review also cites it as one of the top 301 business schools in the country. Hospitality Management is a popular major on campus, with students getting the opportunity to gain supervised field work experience at one of many resorts in the area. Professional Golf Management is a unique program with limited access, much like the Nursing, Music and Athletic Training programs. FGCU has a unique requirement prior to graduation, University Colloquium, as it was built in an ecologically sensitive area. The aim of this Colloquium is to educate graduates on the importance of ecology and preservation.  FGCU recently announced the addition of a real estate undergraduate degree to begin in fall of 2012  As of 2011, the student body carries an average GPA of 2.97.
The academic demands and qualifications of FGCU students have continued to increase over the years.  
FGCU also offers Civil, Environmental, and Bioengineering. The first graduating classes of all three of these disciplines received their diplomas in May 2009. As of Fall 2010 FGCU's engineering program is ABET accredited. Holmes Hall was built primarily to facilitate the new Engineering program; however, Computer Science majors also use the building for their majors, and some nursing classes take place there as well.
The university is currently expanding its graduate offerings and is adding to its research capabilities, with an Environmental Forensics Facility or "body farm" in the works, under the direction of Dr. Heather Walsh-Haney. The Division of Justice Studies in the College of Professional Studies is in its 3rd year of offering a Master of Science in Criminal Forensic Studies. Students can choose to become qualified as a Forensic Behavior Analyst, under Dr. Duane Dobbert, or in Human Identity under Dr. Walsh-Haney.
The Death Investigator concentration prepares students to work in the field as medico-legal death investigators for Medical examiner's offices, as well as crime scene investigators or law enforcement detectives. Those in Death Investigations specialize in Human Identity and Trauma Analysis. The Human and Trauma ID concentration, under the direction of forensic anthropologist Dr. Walsh-Haney, trains students to identify human remains through skeletal attributes, and analyze decomposed and skeletal remains for signs of trauma. The forensic behaviorist track offers students an opportunity to learn how to analyze the psychological aspect of crime scenes, specifically pertaining to pedophilia.
Florida Gulf Coast University academics are divided into six colleges.  These colleges include:
In FGCU's inaugural year, under $3&nbsp;million of research was funded.  By 2010, $14.4&nbsp;million in funds were granted for research annually.  Research institutes include: the Biotechnology Research Group, the Lucas Center for Real Estate, Coastal Watershed Institute, Center for Environmental & Sustainability Education, FGCU Center for Leadership and Innovation, Florida Institute of Government, Center for Positive Aging, Whitaker Center for Science, Mathematics, & Technology Education, Institute for Youth and Justice Studies.  Since FGCU first opened, the total funds awarded for research has amounted to $119&nbsp;million.
As a result of the economic recession, FGCU has had double digit tuition rate increases the past several years. 
FGCU remains less expensive than almost any other public university in the state of Florida.  The chart above illustrates the current tuition per credit hour for residents and non residents of the state of Florida.
FGCU has a multitude of students from different backgrounds, ethnicities, and nationalities.
FGCU's athletics teams are known as the Eagles. FGCU is currently undergoing a transition to NCAA Division I for all athletics programs; final notification is expected in late spring of 2011. The Eagles currently compete in the Division I Atlantic Sun Conference (A-Sun), which they joined in 2007.
FGCU intercollegiate athletics offers:
FGCU is a member of the National Collegiate Athletics Association (NCAA) Division I and a member of the Atlantic Sun Conference, as well as the Coastal Collegiate Swimming Association. FGCU plays its men's and women's basketball games at Alico Arena and its baseball games at Swanson Stadium.
The average GPA of a student athlete at FGCU was 3.13 in the spring semester of 2010. 
FGCU women's basketball has experienced significant success in recent years.  On March 24, 2007, FGCU women's basketball team ended their 35   1 season with a loss in the Division II National Championship to Southern Connecticut State University.  One year later, in 2008, the Women's Basketball team qualified for the WNIT, becoming the first team to qualify for the WNIT in its first season of Division I sports. During the 2008 WNIT Tourney, the team became the first Atlantic Sun conference team to win a post-season game since 1998, when Florida International University won in the Women's NCAA tourney. The Women's team won the Atlantic Sun Conference regular season championship with a conference record of 17   3 but is ineligible to compete in the conference tourney, as the team is still in transition from Division II to Division I athletics.  In the 2010-2011 season, the FGCU woman's basketball team won the Atlantic Sun Conference again.
The FGCU baseball team has won the Atlantic Sun Conference championship three years in a row and will be allowed to compete in the NCAA post season for this first time in the 2010 season as a result of the two year NCAA reclassifying period.  FGCU currently has several former baseball players playing in the minor leagues, and currently has two pitchers (Chris Sale, Casey Coleman) pitching in the majors.
 However, an independent review cleared the school of any wrongdoing.
About 25 percent of the student population lives on campus which is consistent with most universities within the state of Florida. On-campus housing is made up of three sections: North Lake Village, South Lake Village, and West Lake Village. North Lake Village is located on an  lake and features apartment-style residence halls, with waterfront recreation. West Lake Village was previous owned by American Campus Communities and formally called College Club Apartments. The college purchased the apartment complex for $17 million and the apartments officially became part of FGCU Housing and Residence Life in October 2010.   Themed housing is available, such as Honors and Wellness communities. South Lake Village is a suite-style residence hall with two buildings: Everglades Hall and Biscayne Hall. In SoVi, there are over 800 first-year students total. In total, there are currently over 2,700 students living in both North Lake Village and SoVi. Freshmen are not required to live on campus; however, given the unique apartment nature of the dorms, on campus housing is still filled to capacity every year. Individual halls sponsor their own activities and socials, and leadership positions are available in the Hall Association. A commonly used form of transportation on campus is called the Eagle Express.  This shuttle operates daily, taking students from their dorms to classes and activities around campus.  There is also a shuttle which takes students from the dorms to Gulf Coast Town Center that runs from Thursday-Saturday.
Florida Gulf Coast University has 17 fraternity and sorority chapters currently on campus.  Greek life is governed by the Panhellenic Council, National PanHellenic Council, and the Interfraternity Council.  The Interfraternity Council comprises five fraternities, and the Panhellenic Council comprises five sororities.  As of 2011, there is no Greek Housing on campus.
The school has over 100 student clubs and organizations, representing nearly every interest. Sport Clubs and Intramural Sports are also offered along with other recreational venues. Campus Recreation is that largest student employer on campus with over 100 student-staff. Offering positions as Fitness Center Staff, Personal Trainers, Group Fitness Instructors, Lifeguards(Lake Front and Pool), Intramural Sports Referees and even Marketing/Advertising opportunities.Student Government Association (SGA) and other leadership organizations are available. Dining options on campus include a food court with several fast-food outlets, and C3, a Starbucks coffee shop located in the library, and a bagel bar in the large Student Union. A sandwich shop called The Perch is also in the Union. South Village residence complex contains Fresh Food Company cafe.
The North Village residence halls are on a large lake with a beach, providing students a beach to relax on and to engage in water sports. Eagle's Landing is a small study and game lounge in the middle of North Village, adjacent to the common area. In addition, plenty of wetlands, green space, and ponds are present on campus, and the campus is surrounded by a huge nature preserve. The school's athletic venues, including Alico Arena are right next to the complex.
Eaglepalooza is a party thrown by Student Government every fall. It is a campus-wide event that is free for the student body and features games, headlining performances and other spirit activities. The event in 2008 attracted 7,000 people, featuring big-name headliners Flo Rida (who was forced to cancel due to schedule conflict) and Busta Rhymes. Yung Joc performed for the 2007 event.  Sean Paul and Mims performed at the 2009 Eaglepalooza event. At 2010's Eaglepalooza, hip-hop group LMFAO performed.
Nearby off-campus diversions include Gulf Coast Town Center and Miromar Outlets, both located two miles (3 km) from campus, which are open-air malls featuring nightlife. Coconut Point is another open-air mall only a bit further away, on Tamiami Trail. Entertainment that is around the Southwest Florida area include Downtown Fort Myers, Naples Beach which has been called Best All-Around Beach by Travel Channel in 2005, entertainment district 5th Avenue South in Naples, downtown Cape Coral and The Everglades.
The office of Career Development Services acts as a referral services for the students seeking internships and full time employment in the area.  The department offers major selection, interview coaching, and guidance for undergraduate, graduate, doctoral students, and alumni of the university
The university has operated public broadcasting stations WGCU television and WGCU-FM since 1996, when the license was transferred from the University of South Florida in Tampa. WGCU is a PBS member while WGCU-FM is an NPR member and broadcasts news, talk and  jazz.  The  ''Eagle News'' is the school's official newspaper; it is printed weekly and also publishes news and blogs on their .  
The school has gained media attention for its involvement in activism, namely in banning fast-food chain KFC from campus for its alleged torture of chickens.  In addition, FGCU students are receiving nationwide attention for their call to prohibit Chick fil-A from being on campus because of the company's ties to anti-gay groups.  At least half a dozen universities have been emboldened by FGCU's example and have also called for Chick fil-A to be banned from their campus as well.
FGCU is home to the black box theater where multiple plays and performances are held every year.  The university just completed a 24,700 square foot expansion of the fine arts building where the Bower School of Music is to be located.
FGCU has a distinguished speaker series where one major, high-profile speaker comes and speaks to the students every year.   Former Secretary of State and retired General Colin Powell spoke to a crowd of 4,000 at FGCU's Alico Arena on March 23, 2007, as a part of the University Lecture Series.  Maya Angelou also spoke to a crowd of about 4,000 FGCU students.  Mikhail Gorbachev spoke to a sold-out crowd of FGCU students as well. Current U.S. Vice President Joe Biden has held an event here, as well as former VP Dick Cheney.  Between 2008 and 2010, the lecture series was put on hold, but returned in April 2011, with former first lady Laura Bush as the guest speaker.