This article discusses the debate that occurred over the issue of '''health care reform in the United States presidential election, 2008'''.
Both of the major party presidential candidates offered positions on health care.
John McCain's proposals focused on open-market competition rather than government funding or control. At the heart of his plan were tax credits - $2,500 for individuals and $5,000 for families who do not subscribe to or do not have access to health care through their employer.  To help people who are denied coverage by insurance companies due to pre-existing conditions, McCain proposed working with states to create what he calls a "Guaranteed Access Plan".
Barack Obama called for universal health care.  His health care plan proposed creating a National Health Insurance Exchange that would include both private insurance plans and a Medicare-like government run option.  Coverage would be guaranteed regardless of health status, and premiums would not vary based on health status either. It would have required parents to cover their children, but did not require adults to buy insurance.
  Critics of Obama's plan argued that it would increase federal regulation of private health insurance without addressing the underlying incentives behind rising health care spending.Joseph Antos, Gail Wilensky, and Hanns Kuttner,  ''Health Affairs'', September 16, 2008Robert E. Moffit and Nina Owcharenko,  The Heritage Foundation, October 15, 2008  Mark Pauly suggested that a combination of the two approaches would work better than either one alone.Mark V. Pauly,  ''Health Affairs'', September 16, 2008  
Various analyses of the two candidates' plans came to widely varying predictions of their costs and effects. A comparison by The Tax Policy Center, a project of the Brookings Institution and the Urban Institute estimated that Obama's proposals could cost $1.6 trillion over 10 years, while the tax-related provisions of McCain's proposals could cost $1.3 trillion over the same period. A comparison by The Lewin Group, a subsidiary of UnitedHealth Group, published in October 2008, found that the McCain plan would reduce the number of uninsured by 21.1 million and cost $2.05 trillion over 10 years, while the Obama plan would reduce the uninsured by 26.6 million and increase federal spending by $1.17 trillion over the same period.  Estimates prepared by HSI Networks found that the McCain plan would reduce the uninsured by 27.5 million at an annual cost of $287 billion, and the Obama plan would reduce the uninsured by 25.5 million at an annual cost of $452 billion.
A poll released in early November, 2008, found that voters supporting Obama listed health care as their second priority; voters supporting McCain listed it as fourth, tied with the war in Iraq.  Affordability was the primary health care priority among both sets of voters.  Obama voters were more likely than McCain voters to believe government can do much about health care costs.
McCain was against publicly funded health care, universal health care, or health coverage mandates. Instead, he favored tax credits of up to $5,000 for families to get health insurance. WashingtonPost.com, Oct. 10, 2007 His plan focused on enhancing competition in the health care industry as a way to lower costs. MSNBC.com, Oct. 11, 2007 To that end, McCain's plan would have allowed citizens to purchase health insurance nationwide instead of limiting them to in-state companies, and to buy insurance through any organization or association they choose as well as through their employers or buying direct from an insurance company.  In an October 2007 statement, McCain said:  "In health care, we believe in enhancing the freedom of individuals to receive necessary and desired care. We do not believe in coercion and the use of state power to mandate care, coverage or costs."
On April 29, 2008, McCain detailed his health care plan in the context of his campaign for President. His plan focused on open-market competition rather than government funding or control. At the heart of his plan are tax credits: $2,500 for individuals and $5,000 for families who do not subscribe to or do not have access to health care through their employer. He says the money could be used to purchase insurance and force insurance companies to be competitive with their costs in order to attract consumers.  McCain would pay for the tax credits by eliminating the tax break currently offered to employers for providing health insurance to employees. A critique of McCain's health care plan published in ''Health Affairs'' projected that the loss of tax benefits would cause businesses to drop 20 million people from employer-sponsored coverage, while the individual insurance market would grow to 21 million people.Colliver, Victoria , San Francisco Chronicle, 2008-10-01, accessed 2008-10-01.  To help people who are denied coverage by insurance companies due to pre-existing conditions, McCain proposed working with states to create what he called a "Guaranteed Access Plan". He did not provide details, but pointed to states such as Florida and North Carolina where such systems are in place. USA Today, April 29, 2008 His health care plan had an estimated annual cost of $7 billion, according to McCain's health-policy experts.Mike Allen and Jonathan Martin, , ''Politico'', April 29, 2008 His campaign acknowledged that the health plan he had outlined would have the effect of increasing tax payments for some workers, primarily those with high incomes and expensive health plans.Kevin Sack and Michael Cooper, , ''New York Times'', May 1, 2008
On January 24, 2007, Obama spoke about his position on health care at Families USA, a health care advocacy group.  Obama said, "The time has come for universal health care in America  I am absolutely determined that by the end of the first term of the next president, we should have universal health care in this country."  Obama went on to say that he believed that it was wrong that forty-seven million Americans are uninsured, noting that taxpayers already pay over $15 billion annually to care for the uninsured. Obama cites cost as the reason so many Americans are without health insurance.  Obama's health care plan included implementing guaranteed eligibility for affordable health care for all Americans, paid for by insurance reform, reducing costs, removing patent protection for pharmaceuticals, and requiring employers to either furnish meaningful coverage or contribute to a new public plan. He proposed providing for mandatory health care insurance for children.
Obama promised to    bring down premiums by $2,500 for the typical family.     His advisers said that the $2,500 premium reduction included, in addition to direct premium savings, the average family's share of the reduction in employer-paid health insurance premiums and the reduction in the cost of government health programs such as Medicare and Medicaid.  Ken Thorpe of Emory University issued estimates that support Senator Obama's proposal. Other health analysts, such as Joe Antos of the American Enterprise Institute, Karen Davis of the Commonwealth Fund and Jonathan B. Oberlander of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill expressed skepticism that the Obama plan would achieve the stated level of cost savings.
For those not insured through employment, Obama proposed a National Health Insurance Exchange that would include both private insurance plans and a Medicare-like, government-run option. Coverage would be guaranteed regardless of health status, and premiums would not vary based on health status either.  The Obama campaign estimated the cost of the program at $60 billion annually.Associated Press,  September 11, 2008  According to the Associated Press, the program would need to attract young, healthy people into buying coverage to work, but at the state level guaranteed issue requirements have "often had the opposite effect." The plan requires that parents cover their children, but does not require adults to buy insurance.  A critique of Obama's health care plan published in ''Health Affairs'' concluded that it does not address the core economic causes of rising health care spending, but would "greatly increase" federal regulation of health coverage.
 Rudy Giuliani, the 2008 Republican presidential front-runner, unveiled his health care plan in Rochester, New Hampshire, attacked the health care plans of Democratic presidential candidates as socialized medicine that was European and socialist, and   citing incorrect numbers   said his chances of surviving prostate cancer had been 82% in the United States, but would have only been 44% in England under socialized medicine (the actual five-year relative survival rates for localized prostate cancer were comparable in the two countries: 100% in the U.S. and 99% in England). Giuliani repeated his claims in campaign speeches for three months before making them in a radio advertisement. 
After the radio ad began running, FactCheck.org, PolitiFact.com and ''The Washington Post'' consulted leading prostate cancer experts and cancer statisticians who found Giuliani's cancer survival statistics to be false and misleading fabricated nonsense numbers obtained from an opinion article by Giuliani health care advisor David Gratzer, a Canadian psychiatrist and senior fellow at the Manhattan Institute, a conservative think tank. 
Giuliani ignored a plea by the UK Health Secretary to stop repeating false statistics smearing the NHS to attack Democratic health care plans as socialized medicine. Florida's largest circulation newspaper, the ''St. Petersburg Times'', said that Giuliani's tactic of "injecting a little fear" exploited cancer, which was "apparently not beneath a survivor with presidential aspirations." A month later, ''The New York Times'' belatedly declared Giuliani's statistics false, and Giuliani's false statistics were significant enough to make worst of 2007 lists in ''The Times'' and ''The Washington Post''.