This   cleanup subpage has been opened because concerns of multiple point infringement have been substantiated and further steps are necessary to address the serious risk of   from the listed contributor. Listings are not intended to imply a presumption of bad faith on the part of any contributor, as copyright laws vary widely around the world and many contributors who violate   do so inadvertently through not understanding it or the United States' laws that govern it.
Note for continuing work on this, per  , "the map images are (probably) OK but anything photographic should go" and the rest is an unknown quantity.   ( ) 17:45, 29 June 2010 (UTC)
All done   ( ) 20:35, 28 November 2009 (UTC)
The Arab Atlas images are already , based on prior deletion requests. Most of these Maps are based on one map and generated likely with the same software. 
Maybe some explanation from the uploader about the base maps represented in   (Noth Africa and Arab peninsula, Middle East, India, China, some variants of South America, Africa), the base maps copyright status, the software used for modification and the meaning of the Arab Atlas logo can resolve the problem already.
Although the base map might be public domain, there is of course the posibility to use PD maps from Wikimedia projects, but it is still required to attribute the base map and its author to provide evidence that the base map is in fact PD and not to declare the whole thing own work. , regretably the only response to all the copyright problems so far, the User claims the map his own creation. From    it appears that he uses the Arab Atlas tag on his own works - however the base maps lacking source information, the world map used in the latter example is obviously not own work. Besides the photographs, already nominated for deletion on  , the maps are the second large package of uploads. The photographs are almost lost, I hope we can correct the maps and keep them with the uploaders help, explanation requested above. --  ( ) 23:30, 23 November 2009 (UTC)
Anyways, the watermark can be simply removed, if it causes so much of a hastle... all i did is simply upload Maps i created for the Atlas and uploaded them on Wikipedia...
Im Glad to help, since i find this is strongly building Wikipedia, and enhancing it's Credibility... if the Investigation needs any furthur information, please inform me, and like i have previously mentioned, i would be more than happy to answer Any Questions... tho already, several of my images, and Maps HAVE been misleadingly deleted, but its alright, i can re-upload them once the issue is setteled...