LUCK3.com carry the official approval certificate of the independent testing facility  which regularly verifies that LUCK3 games are fair and have random outcome.
LUCK3.com offers different types of online gambling via its website on the Internet. The website has three main sections: Online Casino, Games and Poker Room.
LUCK3 offers to its players various casino games such as card games ''(Baccarat, Blackjack, Blackjack Surrender, Card Wars, Caribbean Poker, Casino Hold`Em, Let Them Ride, Poker Three)'', table games ''(American Roulette, Craps, European Roulette, Keno)'' and slots ''(Aztec Slots, China MegaWild Slots, Cleopatra Treasure Slots, Freaky Fruit Slots, Fruit Salad Jackpot Slots, Mexico Slots)''.
Many other games such as ''Black and White, Cards Super HiLo, Derby, Greyhounds Park, Instant Lotto, Jackpot 7, Lucky Wheel, Penalty Shootout, Pokerbet, Potshot, Rollup'' and ''Soccer Hot'' can be played on LUCK3.com. 
LUCK3 Poker Room  offers Real Money Game and Play Money Game possibilities. Playing for free at any of play money tables offers a no risk chance to learn poker. 
LUCK3 Poker offers playing poker in ''Texas Hold'em, Omaha, Seven-card stud'' and ''Omaha Hi-Lo formats''.
LUCK3 Poker offers also round the clock tournament action. 24/7 schedule offers multi table tournaments, Sit & Go's, and satellites to the poker world's most prestigious events including the World Series and World Poker Tour.
LUCK3.com regularly announces different contests and promotions for its players. For example, a monthly Gold Rush Contest grants a gold bullion to one participant each month who made a unique minimal deposit to its account. 
Despite the company is quite young, LUCK3 has already established partnership with many international companies such as ''Cake Poker Network, iTech Labs, GPWA (Gambling Portal Webmasters Association)'' and payment systems: ''PPay, VISA, MasterCard, ClickandBuy, EcoCard, Click2Pay, Neteller, Moneybookers, WebMoney''.
LUCK3 has a special program for its Affiliates . 3AFF Affiliate Program offers a very loyal Partnership model for those who want to promote LUCK3 in any possible way and to earn their commission. 3AFF also organizes competitions and special promotions for LUCK3 partners.  
LUCK3 bankrolls Live Poker tournaments in casinos in East and West Europe and other World regions.