The '''Outline of the Post-War New World Map''' was a map created and self-published by Maurice Gomberg of Philadelphia PA, on February 25, 1942 after the attack on Pearl Harbor and the entry of the US into World War II. It shows a proposed political division of the world after World War II in the event of an Allied victory in which the United States of America, the United Kingdom, and the Soviet Union would rule. The map includes a manifesto describing a "New World Moral Order", along with quotes from Roosevelt's Four Freedoms speech.
Gomberg created the map as a personal project, and little else is known of him. The map has been highlighted by New World Order conspiracy theorists who believe it represents some broader view of the US government, and has also been widely circulated online.
The map proposes a total of 14 independent sovereign states, 13 of them democracies and 10 of them demilitarized.
The United States has 80 states, not including Security Outposts in the Pacific and the Atlantic, gaining all of Canada, Mexico, and Central America, among other places:
States:
Protectorates:
Port "Peace-security bases":
Dakar and Freetown on the Atlantic coast of Africa
The British Commonwealth of Nations is headquartered in the United Kingdom, including England, Wales, and Scotland, but not Northern Ireland. The Commonwealth includes the former colonies of Madagascar (in 1942 a French colony), Celyon, the Andaman Islands, Cyprus, most of Indonesia (in 1942 a Dutch colony occupied by Japan; other parts are given to the US), as well as the then British colonies that are now the islands of Malaysia and Singapore, South Georgia, the Bismark Archipelago, the Soloman Islands, and the countries of Australia and New Zealand. A number of ports such as Aden and Zanzibar are also designated "Peace-security bases".
Later,
The Federal Republic of Greece consists of Modern day Greece plus Albania and Macedonia.
The Soviet Union would expand to be far larger than its then current size:
Soviet Socialist Republics
Later,