The group reports that they organised the world's "most widespread day of political action" on Saturday October 24, 2009, reporting 5,245 actions in 181 countries.
The organization was founded by author Bill McKibben, an American environmentalist and writer who frequently writes about global warming, alternative energy, and the need for more localised economies.  McKibben promotes the organisation, for instance by writing articles about it for many major newspapers and media, such the Los Angeles Times and The Guardian.
McKibben first started to organize against global warming with a walk across Vermont, his home state. His "Step It Up" campaign in 2007  involved 1,400 demonstrations at famous sites across the United States. McKibben credits these activities with making Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama change their energy policies during the presidential campaign. Later, the meltdown of the polar caps pushed him into starting 350.org, based on Hansen's 2007 book ''Climate Code Red''.
Rajendra Pachauri, the U.N.'s "top climate scientist" and leader of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) has come out in favor of reducing atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide to 350ppm. McKibben called news of Pachauri's embrace of the 350ppm target "amazing". Some media have indicated that Pachauri's endorsement of the 350ppm target was a victory for 350.org's activism.
The organisation had a lift in prominence after founder McKibben appeared on The Colbert Report television show on Monday August 17, 2009.
The organisation disseminates its message through social networking sites such as Facebook, Twitter, and YouTube.
The 350 movement is treating the 350ppm cap as a rallying cry for the 2009 COP15 international treaty. 350 member Alec Appelbaum stated that "We need global compacts to enforce carbon caps, because emissions change the climate whether or not they come from regulated sources. But we also need ingenious businesses to make those caps meaningful. That   s true because no matter how severely we warp the climate, we have to go on living." The overall goal is to influence governments to adopt policies that would lower carbon dioxide emissions.
As a follow-up to 2009's International Day of Climate Action, 350.org and the   campaign joined to help coordinate another global day of action which occurred on October 10th, 2010. The 2010 campaign is focused on concrete actions that can be taken locally to help combat climate change. Actions from tree-plantings to solar panel installations to huge electricity service-provider switching parties occurred in almost every country around the world. 
An "International Day of Climate Action" on October 24, 2009, was organized by 350.org to influence the delegates going to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change meeting in December, 2009 (COP15). This was the first global campaign ever organized around a scientific data point. The actions organised by 350.org included gigantic depictions of the number "350", walks, marches, rallies, teach-ins, bike rides, sing-a-thons, carbon-free dinners, retrofitting houses to save energy, tree plantings, mass dives at the Great Barrier Reef, solar-cooked bake-outs, churches bell ringings, underwater cabinet meetings (Maldives), and armband distributions to athletes. The organization reported that over 5,200 synchronized demonstrations occurred in 181 countries on the day.
Apart from special events, 350.org organises actions on an ongoing basis to promote its message. These activities include tree plantings (350 trees in each instance) for biosequestration, promoting the term "350", publishing adverts in major newspapers calling for the target level of carbon dioxide to be lowered to 350ppm,  conducting polls on the subject of climate change, educating youth leaders, lobbying governments on the issue of carbon targets, and joining a campaign to establish a .ECO top-level domain or "tld". In December 2009, the group petitioned the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency    to set national limits for greenhouse gases using the Clean Air Act,  asking the agency to cap atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide at 350 parts per million.
350.org claims alliance with 300 organisations around the world  and has enlisted "350 messengers" who have publicly allied themselves with the organisation or its goal to spread the 350 movement, including Archbishop Desmond Tutu, Bianca Jagger, David Suzuki, and Colin Beavan.