The map at issue is   -- it is a world map with different colors for homosexuality illegal / same-sex marriage / civil unions / etc. and is used on multiple Wikipedias. The map consists basically of just countries, but individual states/provinces are also added & colored when needed. The problem is that the world map uses one projection, and the various maps of the US or North America use different projections. For the past 2 or 3 additions of new US states who have legalized marriage or civil unions, I have been able to slide by just pasting in new states, copied them from   or similar files and then skewing them horizontally so the longitude lines match the projection/angle the world map uses). At the zoom levels Wikipedia readers are viewing it at, the result is passable -- you can only see the flaws at higher zoom levels (like from within Inkscape). However, this is a temporary fix that is at the least sloppy map-making, I admit -- and at the worst, may eventually result in an obviously flawed map as more US states are added.
If all 48 contiguous states could be pasted into the existing world laws map, then when new US states legalize civil unions/same-sex marriage, it could be re-colored easily, and would already be the same projection as the rest of the world laws map. The currently not-used states could either be kept gray, or stored off to the side where they could be moved into place when eventually needed. Unfortunately, this is beyond my SVG experience (which is mainly limited to recoloring maps for updates and other simple SVG copy/paste operations). A WikiProject ( ) does maintain the updates for this map, but it is still a young project, and none of the current regulars (me included) have the SVG experience to fix this issue. Any help or tips, or direction to a more appropriate blank base map to use would be appreciated, thanks :-)   ( ) 22:40, 28 June 2009 (UTC)
This was requested a couple of months ago, but got archived as "stale". I don't quite understand the logic of thinking that just because something hasn't been done immediately it shouldn't be done at all, but, anyway, I've now added coordinates to the article for all of the locations of these crosses, so it should be a doddle for any of our mapping experts to create a map. This needs a map of the south-eastern chunk of England between Lincoln and London marking the twelve locations whose coordinates are in the article.   ( ) 17:34, 14 June 2009 (UTC)
Secondly the Moroccan dirham used by Morocco and the Western Sahara is pegged to the Euro. And the Jordanian dinar used by Jordan and the West Bank is pegged to the U.S. Dollar, this is also not shown. I request that these things be fix'd.--  ( ) 18:23, 20 June 2009 (UTC)
Thanks,    16:40, 1 July 2009 (UTC)
Please let me know if you need any alterations - different colours, letters etc. --  ( ) 17:05, 19 July 2009 (UTC)
It could also be interesting to use the Metro Subway map above to do a combination map SVG of the type of the  .  Or a map that does a more realistic view of the city.  Either way, I think the article needs a map and anything you can come up with from the sources would be great.     09:35, 15 July 2009 (UTC)
How about something like  , loosely based on the London Underground's Tube map?   ( ) 18:44, 23 July 2009 (UTC)