The first issue, in early 1966, had only a small limited 200-issue run of an "ashcan" edition. With a logo by Ben Oda, it was created overnight by editor Archie Goodwin and letterer Gaspar Saladino to establish publisher Jim Warren's ownership of the title when it was discovered that a rival publisher would be using the name. Warren explained, "We launched ''Eerie'' because we thought ''Creepy'' ought to have an adversary. The Laurel and Hardy syndrome always appealed to me. ''Creepy'' and ''Eerie'' are like Boris Karloff and Peter Lorre."
Official distribution began with the second issue (March, 1966), priced at 35 cents. Behind the Frank Frazetta cover were graphic horror tales edited by Goodwin and hosted by the lumpish Cousin Eerie, a curious character created by Jack Davis. With scripts by Goodwin, E. Nelson Bridwell and Larry Ivie, the second issue featured art by Gene Colan, Johnny Craig (as Jay Taycee), Reed Crandall, Jerry Grandenetti (uncredited), Gray Morrow, Joe Orlando, John Severin, Angelo Torres and Alex Toth.  Other artists during this era included Wally Wood, Al Williamson, Neal Adams, Dan Adkins, and Steve Ditko.  Eerie was published on a bi-monthly basis.
Goodwin would eventually resign as the editor of Eerie after issue 11 in September 1967.  Due to a lack of funds, the majority of the magazine's well known artists departed, and Warren was forced to rely on reprints, which would be prevalent in the magazine until issue 26 in March 1970.  Editors during this period included Bill Parente and publisher Jim Warren himself.  Things would pick up starting in 1969 with the premiere of Vampirella magazine.  Some of ''Eerie'''s original artists including Frazetta, Crandall and Wood would return, as would Goodwin, as Associate Editor for issues 29 through 33.
A variety of editors would continue to manage ''Eerie'' after Goodwin's second departure including Billy Graham and J.R. Cochran.  William Dubay, who first joined Warren as an artist in 1970, would become editor of the magazine for issues 43 through 72.  During this period the frequency of Eerie and Warren's other magazines was upped to nine issues per year.  Color stories would begin appearing in ''Eerie'' starting with issue 54 in February 1974. Another major development occurred in late 1971 when artists from the Barcelona Studio of Spanish agency Selecciones Illustrada started appearing in ''Eerie'' and other Warren magazines, reaching a dominant presence in the 1970s.  These artists included Esteban Maroto, Jaime Brocal, Rafael Aura Leon, Martin Salvador, Luis Garcia, Jose Gonzalez, Jose Bea, Isidro Mones, Sanjulian and Enrich Torres.  Additional artists from S.I.'s Valencia Studio joined Warren in 1974 including Jose Ortiz, Luis Bermejo, and Leopold Sanchez.  Towards the end of Dubay's time as editor, artists from ''Eerie'''s first golden era including Alex Toth and John Severin returned. Notable writers during Dubay's era as editor included Gerry Boudreau, Budd Lewis, Jim Stenstrum, Steve Skeates and Doug Moench.
Dubay would resign after issue 72 and was replaced by Louise Jones, his former assistant.  Jones would edit the magazine until issue 110 in April 1980.  Former DC Comics publisher Carmine Infantino would also join Warren shortly after she became editor.  Much like the wave of Spanish artists that dominated the magazine throughout the mid-1970s, a number of artists from the Philippines would join Warren during Jones's period as editor including Alex Nino, Alfredo Alcala and Rudy Nebres and would remain at Eerie until its end in 1983.  "The Rook", a super hero who first appeared in issue 82 in March 1977, would appear in nearly every issue of the magazine over the next two years and would eventually be given his own magazine.  While he had resigned as editor, Dubay remained with Warren and became their dominant writer during this period. Other dominant writers during this period included Bruce Jones, Bob Toomey and Roger McKenzie.
After Louise Jones resigned as editor following issue 110, Dubay returned to edit the magazine using the alias "Will Richardson" until issue 120.  After Dubay's departure various editors including Chris Adames, Timothy Moriarty held the position.  Reprints would once again start predominantly appearing in the magazine, with many reprint issues being dedicated to a single artist.  ''Eerie'''s last issue published would be issue 139 in February 1983 when Warren went bankrupt.
In 2000, after a protracted legal dispute with Harris Publications, Jim Warren and Warren Publishing finally regained sole ownership of all rights to his two iconic and flagship comic book franchises Creepy and Eerie.
In February 2007, a new player appeared on the scene: New Comic Company, LLC, which after seven years of effort, completed a total rights acquisition from Warren and his entity for all rights in perpetuity to Creepy and Eerie. Terms of the deal were never disclosed although it has been rumored it was a complete buyout and all copyright renewals and trademarks have been re-established in the name of New Comic Company LLC.
Shortly after that rights acquisition deal, in June 2007, New Comic Company LLC principals Dan Braun, Craig Haffner, Josh Braun, and Rick Brookwell completed a partnership agreement with Dark Horse Comics and its CEO Mike Richardson to republish in archival hardcover form all 285 total issues of the original Creepy and Eerie. The first archival volume Creepy release date was AUG 2008, the second DEC 2008 with additional releases planned every four months. The first archival volume Eerie release date - MAR 15th -2009 with additional releases every four months.  In addition, Dark Horse Comics together with New Comic Company LLC will launch the new Creepy Comic magazine in June 2009.
Feature film, television and internet project development is underway.
Unlike its companion magazine, ''Creepy'', which relied on stand alone anthology stories, ''Eerie'' would eventually become dominated by continuing series.  This started with issue 39 in April 1972 with the series 'Dax the Warrior', which would run for 12 issues.  By issue 48 in June 1973 most if not all of each issue contained continuing series. Initially the serials in ''Eerie ''were based on famous horror characters including Dracula, the Werewolf and the Mummy.  Eventually they were replaced with original characters.  Issue 130 was devoted to a huge crossover story with most of the series characters, along with Vampirella. Some of the recurring characters and series that appeared in Eerie include the following: