CERES received the 1996 Banksia Environmental Award for Education and Training, and has also received many other awards.
CERES' purpose is to "initiate and support environmental sustainability and social equity with an emphasis on cultural richness and community participation."
The 4 hectare park, adjacent to picturesque Merri Creek, includes:
Many events are held at CERES including weekend guided tours and private functions. There are three regular festivals each year - Harvest, in March, Beautiful Darkness, at the winter solstice, and the Return of the Sacred Kingfisher festival in November. The latter celebrates the first time a Sacred Kingfisher was seen on the site after revegetation and the transformation from rubbish tip.
CERES is a popular site for school excursions and research students with around 80,000 students visiting each year.
The property is readily accessible from the Merri Creek Trail. Entry is free.
CERES also manages the Harding St Market Garden, a heritage market garden located on the Merri Creek, two kilometres north of the main site.
In 1981, a group of like-minded people dedicated to social awareness, community involvement and environmental issues secured a lease for a 4 hectare plot of neglected land in Brunswick East. Landscaping of the site began and the park was opened in 1982.
Since then it has hosted many research projects, exhibitions and events, and seen hundreds of thousands of visitors.
The first tree was officially planted on the site by Dr Barbe Baker   founder of the men of the trees   on 16 September 1981.
CERES is partially funded through its own programmes, cafe and events as well as project grants from a variety of Government and private sponsors. While the park is open to the public freely, donations and memberships are appreciated. A popular volunteer program is also available.
Image:ceres-env-pk-reedbed-and-solar-cell.jpg|Solar panel pumping reed-bed filtered waste water from the cafe into irrigation of gardens and lawn
Image:ceres-env-pk-honey-lane-storm.jpg|Honey Lane Farm, in the middle of CERES under the transmission lines, just before a storm
Image:ceres-env-pk-hdst-mkt-gdn.jpg|Harding St Market Garden, an organic market garden run by CERES, supplying vegetables to farmers markets
Image:ceres-env-pk-hdst-tank.jpg|Bobcat, during install of the 100,000 litre underground tank at the Harding St Market Garden