Emmer attended St. Thomas Academy, an all-male, Catholic, military, college-preparatory high school, located in Mendota Heights near Saint Paul. He then attended Boston College followed by the University of Alaska at Fairbanks, where he received a Bachelor of Arts in Political Science in 1984. He also played hockey for both schools. He received a Juris Doctor from William Mitchell College of Law in Saint Paul, Minnesota in 1988.
Emmer was first elected to the Minnesota House of Representatives in 2004, and was re-elected in 2006 and 2008. Because of his gubernatorial campaign, he did not seek re-election to the House in 2010. He served on the Finance Committee, the Health Care and Human Services Policy and Oversight Committee, and the State and Local Government Operations Reform, Technology and Elections Committee.  He was also a member of the Finance Subcommittee for the Health Care and Human Services Finance Division, and of the Health Care and Human Services Policy and Oversight Subcommittee for the Licensing Division. at Minnesota's legislature's website
Prior to his election to the House, Emmer served as a member of the Independence and Delano city councils.
Emmer officially announced his candidacy for governor of the State of Minnesota in July 2009.
In April 2010, Emmer announced that his running mate would be Metropolitan Council member Annette Meeks. On April 30, 2010, the Republican Party of Minnesota officially endorsed Tom Emmer as its candidate for governor at the state convention in Minneapolis.  His main opponent, Marty Seifert, withdrew from the race and endorsed Emmer, when Emmer received 56% of the delegate vote.  On August 10, Emmer easily won the Republican primary election, receiving 82 percent of the vote. 
Emmer received the endorsement of Sarah Palin in his bid for governor of Minnesota. He has also was endorsed by Minnesota Governor Tim Pawlenty and Lieutenant Governor Carol Molnau.
Emmer trailed by 9,000 votes behind his Democratic opponent Mark Dayton in the un-certified election results, though the count was close enough to trigger an automatic recount. Most analysts felt it was unlikely that the Emmer campaign could overcome such a deficit in a recount. On December 8, 2010, Emmer conceded the election.
The race has attracted national attention as the "first case in this election cycle of a company hit by national protests over a campaign donation". Minnesota-based Target Corporation donated $150,000 to Minnesota Forward, a new political action committee paying for advertising that supports Emmer's gubernatorial election.
Emmer is now a registered lobbyist in Minnesota . In early 2011, Emmer ran for an open Minnesota seat on the Republican National Committee. He lost this election to Hennepin County Commissioner Jeff Johnson .
He has supported "conscience clause" legislation that would allow pharmacists to refuse to dispense contraception on the basis of "ethical, moral or legal grounds as long as the pharmacist notifies their employer in advance and the employer can ensure a patient has timely access to the drug or device".
Emmer sponsored a constitutional amendment to allow Minnesotan voters to opt out of federal laws, such as those addressing health care, education, and transportation.
Emmer identifies as pro-life.
Emmer strongly opposes tax increases. He has also proposed gradually reducing the state corporate tax, with the eventual goal of repealing it altogether.
Emmer introduced an amendment within the Minnesota House of Representatives that would have eliminated Minnesota's minimum wage law in 2005.
On July 5, 2010, after visiting a restaurant in St. Paul Minnesota, Emmer was asked during a press conference if he supported the idea of a ''tip credit'', the financial policy of allowing businesses to subtract tips from a server's hourly wage. His response was "Yes... if you didn't have a minimum wage law..." His reasoning for implementing the tip credit is that "...somebody could be taking home well over one hundred thousand dollars as a server" while the restaurant owner could be making much less.
One week after his    tip credit    press conference, Emmer announced a proposal that would exempt the first $20,000 a server makes in tips from state taxes.
  Supporters of Emmer's bill have said "it's needed because pre-conviction revocations penalize drivers before proving they're guilty."  Mothers Against Drunk Driving and the head of the Minnesota DWI task force opposed the legislation because it would allow arrested drivers to continue to drive during the time between their arrest and hearing.
Emmer's own history of drunk driving became an issue in relation to his bill.  Emmer, at the age of 20, received a driving under the influence-related ticket in 1981.  In 1991 he pled guilty to careless driving while two charges for DWI and a license plate violation were dropped.  He denies that his own drunk driving and legal consequences played a part in the bill, stating, "We all come to the Legislature with life experiences, but it has nothing to do with this bill."  Emmer also stated that his sentence in 1981 should have been harsher.  Had it been, Emmer felt that he "...probably wouldn't have taken the second chance" that led to his subsequent arrests and guilty plea in 1991.
On May 13, 2010, Emmer was one of three legislators not to vote on a bill that would have provided such tougher penalties for drunk drivers.  Emmer said that he missed the vote when a previously scheduled lunch ran long, and that he had "no idea" how he would have voted on the bill, but that he "assume" he would have supported it.
Emmer supports a state constitutional amendment banning civil recognition of same-sex marriages or its legal equivalent, stating, "I believe marriage is the union between one man and one woman." In March 2007, Tom Emmer introduced HF 1847 which was a proposed Amendment to the Minnesota Constitution stating, "recognizing as marriage or its legal equivalent only a union between one man and one woman." 
On November 4, 2008, Emmer's campaign made a $250 cash contribution to Christian punk rock ministry You Can Run But You Cannot Hide International.  Emmer has since met with the CEO and President of the group Bradlee Dean on his radio show ''Sons of Liberty'' in early 2010.  Dean stated that    Muslims are calling for the executions of homosexuals in America... they themselves are upholding the laws that are even in the Bible of the Judeo-Christian God, but they seem to be more moral than even the American Christians do... They know homosexuality is an abomination.    Emmer's campaign stated that he "is a supporter of traditional marriage, and he strongly opposes any kind of violence or unfair discrimination against any group."
During an October 9 televised debate, Emmer said he would oppose legislation to combat school bullying against gay and lesbian young people.  Emmer, who in the past voted against anti-bullying legislation as a state lawmaker, said that teachers are most responsible for halting bullies, but suggested that the threat of lawsuits keeps them from doing so. "I don't think we need more laws; I think we need more understanding,"
In 2009, Emmer voted against S.F. 247.  This Minnesota law states that by January 1, 2010, no manufacturer, retailer, or wholesaler may sell or offer for sale in Minnesota any children's product that contains Bisphenol-A, except for used children's products which will be prohibited after January 1, 2011.  Emmer stated that he voted against the law because of fear of    increased costs.     As well-intentioned as people may be, he said, "they don't think about what this vote means five steps down the line."
The great-grandfather of Emmer, along with his two brothers, founded Emmer Brothers Lumber in 1910.  It is now called Viking Forest Products LLC, an employee-owned company. Emmer has seven children with his wife of more than 20 years, Jacqueline Emmer. He is an avid hockey player, having played in college, and continuing the sport by coaching.Helgeson, Baird. , ''Star Tribune'', 11 July 2010. During the legislative session, Emmer regularly rides the bus to the Minnesota State Capitol.