A third-generation son of a Korean family in Japan, Son was not considered a Japanese citizen until his family adopted the Japanese surname .  Son pursued his interests in business by securing a meeting with Japan McDonald's president Den Fujita.  Taking his advice, Son began studying English and computer science.  
At age 16, Son moved to California and finished high school while staying with friends and family in South San Francisco.  He attended the University of California, Berkeley in which he majored in economics and studied computer science.  Enamored by a microchip featured in a magazine, Son at age 19 became confident that computer technology would ignite the next commercial revolution.
Convinced that anything related to microchips could yield a fortune, Son decided to produce at least one entrepreneurial idea a day.  He patented a translating device that he eventually sold to Sharp Electronics for $1 million.  Applications of the patent include the Wizard series of Sharp PDAs.
Flush with cash, Son imported Space Invaders video arcade systems and dispersed them about the UC Berkeley campus.  Soon after graduating from Berkeley with a BA in economics in 1980, Son started Unison in Oakland, California, which has since been bought by Kyocera. In 1990, Son Masayoshi had adopted Japanese citizenship.
Although SoftBank's stake in Yahoo! had dwindled to 7%, Son established Yahoo! BroadBand in September 2001 with Yahoo! Japan in which he still owned a controlling interest.  After a severe devaluation of SoftBank's equity, Son was forced to focus his attention on Yahoo! BB and .  Using ADSL technology that could reach speeds upwards of 10 Mbit/s (new service can reach about 100 Mbit/s), Yahoo! BB currently reaches 4.3 million subscribers each paying about $20   $30 a month, but continues to lose about $100 million a month.  So far, SoftBank has accumulated about $1.3 billion in debt.  Yet, Yahoo! BB acquired Japan Telecom, the then third largest broadband and landline provider with 600,000 residential and 170,000 commercial subscribers.  Yahoo! BB is now Japan's leading broadband provider.
On March 17, 2006 Vodafone Group announced it had agreed to sell Vodafone K.K. to SoftBank for approximately 1.75 trillion Japanese yen (approximately US$ 15.1 Billion). On April 14, 2006 SoftBank and Vodafone K. K. jointly announced, that the brand and company name Vodafone will be changed to a "new, easy-to-understand and familiar company name and brand". Masayoshi Son is the CEO (Representative Director) of Vodafone K. K.
Jonggyeong
Samheon  man   man  man  woman  woman  woman
Masaaki  Masayoshi  Masanori  Taizo