Safe mode is entered automatically upon the detection of a predefined operating condition or event that may indicate loss of control or damage to the spacecraft. Usually the trigger event is a system failure or detection of operating conditions considered dangerously out of the normal range. Cosmic rays penetrating spacecraft electrical systems can create false signals or commands and thus cause a trigger event. The central processor electronics are especially prone to such events.
The process of entering safe mode, sometimes referred to as ''safing'', involves a number of immediate physical actions taken to prevent damage or complete loss. Power is removed from non-essential subsystems. Regaining attitude control, if lost, is the highest priority because it is necessary to maintain thermal balance and proper illumination of the solar panels. A tumbling or cartwheeling spacecraft can quickly roast, freeze or exhaust its battery power and be lost forever.
While in this mode the preservation of the spacecraft is the highest priority. Typically all non-essential systems, such as science instruments, are shut down. The spacecraft attempts to maintain orientation with respect to the Sun for illumination of solar panels and for thermal management. The spacecraft then awaits for radio commands from its mission control center monitoring for signals on its low-gain omnidirectional antenna. Exactly what happens while in safe mode is dependent on the spacecraft design and its mission.
Recovery from safe mode involves reestablishing communication between the spacecraft and mission control, downloading any diagnostic data and sequencing power back on to the various subsystems to resume the mission. The recovery time can be anywhere from a few hours to days or weeks depending on the difficulty in reestablishing communications, conditions found on the spacecraft, distance to the spacecraft and the nature of the mission.
The spacecraft's ability to enter safe mode may be suppressed during periods of crucial spacecraft operations, such as during the orbit insertion rocket firing at Saturn of the Cassini spacecraft, where if a critical failure were to occur during this operation most if not all of the mission objectives would be lost anyway.
On occasion a spacecraft is placed in safe mode deliberately by mission control as the Spirit rover was on sol 451.
The term ''safing'' is also used to describe the process of rendering a weapon inactive (safe).