Rin Kagura, Shin Suzutani, Chiyo Kishibe and Makoto Shirae visit "The Black Page", a mysterious website with only a counter that is said to show the number of people who have died after visiting the site. Rin is drawn there because six years ago, she made a promise to a little girl in the hospital. Over an online chatroom, she promised the girl she would come visit her. When she got there, the girl wasn't anywhere to be found. Rin thought "The Black Page" might hold some answers. Shin loves anime and the supernatural and was drawn to "The Black Page". After Chiyo Kishibe's grandson bought her a laptop, she heard rumors of "The Black Page". She thought she might be able to meet her late husband. As for Makoto Shirae, an editor for a newspaper, his friend died under mysterious circumstances. When he took over the investigation, it led him to "The Black Page". After entering a chatroom on the site, Rin, Shin, Chiyo and Makoto are soon drawn into a strange void that lies between life and death which manifests the memories of the dead known as the Mnemonic Abyss. Using their cell phones, these people must try and escape from it.
Shin is the first to end up in the Abyss. He wakes up in the home of a man who became obsessed with making dolls. After finding the dead body of the man who made the dolls and several of his creations (which are alive), he flees back to the point where he began. He gets a call from from a little girl who tells him "Gotcha". Freaked out, a ghost of a little girl holding a black cat doll soon appears (along with several disembodied hands) and attacks him.
Rin is next to enter the Abyss. She finds herself in a school after having a dream that she hasn't had for a long time. Wandering through the school, she hears something in the janitor's office, but lacks a key to gain entry. While searching for a key, she sees a scared, ''living'' person run into the boy's bathroom; attempts to get him out of the stall he's in are unsuccessful. After finding the key, Rin encounters a live black cat that runs away. Following it, she finds she is no longer in the realm of the living. On a computer, she finds the Black Page website. Shin soons runs in, hiding from a ghost. Exchanging plesantries, both of them observe the website until a ghost that is different from the other ghosts scares Shin away. Following the ghost, she meets Makoto. He shares all he knows of where they are, the connection between the Abyss and the Black Page and the fact that people who lose hope become spirits. He tells Rin of his worry for Shin, for his worried condition may cause him to become a spirit. Oddly, the phones they possess can be used as teleporters. The ghost that led Rin to Makoto is really Makoto's dead partner, Sadao. As Rin tries to leave, the door closes and a voice says "Just you stay here forever...with me...". The voice belongs to the ghost of the little girl who attacked Shin. She grabs Rin, but lets go, saying "You're a liar..." before disappearing. Rin meets the black cat again and follows it through the school.
From a first-person perspective, players explore the Mnemonic Abyss' haunted locations such strange doll-filled houses, Shosei school, a creepy internet cafe, Kuromiya hospital, some geeks bedroom and a hair salon. Players use the Wii Remote's pointer function to interact with objects and move around. The controller also acts as a cell phone in which ghosts speak to the player via the speaker. In addition, the player can also use the phone to warp around to different locations, as well as take pictures and record ghostly voices which appear as strange sounds.
The ghosts also confront the player in featured "fright events". Players have to fight the ghosts off by swinging the Wii Remote and following button commands.
The game was originally unofficially unveiled when gameplay footage was leaked on to the internet in October 2008. Hudson reported that the footage was stolen from a PR company's servers. The game was officially revealed in Famitsu in July 2009.
The game has received generally unfavorable reviews with a Metacritic score of 49 based on 23 reviews.http://www.metacritic.com/games/platforms/wii/calling IGN called it absolutely worthless, rating it 3.5/10.http://wii.ign.com/articles/108/1082344p1.html