Mitchell received a Bachelor of Human Biology (BHB) in 1988 and later a Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery (MB ChB) in 1990 from the University of Auckland. In 2001, Diploma in Occupational Medicine (DipOccMed) from the South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society. Mitchell then went on to complete a Doctor of Philosophy in Medicine (PhD) in 2001 and Diploma in Diving and Hyperbaric Medicine (DipDHM) in 1995 from the University of Auckland. Mitchell received his Australian and New Zealand College of Anaesthetists (ANZCA) Certificate in Diving and Hyperbaric Medicine in 2003, and became a Fellow of the Australian and New Zealand College of Anaesthetists (FANZCA) in 2008.
Dr Mitchell is a former vice president of the Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS) and currently serves as the chairman of the organization's diving committee. He became a Fellow of the The Explorers Club of New York in 2006.
Mitchell has dual Australian and New Zealand citizenship. He lives in Auckland, New Zealand, with his wife Sian.
In 2010, Mitchell was awarded the Albert R. Behnke Award by the UHMS for his outstanding scientific contributions to advances in undersea biomedical activity.
Dr Mitchell began diving in 1972. His diving primarily involves the use of rebreather technology to explore shipwrecks at extreme depths.
Mitchell was a member of "The Sydney Project    in 2004 and located the letters U, M, and E that helped with the positive identification of the SS ''Cumberland''. In 2007, Mitchell and Pete Mesley were responsible for identification of the ''Port Kembla'' including recovery of the ship's bell. Mitchell attempted to recover a Robinson 22 helicopter engine from the poor underwater visibility of Lake Wanaka for use in the Transport Accident Investigation Commission investigation of the death of Morgan Saxton.
In 1995, it was announced that the shipwreck of ''Centaur'' had been located in waters  from the lighthouse on Moreton Island, a significant distance from her believed last position. The finding was reported on ''A Current Affair'', during which footage of the shipwreck,  underwater, was shown. Discoverer Donald Dennis claimed the identity of the shipwreck had been confirmed by the Navy, the Queensland Maritime Museum, and the Australian War Memorial. A cursory search by the Navy confirmed that there was a shipwreck at the given location, which was gazetted as a war grave and added to navigation charts by the Australian Hydrographic Office.
Over the next eight years, there was growing doubt about the position of Dennis' wreck, due to the distance from both Second Officer Rippon's calculation of the point of sinking and where USS ''Mugford'' found the survivors. p. 24 During this time, Dennis had been convicted on two counts of deception and one of theft through scams. Two wreck divers, Trevor Jackson and Simon Mitchell, used the location for a four hour world record dive on 14 May 2002, during which they examined the wreck and took measurements, claiming that the ship was too small to be ''Centaur''. pp. 157   81 Jackson had been studying ''Centaur'' for some time, and believed that the wreck was actually another, much smaller ship, the  long MV ''Kyogle'', a lime freighter purchased by the Royal Australian Air Force and sunk during bombing practice on 12 May 1951. The facts gathered on the dive were inconclusive, but the divers remained adamant it was not ''Centaur'', and passed this information onto Nick Greenaway, producer of the newsmagazine show ''60 Minutes''.
On the 60th anniversary of the sinking, ''60 Minutes'' ran a story demonstrating that the wreck was not ''Centaur''. It was revealed that nobody at the Queensland Maritime Museum had yet seen Dennis' footage, and when it was shown to Museum president Rod McLeod and maritime historian John Foley, they stated that the shipwreck could not be ''Centaur'', as the rudder was incorrectly shaped. Following this story, and others published around the same time in newspapers, the Navy sent three ships to inspect the site over a two month period; HMA Ships , , and , before concluding that the shipwreck was incorrectly identified as ''Centaur''. An amendment was made to the gazettal, and the Hydrographic Office began to remove the mark from charts.
In April 2008, following the successful discovery of HMAS ''Sydney'', several parties began calling for a dedicated search for ''Centaur''.Dart, ''Shipwreck hunter offers to find Centaur remains'' By the end of 2008, the Australian Federal and Queensland State governments had formed a joint committee and contributed $2 million each towards a search, and by February 2009, the tender for the project had received eleven expressions of interest. 