By winning the Main Event at the age of 21, Cada surpassed Peter Eastgate as the youngest champion ever. Cada had two previous WSOP cash wins, both in 2009. Cada had been a regular online poker player for several years prior to winning the live WSOP event. He is primarily an online poker player, with more than $500,000 in online tournament winnings at present. As of 2010, his total live tournament winnings exceed $8,550,000.  
He is from a family of card enthusiasts although his parents disapproved of his chosen profession.  His agent dubbed him "The Kid" and he has also taken on the role as a statesman of the profession in the media and political circles, where he is a proponent of legalization of gambling.
Cada started playing online poker at about the age of 16. He twice staked accounts, but lost all the money in the accounts that he shared with his brother Jerome.  His first online account was with PartyPoker. Although he was not legally able to play in casinos prior to age 21 in the United States, he could in Canada at age 19 and play online.  After a brief sabbatical from the game subsequent to losing his money, he began to play at a casino in Windsor, Ontario across the Canadian border from his Detroit-area home. He earned enough to enter contests in the Bahamas and Costa Rica.  
At the time of his WSOP success, he was playing approximately 2,000 hands per day online at PokerStars under the User ID jcada99. Cada had been a professional poker player for six years at the time of his world championship. Between the end of 2008 and the 2009 November Nine, Cada had earned $551,788 online. Prior to the tournament, he had a $150,000 downswing that necessitated him finding a financial backer for the WSOP. Professional poker financiers Eric Haber and Cliff Josephy paid his online fee in exchange for half of his winnings.
 Usually, on Sundays, Cada hosts about fifteen friends to play online at his house.  According to his ''CardPlayer'' magazine profile, Cada used several similar aliases to play with various online poker hosts: jcada99 and Joe Cada on the Full Tilt Poker website, jcada99 on PokerStars and JCADA99 on Absolute Poker.
At the 2009 World Series of Poker he had three in the money finishes (all in No limit Texas hold 'em): 64th in the 1,088-entrant June 5   7 Event 13, $2,500 No Limit Hold'em, which earned him $6,681;  17th in the 2,095-entrant June 16   18 Event 35, $1,500 No Limit Hold'em, which earned him $21,533; and 1st in the 6,494-entrant July 3   15, November 7 and November 9 Event 57 $10,000 World Championship No Limit Hold'em, which earned him $8,546,435.
Prior to his final table victory, Cada earned a $1 million contract with PokerStars that pays for all his hotels, travels, and some of his buy-ins. His signing with Pokerstars resulted from an interview on ESPN with Phil Gordon where he expressed an interest in signing with that specific company.  His agent had already procured him offers from UltimateBet and PokerHost as a result of his November Nine qualification.  Cada was represented by agent Dan Frank.
 With the November 2009 victory, which occurred just over a week before his 22nd birthday, Cada supplanted Peter Eastgate, who won at age 22, as the youngest World Series of Poker Main Event champion.  He was 340 days younger than Eastgate had been at the time of becoming world champion.  In the week following the WSOP win, Cada made numerous publicity appearances as a poker ambassador.  His media events included appearances on CNN, CBS News, CNBC, ''Late Show With David Letterman'', numerous ESPN outlets including ''First Take'', ''The Scott Van Pelt Show'', ESPNU, ESPNews, ESPN Inside Deal and ESPN.com as well as a taping for ''SportsCenter'' that was never aired plus a visit to ''WWE Raw''.  During the publicity run, Dennis Phillips served as Cada's advisor.
 Cada has an older brother, Jerome. Cada's father, Jerry, was affected by the late-2000s recession when his automobile industry job was eliminated in a layoff. During the 2009 World Series of Poker's November Nine, dozens of Cada's fans wore t-shirts with Michigan Wolverines team colors (maize and blue) with the words, "PokerStars Michigan Joe Cada 'The Kid'" emblazoned across the front and Michigan baseball caps with "The Kid" on the back.  His agent came up with the nickname "The Kid". In an interview in ''Time'', Cada estimates he had about 100 friends in his cheering section.
In the ''Time'' interview, Cada expressed his thoughts on legislation related to the legality of gambling: "I support the right to play poker online. Poker isn't gambling. It's a hobby, an activity, a game. It's not about luck   it's about logic, decision-making, math. We all should be able to play poker on the Web if we want to, and I believe that making it illegal strips us of our rights. This is an important issue, and hopefully we'll see it resolved soon." Outside of poker, Cada also plays indoor soccer. He is considering purchasing a second home in  and possibly opening a bar.