A '''T and O map''' or '''O-T''' or '''T-O''' map (''orbis terrarum'', orb or circle of the lands; with the letter T inside an O), is a type of medieval world map, sometimes also called a '''Beatine map''' or a '''Beatus map''' because one of the earliest known representations of this sort is attributed to Beatus of Liebana, an 8th-century Spanish monk.  The map appeared in the prologue to his twelve books of commentaries on the ''Apocalypse''.
The T-O map represents the physical world as first described by the 7th-century scholar Isidore of Seville in his ''Etymologiae'' (chapter 14, ''de terra et partibus''):
Although Isidore taught in the ''Etymologiae'' that the Earth was , his meaning was ambiguous and some writers think he referred to a disc-shaped Earth. However, other writings by Isidore make it clear that he considered the Earth to be globular. Indeed, the theory of a spherical earth had always been the prevailing assumption among the learned since at least Aristotle, who had divided the spherical earth into  zones of climate, with a ''frigid clime'' at the  poles, a deadly ''torrid clime'' near the equator, and a mild and habitable ''temperate clime'' between the two.
 It was presumably tacitly considered a convenient projection of the inhabited parts, the northern temperate half of the globe. Since the southern temperate clime was considered uninhabited, or unattainable, there was no need to depict them on a world map. It was then believed that no one could cross the torrid equatorial clime and reach the unknown lands on the other half of the globe. These imagined lands were called antipodes.
The ''T'' is the Mediterranean, the Nile, and the Don (formerly called the Tanais) dividing the three continents, Asia, Europe and Africa, and the ''O'' is the encircling ocean. Jerusalem was generally represented in the center of the map. Asia was typically the size of the other two continents combined. Because the sun rose in the east, Paradise (the Garden of Eden) was generally depicted as being in Asia, and Asia was situated at the top portion of the map.
This qualitative and conceptual type of medieval cartography could yield extremely detailed maps in addition to simple representations. The earliest maps had only a few cities and the most important bodies of water noted.  The four sacred rivers of the Holy Land were always present.  More useful tools for the traveler were the itinerary, which listed in order the names of towns between two points, and the periplus that did the same for harbors and landmarks along a seacoast. Later maps of this same conceptual format featured many rivers and cities of Eastern as well as Western Europe, and other features encountered during the Crusades.  Decorative illustrations were also added in addition to the new geographic features.  The most important cities would be represented by distinct fortifications and towers in addition to their names, and the empty spaces would be filled with mythical creatures.
Image:Beatus map.jpg|The world map from the Saint-Sever Beatus, dating to ca. AD 1050.
Image:Diagrammatic T-O world map - 12th c.jpg|From a 12th c. copy of ''Etymologiae''.
Image:T-O Mappa mundi.jpg|Mappa Mundi in ''La Fleur des Histoires''. 1459-1463.
Image:1581 Bunting clover leaf map.jpg|Bunting clover leaf map. A 1581 woodcut, Magdeburg. Jerusalem is in the center, surrounded by Europe, Asia and Africa.