His stage name originated from the TEC-9 semi-automatic handgun, given to him by rapper Black Walt due to his fast rhyming style. Yates later applied a deeper meaning to the name, claiming that it stands for the complete technique of rhyme, with 'tech' meaning technique and 'nine' representing the number of completion.
Tech N9ne was born Aaron Dontez Yates on November 8, 1971 in Independence, Missouri.  He began rapping at a very early age, and would rap the letters of his name in order to remember how to spell it.  He never met his father, and his mother suffered from epilepsy and lupus when he was a child, which deeply affected him and inspired him to "search for God". He would wander around abandoned buildings with his best friend, Brian Dennis, hoping to catch a ghost on film.  In 2003, Dennis was shot and killed by his girlfriend's ex-boyfriend, which further inspired Yate's search for a higher power, as well as giving him the drive to vent his frustrations in his music.
Early in his life, Yates was a member of a group formed in 1991 called Black Mafia. He saw glimpses of success in the group 57th Street Rogue Dog  with their single "Let's Get Fucked Up." As a member of the group Nnutthowze, Aaron Yates signed with Perspective Records in 1993. However, the group disbanded soon after being released from the label. Yates signed with Qwest Records briefly before moving to JCOR Records.
In 1997, Yates joined the group The Regime formed by rapper Yukmouth. The following year, he was featured on the soundtrack for the film Gang Related. Yates appeared on the song "The Anthem" by Sway & King Tech in 1999, which also featured artists RZA, Eminem, Xzibit, Pharoahe Monch, Jayo Felony, Chino XL, KRS-One, and Kool G. Rap. Later that year, he and Travis O'Guin founded the record label Strange Music.
In 2001, Yates released the studio album ''Anghellic'' on JCOR Records. After the label closed, Yates decided to stay on his own Strange Music label. The next year, he released ''Absolute Power'' which debuted number 79 on the Billboard 200. In 2006, Yates released the album ''Everready (The Religion)''. The following year, he released ''Misery Loves Kompany''. Yates announced that the album was the first in a series of "Tech N9ne Collabos" albums that feature a wide range of guest appearances.
The following year, Yates released the album ''Killer''. That September, he exceeded one million album sales. Yates remarked of the accomplishment that, "It just reminded me of all the work we done in the past, up until now  I don't think it's sunken in yet. I've been celebrating for the last two days because that's a hell of an accomplishment. I've been planning success all my life. I'm not even a bit surprised, I'm happy about it. That just means I was right." Yates released his second Collabos album, ''Sickology 101'', in April 2009. |title=Allmusic Review of ''Sickology 101'' |first=David |last=Jeffries |year=2009 |work=Allmusic |publisher=Rovi Corporation |accessdate=2010-03-13 }}
Yates later performed at the Rock The Bells 2009 Festival and the tenth annual Gathering of the Juggalos. That October, he released ''K.O.D.'', short for King of Darkness. The album featured a dark overtone, as Yates was dealing with the illness of his mother. An EP of cut songs from the album was released in 2010 as ''The Lost Scripts of K.O.D.'' Later that year, Yates released his third Collabos album, ''The Gates Mixed Plate''. In October, he released his second EP ''Seepage''. On December 23, he released his first mixtape ''Bad Season''.
On June 7, 2011 Yates released his most recent album ''All 6's And 7's''. The album features a myriad of prominent hip-hop artist including B.o.B, E-40, Snoop Dogg,T-Pain, Mint Condition, Hopsin, Busta Rhymes, Twista,Lil Wayne, Yelawolf, and Deftones.
Yates is known for his dynamic rhyme schemes and speed rap abilities. Soren Baker of VH1 states that Yates' techniques "showcase his wide-ranging, mind-blowing flows." Baker characterizes Yates' earlier work as "apocalyptic music, which discussed abortion and infidelity as much as his rapping prowess." Allmusic reviewer Jason Birchmeier calls his style "bizarre hardcore rap."
Yates says that he is influenced by Old school hip hop, and specifically cites Slick Rick, N.W.A, Public Enemy, Boogie Down Productions, Eric B. & Rakim, Schoolly D, and Just-Ice. He is also interested in other genres of music, and lists The Doors, Jim Morrison, Led Zeppelin, Elton John, AC/DC, Metallica, Floetry, Outkast, Cee Lo Green, and Gnarls Barkley as influences.
Yates' songs have appeared in the films ''Gang Related'', ''Alpha Dog'', ''Our Heroes: The 25 Best Black Sports Movies (Ever)'', and ''The Life of Lucky Cucumber''. Yates was originally set to score the entire film ''Alpha Dog'', but the studio decided to replace some of his music with more commercially known songs. In 2009, his song "Let's Go" was used in an online promotional short film for AXE body spray. Yates also appears as an actor in the films ''Vengeance'' and '' ''.
Several of Yates' songs are featured in the video games ''Madden NFL 2006'', '' '',''EA Sports MMA'', and ''25 To Life'', the latter of which Yates is also an unlockable character. In 2009, Yates and label mate Krizz Kaliko appeared in a promotional video for the ''Fight Night Round 4'' video game.
Yates' music has appeared on the television shows ''Dark Angel'', ''I'm From Rolling Stone'', ''My Super Sweet 16'', ''The Hills'', ''Spike Guys' Choice Awards'', and ''Warren The Ape''.