The show debuted at #100 in the 2008 edition of Talkers Magazine Heavy 100, moved up to #84 in the 2009 edition and most recently #75 in the 2010 edition.
Known as    Cakes,    Auville was born in 1970 and adopted by his parents at five weeks old . He was raised in  Bowie, Maryland alongside fellow Junkies Eric Bickel and John-Paul Flaim, and attended Eleanor Roosevelt High School in Greenbelt, Maryland.  After high school, Auville studied communications at Towson University in Baltimore, Maryland, about which he is occasionally ridiculed for achieving a 1.5 GPA one semester; he then managed a local Toys    Us store until making radio his full-time occupation in 1996.  Auville's family currently lives in Olney, Maryland. He married his wife, Amy, in 1995.  They have three children, Kurt Joseph (1997), Juliet (2002), and Brendan Craig (2004). After the birth of their third child, Auville had a vasectomy and has since been mocked with the name    Johnny Blanks.   
Bickel was born in 1970 and grew up in Bowie, Maryland where he grew up across the street from fellow Junkie John-Paul Flaim and in the same neighborhood as John Auville.  Bickel attended DeMatha Catholic High School in Hyattsville, Maryland, where he befriended soon-to-be-Junkie Jason Bishop.  He  lettered in tennis. After high school, Bickel attended the University of Maryland, where he majored in psychology and received his master   s degree in school counseling before becoming a "Junkie" in 1997. Bickel married his wife, Dina, in 1996.  They have three children, Stephen (2000), Megan (2002) and Katherine (2009).
Nicknamed "Lurch" because of his height 6'6" (an allusion to the Frankenstein-like butler on the television show    The Addams Family   ), Bishop grew up in Lanham, Maryland and befriended fellow Junkie Eric Bickel while attending DeMatha Catholic High School in Hyattsville, Maryland, where he played basketball. Six-foot-six in height, Bishop went on to play basketball at the University of Richmond, where he received a scholarship, but transferred to Salisbury State University the following year to pursue a degree in communications.  Bishop currently lives in Ashburn, Virginia with his wife Teresa and their two daughters.
Simply known as    J.P.,    Flaim was born in 1970 and grew up across the street from fellow Junkie Eric Bickel in Bowie, Maryland.  Flaim attended Eleanor Roosevelt High School in Greenbelt, Maryland, and then went on to major in international business at the University of Maryland, College Park before studying law at the Temple University Beasley School of Law in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.   In 1997, Flaim failed the Maryland bar exam, reading his results publicly while on the air; however, he passed the exam the following year and can now legally practice law in Maryland.
Flaim and his ex-wife (Carol) have two children together, a daughter Kelsie (2000), and a son, Dylan Carlos (2007)..
Auville, Bickel, and Flaim grew up as friends in Bowie, Maryland. Auville and Flaim attended Eleanor Roosevelt High School; at the same time, Bickel met Bishop at DeMatha Catholic High School. Bickel and Flaim also attended the University of Maryland together.  After graduating from college, the foursome and other friends hung out and often shared living quarters. In 1995, the four began their broadcasting career as a hobby with a 30-minute Public-access television cable TV show in Bowie featuring sports chat and irreverent humor.
Through the show's history it occupied a night slot from 7-11 p.m. and 8-midnight from mid-2001 until early 2002.  In October 2002, the show moved from WJFK to WHFS during the morning drive time slot. When WHFS changed formats from alternative rock to Spanish-language, the show returned to WJFK-FM in a lunchtime spot.  In 2006, the Junkies' show returned to the morning drive, replacing the Howard Stern show when it ended its run on terrestrial radio.
The Junkies have sponsored a semi-annual "Junkie Poker Open" event at the Borgata casino in Atlantic City, New Jersey.  The Texas hold'em poker tournament has gained some notoriety as former World Series of Poker contestants (Lee Childs, among others) have participated in the events.
Since the 2004 season, the Junkies have hosted a two-hour pregame show prior to the kick-off of each Washington Redskins game. The show is broadcast live from a Washington area restaurant or bar and airs on WJFK-FM.  The show is considered "unauthorized" because they have continued doing the program even though WJFK no longer holds the rights to broadcast the team's games.
The Junkies host a party for the NFL championship game at a Washington area restaurant or bar.  The name is based on a Pig Latin version of the phrase "super bowl" due to the NFL's active pursuit of trademark issues with the Super Bowl name.
An annual spring break themed party held at the State Theater in Falls Church, Virginia.
First held in 2008, the Junkies host an annual end-of-summer party at the Backyard Bar & Grille in Chantilly, Virginia. Women are encouraged to attend wearing sundresses.
An interview with tennis player Justin Gimelstob made international headlines because of comments Gimelstob made about Anna Kournikova and other female tennis players. Gimelstob was reprimanded by his employer, Tennis Channel, and made a donation to the Women's Sports Foundation as a result of the incident.