He began his lettering career designing illuminated signs for Ad/Art, Inc.  in his hometown of Stockton, California, followed by study at Art Center College of Design in Los Angeles where lettering artist Mortimer Leach was among his teachers.  Since 1971 he has worked in lettering and typographic design and as a book designer for Hallmark Cards, in Kansas City, Missouri. He has designed books, journals, posters, brochures, packaging, logos, cards, giftwrap and fonts. As a lettering studio manager, his duties include overseeing font development. He has designed several proprietary typefaces for Hallmark that are used on a range of products such as greeting cards, books, films and packaging. 
Cusick also freelances calligraphy, lettering and design projects and has done a wide variety of work: from Las Vegas signage to a 17 ' long biblical quotation for the Community of Christ's headquarters, Independence Temple, designed by the renowned architect, Gyo Obata.
Nyx is an Adobe Original stencil font created by Cusick and released by Adobe Systems  in 1997. It is named after Cusick's muse, Nyx, the Greek goddess of night.
From 1984 to 1990 he taught typography and publication design at the University of Kansas.  He has taught numerous workshops worldwide, including a five-day workshop for the Schreibwerkstatt  in Offenbach, Germany. He has lectured at Kansas City Art Institute, Indiana Central University, Art Directors Club of El Paso, New York Society of Scribes, Los Angeles Society for Calligraphy, TypeCon 2003 and more.
Cusick has judged numerous lettering and type contests, including TDC2, 2005 type design contest.
Cusick has  compiled, edited and designed numerous books including two books about prominent twentieth century American calligraphers: ''With Respect...To RFD'', an appreciation of Raymond F. DaBoll; and ''Straight Impressions'', essays and calligraphy by Lloyd Reynolds. ''The Proverbial Bestiary'', features proverbs hand-lettered by Cusick and paired with drawings by the late Warren Chappell, which was a Book of the Month Club bonus selection.  Cusick was art director of ''Letter Arts Review'' from 1992 -2003. He has designed numerous books for various publishers including Andrews & McMeel, American Century, Harrow Books and City of Fountain Foundation.
His work has appeared in numerous books and periodicals including: Communication Arts, Typography 6, Calligraphy Today, Typography 18, Visible Language, Signs of the Times, Alphabet, International Calligraphy Today, Fine Print, and Letter Arts Review. He has written articles for Fine Print, Calligraphy Review, Alphabet, ABC-XYZapf, and ''Calligraphic Type Design in the Digital Age.''
Cusick is proprietor of Nyx Editions which has created a range of books and pamphlets regarding the lettering arts including ''OK, It's All Yours: Recollections of Arnold Bank'', and ''Type Fa*ce*tious: Earth-shattering quotations featuring the font designs of Jill Bell''.
Cusick's work has appeared in numerous group shows in museums and gallerys world wide including New York, San Francisco, Los Angeles, Dallas, London, New Delhi, Offenbach, Tallinn and Moscow.