Although talking on a mobile phone while operating a vehicle is considered dangerous, the threat really became an issue when Short Message Service, or texting, was introduced . Texting has become a social norm fairly quickly since the year 2000, as most cell phone plans include a text messaging package. There has been a significant rise in smart phone sales with the popularity of the BlackBerry and iPhone, which allows people to communicate while they are doing practically anything. It cannot be contested that text messaging and other forms of text communication on mobile phones offer a level of convenience that cannot be matched. The dilemma is at what point do we chose safety over convenience. Many studies have linked texting while driving to the cause of life-threatening accidents due to driver distraction. The International Telecommunication Union states that    texting, making calls, and other interaction with in-vehicle information and communication systems while driving is a serious source of driver distraction and increases the risk of traffic accidents   .
A 2009 experiment with ''Car and Driver'' magazine editor Eddie Alterman that took place at a deserted air strip showed that texting while driving had a greater impact on safety than driving drunk. While legally drunk, Alterman's stopping distance from 70&nbsp;mph increased by 4 feet; by contrast, reading an e-mail added 36 feet, and sending a text added 70 feet. While celebrities such as Oprah Winfrey have campaigned against texting while driving, there are reports that the message has not been getting through to teenagers.
In the UK in 2009 Gwent Police worked with film maker Peter Watkins-Hughes and production company Zipline Creative to create the graphic short film "Cow", as part of a campaign to stop texting while driving. The film earned honors in the Advertising Age's weekly Creativity Top 5 videos and became an overnight worldwide internet hit after being shown on the American news program ''The Today Show''.
The scientific literature on the dangers of driving while sending a text message from a mobile phone, or driving while texting, is limited. A simulation study at the Monash University Accident Research Centre provided strong evidence that retrieving and, in particular, sending text messages has a detrimental effect on a number of safety-critical driving measures. Specifically, negative effects were seen in detecting and responding correctly to road signs, detecting hazards, time spent with eyes off the road, and (only for sending text messages) lateral position. Mean speed, speed variability, lateral position when receiving text messages, and following distance showed no difference.
The low number of scientific studies may be indicative of a general assumption that if talking on a mobile phone increases risk, then texting also increases risk, and probably more so. 89% of U.S. adults think that text messaging while driving is "distracting, dangerous and should be outlawed." The AAA Foundation for Traffic Safety has released polling data that show that 87% of people consider texting and e-mailing while driving a "very serious" safety threat, almost equivalent to the 90% of those polled who consider drunk driving a threat. Despite the acknowledgement of the dangers of texting behind the wheel, about half of drivers 16 to 24 say they have texted while driving, compared with 22 percent of drivers 35 to 44.
Texting while driving received greater attention in the late 2000s, corresponding to a rise in the number of text messages being sent. The 2008 Will Smith movie ''Seven Pounds'' deals with Smith's character committing suicide in order to donate his organs to help save the lives of seven people to make up for the seven people he killed in a car accident because he was receiving a text message while he was driving. Texting while driving attracted interest in the media after several highly publicized car crashes were caused by texting drivers, including a May 2009 incident involving a Boston trolley car driver who crashed while texting his girlfriend. Texting was blamed in the 2008 Chatsworth train collision which killed 25 passengers. Investigations revealed that the engineer of that train had sent 45 text messages while operating. Despite these incidents, texting was still on the rise. A July 2010 Fairleigh Dickinson University PublicMind poll found 25% of New Jersey voters admitted to sending a text while driving, which was an increase from 15% in 2008. This increase could be attributed to drivers over the age of 30 sending text messages. More than 35% of New Jersey drivers aged 30 to 45  and 17% of drivers over 45 admitted to having sent a text message while driving in the last year, an increase of 5   10% from 2008.
Several studies have attempted to compare the dangers of texting while driving with driving under the influence.  One such study was conducted by ''Car and Driver'' magazine in June 2009. The study, carried out at the Oscoda-Wurtsmith Airport in Oscoda, Michigan, used two drivers in real cars and measured reaction times to the onset of  light on the windshield. The study compared the reaction times and distances of the subjects while reading a text message, replying to the text message, and impaired. The study showed that at 35&nbsp;mph, reading a text message decreased the reaction time the most, 0.12 and 0.87 seconds. Impaired driving at the same speed resulted in an increase of 0.01 and 0.07 seconds. In terms of stopping distances these times were estimated to mean:
On Sept. 29, 2010, the insurance industry   s Highway Loss Data Institute released research purporting to show that texting-while-driving bans in four states failed to reduce crashes and may instead have contributed to an increase in road accidents.  U.S. Transportation Secretary Ray LaHood called the study "completely misleading".
On July 27, 2009, the Virginia Tech Transportation Institute released preliminary findings of their study of driver distraction in commercial vehicles. Several naturalistic driving studies, of long-haul trucks as well as lighter vehicles driving six million combined miles, used video cameras to observe the drivers and road. Researchers observed 4,452 "safety-critical" events, which includes crashes, near crashes, safety-critical events, and lane deviations. 81% of the "safety-critical" events involved some type of driver distraction. Text messaging had the greatest relative risk, with drivers of heavy vehicles or trucks being more than 23 times more likely to experience a safety-critical event when texting. The study also found that drivers typically take their eyes off the forward roadway for an average of four out of six seconds when texting, and an average of 4.6 out of the six seconds surrounding safety-critical events.  The study revealed that when traveling at , a driver texting for 6&nbsp;seconds is looking at the phone for 4.6&nbsp;seconds of that time and travels the distance of a football field without their eyes on the road.  Some of VTTI's conclusions from this study included that "texting should be banned in moving vehicles for all drivers", and that "all cell phone use should be banned for newly licensed teen drivers".  The results of the study are listed in the table below.
A number of countries ban all cell phone use while driving (talking and texting).
Laws making it illegal to not only operate a mobile phone for voice calls while driving, but also texting, are becoming increasingly widespread. Only    eight states (Calif,. Conn., Del., Md., N.J., N.Y., and Wash.) D.C. and the Virgin Islands prohibit all drivers from using handheld cell phones while driving   . Due to the statistics of teen drivers being more likely to text and drive and be involved in deadly crashes due to driver distraction, some states have tougher laws for new, or    novice    drivers. Although there is a discrepancy over what age is the cutoff for a    novice    driver, the majority of states define    novice    as a driver who is 18 or younger. North Carolina is one of 28 states that ban    novice    drivers from operating a mobile phone while driving a vehicle.
North Carolina made their anti-texting and driving law effective on December 1, 2009, making it unlawful    to operate a vehicle on a public street, highway, or public vehicular area while using a mobile telephone to manually enter multiple letters or text in the device as a means of communicating with another person   .
All provinces except New Brunswick and Alberta have banned both talking on hand-held phones and texting while driving. The country's territories (Northwest Territories, Nunavut, and Yukon) have also yet to enact bans.
In 2010, the province of Alberta introduced Bill 16 - Alberta's first distracted driving legislation. While the bill is not law yet, the government and several media outlets have publicly discussed what will and won't be allowed under the law.
Any use of a  mobile phone or similar device whilst driving, or supervising a learner driver, is illegal. This includes being stopped at traffic lights. The only exceptions are emergency calls to 999 or 112.
 Michigan, Minnesota, Nevada. New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, North Carolina, Oregon, Tennessee, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, Wisconsin, and Wyoming. The state of Texas prohibits school bus drivers from texting while transporting a child under 17. The states of Indiana, Kansas, Mississippi, Missouri, Nebraska, Texas and West Virginia have laws restricting those who are underage and/or with learner's permits from texting while driving.http://www.ghsa.org/html/stateinfo/laws/cellphone_laws.html. A law just enacted in 2010 by Kentucky has banned texting for all drivers, as well as cell phone usage by all drivers under 18. The latter feature is unusual in that holders of unrestricted licenses are subject to the ban; most states that have banned cell phone usage by young drivers apply their laws only to holders of restricted or graduated licenses.
In Florida, a proposed bill known as "Heather's Law" would ban all cell phone use while driving. The law was inspired by the death of Heather Hurd, who was killed in an accident allegedly caused by a truck driver who crashed into 10 cars when he was sending a text message behind the wheel.
On October 1, 2009, the U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT) announced President Barack Obama's signing of an Executive Order directing federal employees not to engage in text messaging while driving government-owned vehicles, among other activities. According to Transportation Secretary Ray Lahood,    This order sends a very clear signal to the American public that distracted driving is dangerous and unacceptable. It shows that the federal government is leading by example." As a part of a larger move to combat distracted driving, the DOT and National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) launched the public information website distraction.gov.
On January 26, 2010, the US Department of Transportation announced a federal ban on texting while driving by truckers and bus drivers.
House Bill 2872 prohibits drivers that are under 18 years of age from using any type of mobile communication device such as a cell-phone. This includes text-messaging and does not allow for hands-free operation of a cell-phone. This law applies if you are under 18 and driving with a provisional drivers license, a special student driver permit, or a instruction driver permit.
Second Offence: Class B misdemeanor
Automatic Class B misdemeanor if the person inflicted serious bodily injury upon another as a proximate result of using a handheld wireless communication device for text messaging or electronic mail communication while operating a moving motor vehicle
In 2009 it was reported that some companies, including , ZoomSafer, Aegis Mobility, and cellcontrol by obdEdge employ systems that place restrictions on cell phone usage based on the phone   s GPS signal, data from the car itself or from nearby cellphone towers.
The use of telematics to detect drunk driving and texting while driving has been proposed.  A US patent application combining this technology with a usage based insurance product was open for public comment on peer to patent.  The insurance product would not ban texting while driving, but would charge drivers who text and drive a higher premium.
In 2010  launched, , the world's first smartphone application that lets motorists keep their eyes on the road and hands upon the wheel. StartTalking addresses the issue of distracted driving throughout the entire process of composing, sending and receiving text messages, removing the visual and physical distractions normally associated with text messaging. StartTalking is 100% eyes-free and hands-free way to interact with the mobile phone.
In addition to technological solutions to address the issue of texting while driving, drivers may consciously read and sign a pledge to never text while driving. After drivers read and sign the pledge, they remember their pledge each time they have an urge to text while driving.  While there is not a fix all solution to this problem, each and every small initiative helps. The pledge can be found at .
One argument against banning texting while driving is that it is safe and helpful under some circumstances. For example, a driver in a traffic jam might safely, and usefully, send a text message rescheduling his appointment. There are products like FleetSafer, MobileSafer and TeenSafer now available in Canada (www.itiinternational.com) that suppress the use of cell phone keyboards and screens hence no texting, emailing nor browsing. However, ZoomSafer safe driving products permit calls to be made and use of 911 using Bluetooth in-vehicle or other BT devices in a hands free manner reducing the associated risks of distracted driving. Using MobileSafer and VoiceMate also permits the sending of voice messages to other parties where the message is converted and verbally repeated upon receipt. Technology definitely contributes to safe, undistracted driving. Another argument can be made against the way the texting bans are written.  Instead of banning the act of writing or reading that distracts a person from driving, such as reading a book, writing notes on a piece of paper or writing text using a keyboard of a phone, the laws mostly ban the act of sending text messages and do not say anything about how the messages were created. Using modern voice recognition technology text messages can be created with eyes and hands free without ever engaging in the act of reading or writing.