Why is it that when I look at the Wikipedia articles on Mercury, Venus, Jupiter, and Saturn, there is not a single mention of the names of the planets in southwest Asian cultures. In fact, the only way to learn them is to use the '''languages''' tab beneath the search box? (Mars is the exception, in that it has a mention of them. Planets beyond Saturn are all simply Uranus and Neptune in every language, as far as I can tell). Where can I find information on the names of the planets in southwest Asian cultures? Thanks--  ( ) 01:26, 22 July 2009 (UTC)
That's because the European names are the ones universally accepted by astronomers around the world, while the southwest asian (arabic?) names are pretty much forgotten.  And why would anyone want to use the planets' arabic names, no-one else would understand what you're talking about.  If you want info on the planets' arabic names, just get yourself an english-arabic dictionary.   ( ) 01:38, 22 July 2009 (UTC)
No offence meant to anybody but what a pointless thread- going down the lines of; if you say "Saturn" there must be a cavat to say this can be said in 900 million languages if it isnt then anglophones are systemicly bias???? positivly daft  ( ) 06:22, 28 July 2009 (UTC)
If I had a length of nylon cord, attached a toy helium balloon, reeled out the cord until the weight of the cord equaled the lift of the balloon, attached another balloon and so on, just how high would it go? Also could my experiment be a hazard to aviation? 
Suppose I used larger balloons attached to an electric cable-could I float a solar panel above the UK's (near continuous) cloud layer to gain a reliable supply of solar energy, including enough to electrolyze hydrogen to refill the balloons, bearing in mind that using helium would be uneconomic?  ( ) 02:15, 22 July 2009 (UTC)
Or, flat-panel satellite dish. How it focus signal? I mean, quotation From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia: ''The parabolic shape of a dish reflects the signal to the dish   s focal point.'' But in flat panel antenna there is no focal point. How come that flat panel antenna still capable to archive good signal to noise ratio? So good, that it could receive satellite programming from different geostationary positioned telecommunication satellites, like ones that broadcasts Freesat? Dose it HAVE to be oriented so broadcasting from satellite reach a dish(opps, panel) with a right angle? Short technical description/explanation would be nice. And it looks like thous panels are actually smaller then regular dishes.
Examples:
What makes the odor of popcorn carry so far?  I mean, it seems to carry so much farther than any other odor.  Why?  |  05:50, 22 July 2009 (UTC)
A common form for fictional poisons is a pair of substances, each individually harmless, but which when taken together or in succession are fatal.  Do these have any basis in reality? --  ( ) 07:22, 22 July 2009 (UTC)
1.  If one plotted on the same map the paths of all the total solar eclipses over the past 10,000 years, say, would there be places on land that get them a lot more often than other places on land?  
2.  Given sufficient time, would the entire planet eventually be covered by paths of totality?  If so, how long would it take for the entire planet to be covered?  If not, where are they never seen, and why?   --    ( ) 13:38, 22 July 2009 (UTC)
I think u made a decimal mistake. 1.12*20= 22.4 l..that is one mole. your answer should be 0.5*20=10 gms     Preceding   comment added by   (       ) 17:22, 22 July 2009 (UTC) 
Did you show your working out on the answer? In my experience teachers will award partial marks if you are performing the correct calculations but make an error in the actual maths.   ( ) 19:09, 22 July 2009 (UTC)
I cam across a list of megafauna and there are a great many animals on it that really aren't that large, including things like the domestic cat, Canada Goose, and the Blue-and-yellow Macaw.  According to the megafauna article, there is no standard definition of size, and some of the references in that article are a bit contrary to each other on the matter. A reference that you could direct me to that might offer some guidance in this area would be appreciated.    ( ) 19:34, 22 July 2009 (UTC)
The term megafauna (Ancient Greek megas "large" + New Latin fauna "animal") has two distinct meanings in the biological sciences. The less commonly found meaning is of any animal which can be seen with the unaided eye, in contrast to microfauna. The more commonly found meaning, discussed in this article, is of "giant", "very large" or "large" animals     although there is no standard definition of a minimum size.
Why is it that scientists insist that evolution is widely accepted when it's obvious that there are so many flaws (missing links, for example) which prove that it's not true? And so many people in the world don't believe in Darwinism, it's not accurate to teach only one view of the world when there are so many different, more likely possibilities.
Haha got ya! I'm just kidding, I'm a hardcore biologist that loves evolution. Darwin wrote something about if someone could find something that was put on earth just for our (humankind's) pleasure, his theory would be disproved. Does anyone have this exact quote, and have any serious (misguided) attempts been made to find such a thing?
Cheers,
1. Does anyone know the exact chemical formula of the oily substance secreted by birds such as ducks and seagulls that is spread on the feathers during preening to waterproof them?
2. Does this stuff have any practical use in human society if sythesized artificially?
3. The gland that secretes it would seem to be on the lower back in birds. Is there an analogous organ anywhere in humans/other mammals?
Thanks. --  ( ) 22:22, 22 July 2009 (UTC)