The '''Gall   Peters projection''', named after James Gall and Arno Peters, is one specialization of a configurable equal-area map projection known as the '''equal-area cylindric''' or '''cylindrical equal-area''' projection. The Gall   Peters achieved considerable notoriety in the late 20th century as the centerpiece of a controversy surrounding the political implications of map design. Maps based on the projection continue to see use in some circles and are readily available, though few major map publishers produce them.
The projection is conventionally defined as:
Stripping out unit conversion and uniform scaling, the formulae may be written: 
The various specializations of the cylindric equal-area projection differ only in the ratio of the vertical to horizontal axis. This ratio determines the ''standard parallel'' of the projection, which is the parallel at which there is no distortion and along which distances match the stated scale. There are always two standard parallels on the cylindric equal-area projection, each at the same distance north and south of the equator. The standard parallels of the Gall   Peters are 45  &nbsp;N and 45  &nbsp;S. Several other specializations of the equal-area cylindric have been described, promoted, or otherwise named.Snyder, John P. (1989). ''An Album of Map Projections'' p. 19. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Geological Survey Professional Paper 1453. (Mathematical properties of the Gall   Peters and related projections.)Monmonier, Mark (2004). ''Rhumb Lines and Map Wars: A Social History of the Mercator Projection'' p. 152. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press. (Thorough treatment of the social history of the Mercator projection and Gall   Peters projections.)Smyth, C. Piazzi. (1870). ''On an Equal-Surface Projection and its Anthropological Applications''. Edinburgh: Edmonton & Douglas. (Monograph describing an equal-area cylindric projection and its virtues, specifically disparaging Mercator's projection.)
The Gall   Peters projection was first described in 1855 by clergyman James Gall, who presented it along with two other projections at the Glasgow meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science (the BA). He gave it the name "orthographic" (no relation to the Orthographic projection), and formally published his work in 1885 in the ''Scottish Geographical Magazine''.
The name "Gall   Peters projection" seems to have been used first by Arthur H. Robinson in a pamphlet put out by the American Cartographic Association in 1986.American Cartographic Association's Committee on Map Projections, 1986. ''Which Map is Best'' p. 12. Falls Church: American Congress on Surveying and Mapping. Prior to 1973 it had been known, when referred to at all, as the "Gall orthographic" or "Gall's orthographic." Most Peters supporters refer to it only as the "Peters projection." During the years of controversy the cartographic literature tended to mention both attributions, settling on one or the other for the purposes of the article. In recent years "Gall   Peters" seems to dominate.
Arno Peters, an amateur historian, devised a map based on Gall's orthographic projection in 1967 and presented it in 1973 as a "new invention." He promoted it as a superior alternative to the Mercator projection, which was suited to navigation but also used commonly in world maps. The Mercator projection increasingly inflates the sizes of regions according to their distance from the equator. This inflation results, for example, in a representation of Greenland that is larger than Africa, whereas in reality Africa is 14 times as large. Since much of the technologically underdeveloped world lies near the equator, these countries appear smaller on a Mercator, and therefore, according to Peters, seem less significant. On Peters's projection, by contrast, areas of equal size on the globe are also equally sized on the map. By using his "new" projection, poorer, less powerful nations could be restored to their rightful proportions. This reasoning has been picked up by many educational and religious bodies, leading to adoption of the Gall   Peters projection among some socially concerned groups.
Peters's original description of the projection for his map contained a geometric error that, taken literally, imply standard parallels of 46  02'&nbsp;N/S. However the text accompanying the description made it clear that he had intended the standard parallels to be 45  &nbsp;N/S, making his projection identical to Gall's orthographic.Maling, D.H. (1993). ''Coordinate Systems and Map Projections'', second edition, second printing, p. 431. Oxford: Pergamon Press. ISBN 0-08-037234-1. In any case, the difference is negligible in a world map.
At first Peters's foray into cartography was largely ignored by the cartographic community. The preceding century had already witnessed many campaigns for new projections with little visible result. Just twenty years earlier, for example, Trystan Edwards described and promoted his own eponymous projection, disparaging the Mercator, and recommending his projection as "the" solution.Edwards, Trystan (1953). ''A New Map of the World''. London: B.T. Batsford LTD. Peters's projection differed from Edwards's only in height-to-width ratio. More problematic, Peters's projection was identical to one that was already over a century old, though he probably did not realize it. That projection&mdash;Gall's orthographic&mdash;passed unnoticed when it was announced in 1855.
Beyond the lack of novelty in the projection itself, the claims Peters made about the projection were also familiar to cartographers. Just as in the case of Peters, earlier projections generally were promoted as alternatives to the Mercator. Inappropriate use of the Mercator projection in world maps and the size disparities figuring prominently in Peters's arguments against the Mercator projection had been remarked upon for centuries and quite commonly in the 20th century.Hinks, Arthur R. (1912). ''Map Projections'' p. 29. London: Cambridge University Press.Steers, J.A. (1927). ''An Introduction to the Study of Map Projections'' 9th ed. p. 154. London: The University of London Press.Kellaway, G.P. (1946). ''Map Projections'' p. 37   38. London: Methuen & Co. LTD. (Mentions allegations of an "imperialistic motive".)Abelson, C.E. (1954). ''Common Map Projections'' p. 4. Sevenoaks: W.H. Smith & Sons.Chamberlin, Wellman (1947). ''The Round Earth on Flat Paper'' p. 99. Washington, D.C.: The National Geographic Society.Fisher, Irving (1943). "A World Map on a Regular Icosahedron by Gnomonic Projection." ''Geographical Review'' 33 (4): 605. (A jab at Mercator and proposal for a replacement.) As early as 1943, Stewart notes this phenomenon and compares the quest for the perfect projection to ''"squaring the circle or making pi come out even"''Stewart, John Q. (1943). "The Use and Abuse of Map Projections." ''Geographical Review'' 33 (4): 590. (Noting quixotic promotions of new projections.) because the mathematics that governs map projections just does not permit development of a map projection that is objectively significantly better than the hundreds already devised. Even Peters's politicized interpretation of the common use of Mercator was nothing new, with mention of a similar controversy in Kelloway's 1946 text.
Peters, however, launched his campaign in a different world than Edwards had. He announced his map at a time when themes of social justice resonated strongly in academia and politics. Suggesting cartographic imperialism, Peters found ready audiences. The campaign was bolstered by the claim that the Peters projection was the only "area-correct" map. Other claims included "absolute angle conformality," "no extreme distortions of form," and "totally distance-factual."(1977) ''The Bulletin'' 25 (17) pp. 126   127. Bonn: Federal Republic of Germany Press and Information Office.
All of those claims were erroneous.Snyder, John P. (1993). ''Flattening the Earth: Two Thousand Years of Map Projections'' p. 165. Chicago and London: The University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0-226-76746-9. (Summary of the Peters controversy.) Some of the oldest projections are equal-area (the sinusoidal projection is also known as the "Mercator equal-area projection"), and hundreds have been described, refuting any implication that Peters's map is special in that regard. In any case, Mercator was not the pervasive projection Peters made it out to be: a wide variety of projections has always been used in world maps.Bowyer, T.D.; German, G.A. (1959). ''A Guide to Map Projections'' p. 16. London: John Murray. Hence, it could be argued that Peters had simply set up a straw man to knock down. Peters's chosen projection suffers extreme distortion in the polar regions, as any cylindrical projection must, and its distortion along the equator is considerable. Several scholars have remarked on the irony of the projection's undistorted presentation of the mid latitudes, including Peters's native Germany, at the expense of the low latitudes, which host more of the technologically underdeveloped nations. The claim of distance fidelity is particularly problematic: Peters's map lacks distance fidelity everywhere except along the 45th parallels north and south, and then only in the direction of those parallels. No world projection is good at preserving distances everywhere; Peters's and all other cylindric projections are especially bad in that regard because east-west distances inevitably balloon toward the poles.Canters, Frank; Decleir, Hugo (1989). ''The World in Perspective: A Directory of World Map Projections'', p. 36. Chichester: John Wiley & Sons LTD. ISBN 0-471-92147-5. (Distortion of distance in world maps. Gall   Peters is structurally very similar to Behrmann.)
The cartographic community met Peters's 1973 press conference with amusement and mild exasperation, but little activity beyond a few articles commenting on the technical aspects of Peters's claims. In the ensuing years, however, it became clear that Peters and his map were no flash in the pan. By 1980 many cartographers had turned overtly hostile to his claims. In particular, Peters writes in ''The New Cartography'',
This attack did not endear cartographers, who themselves had long been frustrated by the favoritism publishers showed for Mercator's projection.
The two camps never made any real attempts toward reconciliation. The Peters camp largely ignored the protests of the cartographers. Peters maintained there should be "one map for one world"''Arno Peters: Radical Map, Remarkable Man''. (A DVD documentary.) 2008.&mdash;his&mdash;and did not acknowledge the prior art of Gall until the controversy had largely run its course, late in his life. While Peters likely reinvented the projection independently, the unscholarly conduct and refusal to engage the cartographic community undoubtedly contributed to the polarization and impasse.
The geographic and cartographic communities do not unanimously disparage the Peters World Map. For example, one map society, the North American Cartographic Information Society (NACIS), declined to endorse the 1989 resolution, though no reasons were given. Some cartographers, including J. Brian Harley, have credited the Peters phenomenon with demonstrating the social implications of map projections, at the very least. Crampton sees the condemnation from the cartographic community as reactionary and perhaps demonstrative of immaturity in the profession, given that all maps are political. Denis Wood sees the map as one of many useful tools. Lastly, Terry Hardaker of Oxford Cartographers Limited, sympathetic to Peters's mission, became the map's official cartographer when Peters, overwhelmed by the technical aspects of cartography, sought to pass on those responsibilities.
The Peters projection map was featured in the United States television drama ''The West Wing'' (season 2, episode 16), in which the (fictitious) ''Organization of Cartographers for Social Equality'' is given access to the White House Press Secretary due to Big Block of Cheese Day.  Dr. John Fallow (actor John Billingsley) explains why the President of the United States of America should champion the use of this map in schools, because it correctly represents the size of the countries and therefore gives due prominence to countries in less technologically developed parts of the world that are otherwise underestimated. 
The map is also a favorite of military strategist Thomas Barnett, who has included it in his presentations of ''The Brief'', which have aired on C-SPAN in the United States.