The company was founded in 1946 by Chandler's grandfather, William Chandler, after several years ownership of Walthamstow Stadium. William Chandler was succeeded by Victor's father, also named Victor.  Victor Sr. died suddenly in 1974 and the business passed over to Victor Jr., who at the time was working in the hotel industry in Spain.  Shortly after assuming control of the family business, Chandler lost one of the business' integral assets; prime racecourse pitches and began concentrating on other aspects of developing his firm, namely credit betting through laying bets to high rolling businessmen in the Far East. The company now claims to turn over in excess of   1billion and have over a half a million customers in more than 160 different countries.
With the knowledge accrued from catering to customers in foreign climes, Chandler sought the answer to offering a duty-free service to his customers and in 1998 took the historic step of taking his entire business off-shore to avoid UK gambling tax.  His move to the British Overseas Territory of Gibraltar  led to other bookmaking firms  Ladbrokes and Stan James following Chandler in setting up businesses in the small peninsula.  Victor Chandler is seen as responsible for Gordon Brown abolishing gambling tax in his 2001 budget.. Thanks to Chandler's foresight and business accumen the doors were opened to Gibraltar becoming a worldwide hub for online gaming with numerous sportsbook, casino and poker licenses awarded to most of the world's largest gaming firms. In 2004, the company was renamed 'VC Bet' for branding reasons although in late 2008 Chandler himself chose to revert the name to 'Victor Chandler'.
Victor Chandler International has sponsored several sporting events over the years, most notably the grade 1 listed Victor Chandler Chase at Ascot racecourse, the Victor Chandler British Masters golf tournament and the grade 1 listed Nunthorpe Stakes from 2000   2004 as the Victor Chandler Nunthorpe Stakes and then 2005   2006 as the VCBET Nunthorpe Stakes. The Victor Chandler Chase has become, for many , a yardstick for one of the Cheltenham Festival's showpiece events, the Queen Mother Champion Chase. 
In 2004 and 2005 Victor Chandler International ran a televised poker tournament called the Victor Chandler Poker Cup which became established as one of the richest events on the circuit. With   250,000 to the tournament's first winner, Harry Demetriou and then   200,000 won in its second year by Tony Bloom, the competition attracted well known professionals from all over the world. Combine that with celebrity appearances from John McCririck, Teddy Sheringham, Ken Doherty and Eastenders' very own, 'Beppe di Marco', Michael Greco, the event commanded substantial viewing figures from the seven hour-long programmes shown on Sky Sports 2.     
Victor Chandler International currently sponsors the professional European Tour golfer, Graeme Storm and professional snooker  players, 'The Darlin' of Dublin', Ken Doherty, 'On-Fire Maguire', Stephen Maguire and, 'The Outlaw', Joe Swail. 
Victor Chandler International is currently one of four official betting partners of the TV channel Racing UK.
On Wednesday 8 July 2009 Victor Chandler International announced they will sponsor Coca-Cola Championship team Nottingham Forest F.C. during the 2009   2010 football season for a "six figure fee".  The name Victor Chandler will appear on the front of home, away and goalkeeper shirts, as well as on replica adult shirts.  At the same time they also announced that former Forest legend Viv Anderson has joined the company as Football Ambassador. As part of the sponsorship deal, Victor pledged to supporters he would buy each person with a season ticket, and a VC Bet account, a new season ticket for the 2010/11 season should Forest win the Football League Championship.
Chandler sold the licenses of 41 betting shops in London and the surrounding area to the Gala Coral Group that operate Coral Bookmakers in March 2006. Despite the sale of the majority of the licenses, Chandler kept hold of the properties in Deanery Street, Mayfair, London and the Dublin betting lounge on Upper Baggot Street, and 14 shops in Scotland carry the Victor Chandler brand.
In November 2009 Victor Chandler announced that they had secured a Sports Betting Licence for South Africa.  Initially Chandler will open an office Cape Town from which it will operate an Internet Sports Betting Business.  Victor Chandler International CEO Michael Carlton appeared on the Business Show on Summit TV to discuss the new operation.