It takes its name from one of its founder's first inventions, the Ever-Sharp mechanical pencil, which was invented by Tokuji Hayakawa (             ) in 1915. Since then it has developed into one of the leading electronics companies in the world.  Sharp is among the Top 100 R&D Spenders in a list published by ''IEEE Spectrum'' magazine. It gained greater public awareness in the United Kingdom when it sponsored Manchester United F.C. from 1982 to 2000, which was a period of great success for the club.
Sharp took a controlling stake in Pioneer Corporation in 2007. On 25 June 2009, they agreed to form a joint venture with Pioneer on their optical business to be called "Pioneer Digital Design and Manufacturing Corporation".
In 1912, Tokuji Hayakawa (             ) founded a metal workshop in Tokyo. The first of his many inventions was a snap buckle named 'Tokubijo'. Another of his major inventions was the Ever-Sharp  mechanical pencil in 1915, from which the Sharp Corporation took its name. After the pencil business was destroyed by the 1923 Great Kanto earthquake, the company relocated to  Osaka and began designing the first generation of Japanese radio sets. These went on sale in 1925. In 1953 Sharp started producing television sets.
Other notable achievements include the first LCD calculator in 1973.  LCD technology continues to be a key part of Sharp's product range, in both the component and consumer-appliance sides of the business.
Core technologies and products include: LCD panels, solar panels, mobile phones, audio-visual entertainment equipment, video projectors, Multi-Function Printing Devices, microwave ovens, air conditioners, cash registers, CMOS and CCD sensors, and flash memory.
The first commercial camera phone was also made by Sharp for the Japanese market in November 2000. Recent products include the ViewCam, the Ultra-Lite notebook PC, the Zaurus personal digital assistant, Sidekick 3, and the AQUOS flat screen television.
Sharp manufactures a variety of consumer electronic products. These include LCD televisions, sold under the Aquos brand, mobile phones, microwave ovens, Home Cinema and audio systems, air purification systems, fax machines and calculators.
For the business market, Sharp also produces ranges of projectors and monitors and a variety of photocopiers and Laser Printers, in addition to electronic cash registers and Point of sale technologies.
Sharp is a pioneer and innovator in the field of multi-functional devices (MFD) having won many awards from BLI and BERTL - the two major authorities providing competitive intelligence and test reviews in the print industry. SHARP's latest products - MX2600N and MX3100N have once again broken new ground with the launch of version 3 Open System Architecture (OSA3). This feature enhances productivity further still by letting third party developers directly integrate their business applications with the MFD.
Sharp shared a close working relationship with Nintendo during the 1980s, and was granted licensing rights for the manufacture and development of the C1 NES TV (1983, later released in North America as the Sharp Nintendo Television), the Twin Famicom (1986), the Sharp Famicom Titler (1989), and the SF-1 SNES TV (1990). All of these units are considered collectors items on the secondary market.
Sharp Solar has for a number of years been a leading supplier of silicon photovoltaic (PV) solar cells. Now, it offers solar TV. In Q1 2010 they were rated the #1 producer of solar PV systems, in terms of revenues.
Sharp's Mobile Communications Division created the world's first commercial camera phone, the J-SH04, in Japan in 1997, and continues to be a leading player in the Japanese mobile phone market, also maintaining a position as a niche supplier outside Japan. Currently (2008), Sharp is collaborating with Emblaze Mobile on the ''Monolith'', "...an ambitious project to design the ultimate holistic mobile device".
Net sales for the year 2003/4 were $16.8 billion.
The Corporation employs 46,600 staff, of which around half live outside Japan.
It operates from 64 bases in 30 countries and its products are distributed in 164 countries worldwide.  Many of its regional subsidiaries trade under the name "''Sharp Electronics''".
Sharp is among the Top 100 R&D Spenders in a list published by the IEEE Spectrum magazine.
Sharp is ranked on the 11th place in Greenpeace   s Guide to Greener Electronics (October 2010 version) that ranks 18 electronics manufacturers according to their policies on toxic chemicals, recycling and climate change. 
Sharp get the points in this ranking mainly for its promise to phase-out PVC and BFRs by the end of fiscal year 2010. It provides a timeline of financial year 2010 for eliminating phthalates and antimony , but there is a lack of clarity on whether the commitment to eliminate phthalates relates to all phthalates or just three.
Sharp has launched many models of LCD TVs and solar modules free of PVC (except accessories) and now has 14 models of LED lightings that are BFR-free. 
On the other hand, Sharp is weakest on the e-waste criteria. Although Sharp supports Individual Producer Responsibility (IPR) it fails to clarify this support, as well as show evidence of lobbying for it. 
Sharp was the principal sponsor of Manchester United Football Club from 1983 until 2000, in one of the lengthiest and most lucrative sponsorship deals in English football. Sharp's logo was on the front of United's shirts during these 17 years, during which the team won seven Premier League titles, five FA Cups, one Football League Cup, one European Cup Winners' Cup and one European Cup.