The fourth season of the American drama/adventure television series '''''Alias''''' premiered January 5, 2005 on ABC and concluded May 25, 2005 and was released on DVD in region 1 on October 25, 2005. Guest stars in season four include Sonia Braga, Joel Grey, Michael McKean, Lena Olin, Isabella Rossellini .
The scheduling shift for the fourth season was prompted by displacement of the series from its previous time slot (Sundays 9:00 p.m. ET/8:00 p.m. CT), due to the success of ''Alias''' fall replacement     season one of ''Desperate Housewives''.  ABC's other notable new series from the season, ''Lost'', became the lead-in program for ''Alias''.  A new night, new lead-in, and noticeable lack of weeks without new episode broadcasts are thought to have contributed to some of the series' best overall ratings during its five-season run.
The hard drive turns out to have been booby-trapped by Third Faction.  When inspected it detonates and releases cyclosarin. The biological nerve agent infects Dixon as he attempted to aid the technician who was inspecting the hard drive.  Due to the release of the nerve agent, APO goes into lockdown mode for thirty-six hours.
Marshall, late for work, arrives at the parking lot only to be informed that they're in lockdown mode and that Sydney is trapped in a coffin somewhere in Cuba. Sydney is able to communicate with her cell phone that she still had. Because Marshall is the only one not affected by the lockdown, he is sent to Havana to find the graveyard where Sydney is buried; using a transceiver he rigged to locate her cell phone and retasking a thermal imaging satellite, Marshall finds Sydney unconscious, but alive. Marshall and Sydney's mission is extended to Berlin where the man who gave them the phony hard drive is located. Since the man knows what Sydney looks like, Marshall is sent in to get a copy of the data using a remote scanner.  Marshall accidentally shoots and kills him. Over the phone, Jack instructs Marshall on how to remove the man's eyes (using a spork) so that he can access a security station in the basement and deactivate a firewall. After doing so, Sydney and Marshall rendezvous and finally obtain a real copy of the hard drive, which they deliver to APO.
In the middle of it all, Marshall must sing his baby to sleep by phone with a song about the Lanthanide series.  Though his wife is an NSA employee, he can never tell her where he has been.
Meanwhile, a mysterious stranger meets with Vaughn in the UCLA library and promises answers about his father in exchange for the Nightingale's coil. Vaughn, Sydney and Jack travel to the Nightingale facility to shut it down and retrieve the coil from the weapon, however, Sydney becomes trapped in the room with the Nightingale device. Jack, Vaughn and Marshall attempt from three different locations to free her, which ultimately leads to Jack shutting down the nuclear core manually exposing himself to harmful radiation. With Sydney's help, Vaughn disappears with the coil to learn more of his father. Marshall later discovers what Jack did, but swears to keep Jack's secret.
Meanwhile, Nadia informs Sydney that she's been secretly seeing Katya Derevko. When Sydney confronts Katya, she learns that Irina did not put a contract on Sydney's life at all. Sydney tracks down a message from her mother that has been hidden inside a music box. The message is the number to a bank account under the name of Arvin Sloane.
Marshall dupes Jack into signing some papers, which Marshall uses to test Jack for mutations due to his radiation exposure. The test returns positive and Marshall confronts Jack informing him of the effects this may have to people who care about him, such as Sydney if she found out, unless he goes to a doctor.
Vaughn, after the success of the mission, learns that his father has actually been dead all this time and that everything, including the journal was forged supposedly by Sloane. Later, Jack reports to Arvin Sloane that Vaughn has returned with the Nightingale coil and that the CIA was still in possession of the Rambaldi artifact. It was also mentioned that Dixon was merely shot in his vest and would eventually recover.
During the final moments of the show, a second man referred to as "Mister Sloane", and bearing a distinct resemblance is revealed in Santiago.
Elena steals the Hydrosek recovered earlier and kills her ally after the heist.
To find Elena and Sloane, Jack Bristow visits Katya Derevko and promises her immunity for information on Elena's whereabouts which she then gives to Jack. Dixon, Nadia, and Sydney then infiltrate Elena's compound, where Dixon is shot by Elena, but not before positively identifying that Irina Derevko, long thought to be executed by Jack, is still alive.
While all this is going on, a device known as the Mueller Device (Marshall calls it the Big Red Ball) is put into place over Sovogda, Russia, the entire population of which is rioting much like the frenzied bees from ''In Dreams...''. The Rambaldi prophecy appears to be coming true and only Irina has the knowledge to foil Elena and Sloane's plot. The team makes a HALO jump into Sovogda in an attempt to shutdown the Mueller Device. The Russian authorities have ordered an airstrike, but since rupturing the sphere would release a vast amount of toxins, time is running out.
Sloane "betrays" Elena and leads the team to her. She is then captured and Irina makes her tell her which wire to cut on the device to deactivate it. Elena says to cut the white wire, but Irina tells Sydney to cut the blue wire. Irina then shoots Elena, killing her.
Nadia becomes infected when Elena injects her with the infected tap water, who tries to kill Sydney to prevent her from stopping the device. Sloane shoots Nadia to save Sydney's life in fulfillment of the prophecy. The Mueller device then dissolves into water and destroys the building, but the team makes it out. Jack then lets Irina go free.
The end of the episode shows Sydney and Vaughn in a car going off on vacation to Santa Barbara, where they decide they would elope. After being prompted by Irina of not having a marriage full of lies like her marriage with Jack, Vaughn tells Sydney that he doesn't want to keep any secrets from her. As they're driving he tells her his real name isn't Michael Vaughn and that his assignment of being Sydney's handler was no accident; however, before an explanation can be given, their car is hit in the driver's side door by another vehicle.
Season 4 was not aired in production order. The production order is supposedly as follows: