By 1994, LMG opened an office in Phoenix to better serve the West Coast clientele. To support rental clients, LMG   s office extended its hours of operation to seven days a week. In 1996, LMG built a new  corporate headquarters and warehouse operations center in Orlando.  In 1998, LMG became the onsite provider of audiovisual services for the Orange County Convention Center in Orlando and in 2009 won the contract to renew for an addition five years.  In 2001, LMG opened another office that is  in Las Vegas. 
In 2005, LMG custom designed and built the first multiformat, high definition truck in a box flypack system, dubbed HD-1, for corporate events and later built three additional systems, designed around the Snell & Wilcox Kahuna broadcasting switcher.
In 2008, LMG   s corporate headquarters expanded its office/warehouse from  to 108,000 square feet.
Les Goldberg:  Les Goldberg is the Chief Executive Officer, President and Founder of LMG Inc., He started the company in 1984 at the age of 17, while still attending high school. Les Goldberg oversees LMG   s shows, integration and touring divisions, as he maintains an active role with all projects and clients. Some of his awards and honors: Orlando Business Journal   s Top 40 under 40 Honoree, 1998 and 2005; Ernst & Young, Finalist, Entrepreneur of the Year Competition 2000; and Contributing Author for Rental & Staging Magazine.
LMG Show Technology offers full service video, audio and lighting capabilities throughout the United States for corporate meetings, trade shows, live broadcasts, and specialty events. 
LMG Systems Integration is made up of engineers, system designers, and product specialists who provide design, consulting, and installation, as well as product sales, of permanent presentation technology.  LMG Systems Integration is certified by Infocomm International as a Gold Certified Audiovisual Services Provider (CAVSP). Examples of project types: SMART Classrooms, House of Worship, Theatres, Boardrooms and Training Labs.
LMG Touring provides integrated audio, video, lighting and satellite web streaming for concert tours. Artists LMG Touring has worked with: Avril Lavigne, Flo Rida, We the Kings, Blue October, and Jars of Clay.
In 2006- INFOCOMM International,    Best Use of HD    for 2005 Discovery Communications Upfront Tour.
In 2007- INFOCOMM International,    Best Overall Staging for a Corporate Event    for Rite Aid Annual Conference.
In 2008- INFOCOMM International,    Best Overall Staging for a Corporate Event    for AutoDesk One Team Conference.