So, we have an equivalent definition for continuity (which I copied and pasted from Continuous function):
The question is, can we do a similar thing for right or left continuous only using sequences that are greater than or equal (for right) or less than or equal (for left) to c?   ( ) 14:16, 28 July 2009 (UTC)
How do I graph y   Preceding   comment added by   ( ) 14:51, 28 July 2009 (UTC) 
Where can I get more information on Orthogonal Arrays and their relation to error correcting codes. I want to find a proof of the following theorem: The minimum distance d(C) of a binary linear code C and the (maximal) strength t(C') of C' (where C' is the dual code of C) are related by d(C)=t(C')+1. If someone can find me the proof online I would be much obliged. Thanks--  ( ) 14:52, 28 July 2009 (UTC)
Is it statistically possible to objectively rank the poker bots of the world, or at least find the top of the rank?  (I mean on standard hardware, in a standard configuration?)
So A beats B beats C beats A.  Which is the best?  Also, the bots could consistently beat other bots for other reasons than their programmer having studied them.  It could just look like a directed graph for whatever reason, where each edge you can determine with as much statistical confidence as you want (A really, we are very confident, beats B), but the overall graph is useless for ranking or coming up with a "best".   And all this is even assuming that it is possible to statistically compare two bots!!!  My other suspicion, in the absence of this, is:
This leads me to my question: when a poker player wins a tournament, are the tournament conditions such that the "best" player is statistically chosen with high confidence from among all the players (say 1300 of them!)  Or, as I suspect, is it mostly luck, meaning that if you WENT BACK IN TIME and redid the tournament (so that the players don't have the knowledge gained from the tournament) you wouldn't have the same rankings.  (maybe if you redid the whole universe 1000 times with different random hands, in the 1000 results one of the same 5 players would win almost all of the time, but ''which'' of the 5 players would be split...  also maybe in 50 of the 1000 universes a non-"best"  ends up winning because of luck?)
Does anyone here know statistics??? Thank you for any help you might have in whether there is any statistical confidence in evaluating poker players and pokers.    ( ) 18:03, 28 July 2009 (UTC)
Does a poker tournament reach statistical significance in telling apart players' abilities?   ( ) 18:12, 28 July 2009 (UTC)
What??  No "champion" of ''any'' year comes even ''close'' to being champion the next?  Isn't this ''very strong evidence that a poker tournament like the World Series does not reach ANY statistical significance that the winner is better than the runners-up, let alone the best of them?''   ( ) 19:41, 28 July 2009 (UTC)
I hope this is the right category.
I've always been a logical person, but usually intuitively logical. Lately I want to understand the philosophy of logic, how to think rationally, and how to apply logic and statistics to my own thinking and my life. Unfortunately, a lot of the web materials out there require a lot of background knowledge and understanding that I just don't have. For instance, the great blogs  and  have some extremely interesting discussion topics, but sometimes they just absolutely lose me.
Right now, I'm eighteen and in high school. My math skills are limited to algebra, very basic graphing (y=mx+b is about the limit of my understanding) and a very small amount of trig. I don't understand quadratics or polynomials or a lot of trig or geometry, and I still haven't taken any course that covers functions, or calculus. I know what set theory and formal logic ''are'', and maybe a ''little'' bit about them, but not enough to say, explain it to my thirteen-year-old brother.
With that in mind, what would be a good, clearly-written, layman-oriented primer on some of these subjects, especially ones like the Less Wrong blog covers, but also basic statistics and stuff like that? Having some book to learn this from would make it so much easier than aimlessly clicking links and throwing half-assed, vaguely-written quries at Google only to get answers so academic I barely comprehend the page titles.
Again, many apologies if I didn't put this in the right place, but it didn't feel likely that I'd get good responses in any other category.
If you don't mind a rather old book, start with How to Lie with Statistics by Darrell Huff.  Of course it's really about how to tell when someone is lying to ''you'' with statistics.   ( ) 03:49, 29 July 2009 (UTC)
If one of the things you're interested in learning is geometry, C.&nbsp;Stanley Ogilvy's book ''Excursions in Geometry'' is absolutely beautifully written and doesn't require you to know much at all before you read it.  It's surprising how little you need to know to read the book and how much you learn from it fairly quickly.  A very fun book.  (It is intensely hated by the sort of students whose reason for taking a math course is that it's required of them.  I think maybe they want someone to give them algorithms for solving all of their homework problems and they want their work in the course to consist only of applying those algorithms.)   ( ) 21:45, 29 July 2009 (UTC)
Roughly 2 years ago I inquired about whether it was well known that one could solve certain Quartic Equations by representing it as a composition of two Quadratic functions, the consensus I got from that was no, and that it wasn't particularly useful to have a non-general solution like that. Well, just in the last few days I've figured out how to solve the general case by using another 'relatively' simple technique that transforms any Quartic into one that can be represented as a composition of two Quadratics. I'm once again curious if this would be a significant result.   ( ) 21:24, 28 July 2009 (UTC)
I'm not talking about factoring here, I'm talking about Function composition, in this case, both being Quadratics yielding a Quartic naturally, I'm quite certain it works. A couple years back I figured out how to solve an equation of the form f(g(x))=0 if I know how to solve f, and how to solve an equation of the form g(x)+C for arbitrary constant C. But for the Quartic, the middle terms had to have a certain relation, by doing a change of variables of the form y- \lambda =x, I can transform any Quartic into the correct form, this involves solving a Cubic, the Resolvent Cubic in fact.   ( ) 00:34, 29 July 2009 (UTC)
I think I remember a boring stretch of algebra class involving showing how to decompose the quartic into the composition of two quadratics.  I guess if you can write your version up in a clever way it might be interesting (Wikipedia is not the right place for it though, as Dmcq says).  But generally, Galois theory gives a pretty complete treatment of what polynomials can be solved by radicals.   ( ) 16:36, 29 July 2009 (UTC)
To dcmq, I wasn't necessarily suggesting it be put in the article, I was curious it is or is not known, since I haven't been able to find any info on using compositions of functions as a way of solving polynomials.
To pma, I'm intrigued, this is different than Ferrari's solution given in the article if I'm reading that right.
I think my solution might qualify as beautiful, It takes a bit fewer steps that Ferrari's solution, here, I've give it a run through.
The first step, after dividing out the leading coefficient, is to check the coefficient condition. 
To see a derivation of this, goto my userpage. Under the title, Solving Polynomials with Composition of Functions.
If the condition checks out, then the solution is pretty easy, just build the composition, and setup and solve the system for the C, and D. B uniquely defines one of the other 4 coefficients, and E takes care of the last one.
Assuming though that the condition is not met, we will perform a Linear transformation by substituting y-\lambda  for x. (note that we've already divided out the leading coefficient.)
Now we need to find \lambda such that the coefficient condition i met.
Solving this Cubic can be done as show in the Cubic Equation article, sometimes it just might happen that the solution to this Cubic is easier than the general case though.
With three values for \lambda, I would generally choose the Real one. We now have a Quartic that satisfies the coefficient condition. For simplicity I'm going to substitute for coefficients now.
To solve this Quartic, we must equate its coefficients to those of the expanded Composition, for a derivation, again, see my userpage.
Let f(x)=x^2+bx+c and let g(x)=x^2+mx+n then for f(g(x))=0
One interesting caveat here is C, and D. They form a linear system in b and n, after you get m's value from B. Furthermore, the system has infinitely many solutions. so we may pick an n, and derive a b or vis versa. once those two are defined E defines c. Attempting to solve the linear system in the general case was in fact, precisely how I derived the coefficient condition.
Now we need to solve f(y)=0. Why not f(x)? because our Quartic that were solving is in y, we will use the solution for this Quartic to write the solution for the original one in x.
Now we solve g(y)=\frac{-b\pm \sqrt{b^2-4c}}{2}
One note first, in order to distinguish the independent plus-minus signs, I'm going to put different subscripts below them.
And now to solve for x,
Depends on what you mean by alternate, if you mean the final formula no, I would imagine its the same. But that formula doesn't see much use, generally easier to work iteratively. So what I have is alternate avenue to getting a solution by radicals.   ( ) 06:42, 30 July 2009 (UTC)
I like your idea about looking at those fourth degree monic polynomial which are composition of two second degree monic polynomials, ''h(x)=f(g(x))''. However, notice that if ''h'' is such a composition, then any translation of ''h'' is also a composition: ''h(x-  )=f(g(x-  ))''; and of course, if ''h(x)'' is not a composition, no translate ''h(x-  )'' will be, for any ''  ''. Therefore, we can't reach the case of a composition just by a substitution y-  =x: no hope of finding such a ''  '', if ''h'' itself was not already a compositon. The equation in ''  '', should we write it carefully, is not a cubic, but has certainly to be independent of ''  '', and will reduce to the same condition 4BC-B3=8D you found for ''h'' to be a composition. There is another way to see it, in terms of the roots of ''h(x)''. As you said, the equation ''f(g(x))=0'' is equivalent to: ''g(x)=  1 or g(x)=  2'', where ''  1'' and ''  2'' are the roots of ''f(x)''. As a consequence, the roots of ''h'' are not a generic 4-ple of complex numbers, but if you think a little, they are such that the sum of two of them (precisely, the ones coming from ''g(x)-  1=0'') is equal to the sum of the other two (the ones coming from ''g(x)-  2=0''): again a translation-invariant condition, as it has to be. To compare the condition on the roots with the condition on the coefficients you found, just write the latter in terms of the roots: you will find: 
But remember, a linear translation changes the solution behavior, for example in Ferrari's method he eliminates the x^3 term. This causes the solutions of the new Quartic to have a sum of zero, see Viete's formulas. The change is undone at the very end by the change back from y to x. I'm doing the same thing here note that it's not x-\lambda but y-\lambda that would be the new input, and it's y I solve for, not y-\lambda. My choice for \lambda doesn't eliminate any of the terms but instead does exactly what you explained about the roots, so that the Quartic in y can be written as a composition, not the one for y-\lambda. Take a close look at these three lines from above.
And to Bo Jacoby, yes the formula is basically useless, but if someone wants to solve a 'poorly behaved' Quartic by hand, and they want a solution by radicals, they often follow something like Ferrari's method through w/ number in place of those unwieldy expressions, correct?    ( ) 20:23, 30 July 2009 (UTC)
To pma, I believe the following will constitute a counterexample to your claim. Assuming I haven't made any mistakes.
Consider h(x)=x^4+4x^3-24x-28=0
Clearly, the coefficient condition isn't met, 4(4)(0)-(4)^3=8(-24) implies -64=-192 which obviously isn't true.
So now consider, f(y)=y^2+2y+1 and g(y)=y^2-2y+1.
Now suppose in h(x) we make the substitution y-2=x, i.e. \lambda=2
Then h(x)=f(g(y)).   ( ) 21:32, 30 July 2009 (UTC)
To Bo Jacoby, Yes your correct about the solution route being, a 3rd then 2 2nd degree polynomials, isn't that necessarily true for a solution by radicals to the Quartic due to Galois Theory? Some noteworthy differences include, I don't bother eliminating the x^3 term unlike Ferrari, rather than building two complete squares I build two Quadratics, and of Composition form instead of on opposite sides of an equality.   ( ) 21:36, 30 July 2009 (UTC)
Well I'll be damned, makes me wonder if I tried that when I first came up with the composition idea. Thanks for everything though.   ( ) 23:46, 30 July 2009 (UTC)
Since we know that Monty will disclose a goat why is the contestant's original chance of picking the car not one half?
Also -
What if there were two contestants? If the two thirds chance of winning by swapping was correct then since one of them winning is a certainty, we have two thirds plus two thirds is greater than one, which is not correct.
Bob Coote
Wentworth Falls
NSW Australia     Preceding   comment added by   ( ) 22:00, 28 July 2009 (UTC) 