Orly Taitz was born to a Jewish family in Chisinau, Moldavian SSR in the Soviet Union (present day Moldova). Both of her parents were science teachers. In 1981, Orly immigrated to Israel, where she obtained a dentistry degree at Hebrew University. In 1987, she met Yosef Taitz who proposed four months later. Orly immigrated to the United States in May 1987, marrying the Latvian-born Yosef in Las Vegas, Nevada. Taitz became a naturalized United States citizen in 1992. She received her law degree from Taft Law School and was admitted to practice law in California in December 2002.
 and owns dental practices in nearby Mission Viejo and Rancho Santa Margarita. She has three sons, holds a second degree black belt in Taekwondo, and speaks five languages; English, Hebrew, Romanian, Russian and Spanish.
Before her national news exposure, Taitz was quoted in ''The Orange County Register'' in 2006 supporting Israeli military actions against Hamas and Hezbollah, and downplaying the impact of the espionage trial of two American Israel Public Affairs Committee staffers (charges against both were subsequently dropped). Taitz has also said that she lost relatives in the Holocaust and that her grandmother witnessed the Kishinev pogrom.
Taitz alleges that U.S. President Barack Obama is not a natural-born citizen of the United States and is therefore ineligible to serve as President. She claims he was born in Kenya and that he falsified his Selective Service papers and his application to the Illinois bar. "I believe  is the most dangerous thing one can imagine, in that he represents radical communism and radical Islam: He was born and raised in radical Islam, all of his associations are with radical Islam, and he was groomed in the environment of the dirty Chicago mafia. Can there be anything scarier than that?"
Taitz has made other Obama-related claims, including:
Taitz has also supported a number of other theories not directly related to Obama, including:
Taitz has also advocated numerous Internet-related theories, including PayPal attacks, the deletion of her Wikipedia entry, and Google's flagging her webpage as an attack site and suppressing search results for her name.
 A California Court of Appeal affirmed the dismissal on October 25, 2010, and the Supreme Court of California declined, without comment, to review the case on February 2, 2011; Taitz was not counsel of record for the appeals.
Taitz filed an emergency petition in the California Supreme Court in 2008 on behalf of Libertarian vice presidential candidate Gail Lightfoot to stop the certification of California's 2008 election results because of the challenge to Obama's eligibility. The California Supreme Court denied the petition, and the U.S. Supreme Court declined to hear the case.
 The dismissal criticized Taitz's legal abilities, stated her behavior was "unethical", and suggested that Taitz "may have suborned perjury".
  The United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit heard oral arguments for this case on May 2, 2011.
 Taitz filed an appeal in the Eleventh Circuit, which was dismissed on November 24, 2009, due to a failure to prosecute the appeal.
In September 2009, Taitz was retained by Captain Connie Rhodes, a U.S. Army physician. Rhodes sought a restraining order to prevent her forthcoming deployment to Iraq. In the request for a restraining order, Taitz argued the deployment order was illegal since Obama was illegally serving as President. On September 16, federal judge Clay D. Land rejected the motion and denounced it as frivolous. In his opinion, the judge noted that Rhodes had not previously raised any objections to orders she had received from Obama since he had been sworn in. He noted that while she seemed to have "conscientious objections" to taking orders from Obama, she did not seem to object to serving under him "as long as she is permitted to remain on American soil". Land then upbraided Taitz for using military officers as pawns to further her claims that Obama was not qualified to be President. He also expressed astonishment at Taitz' apparent misunderstanding of American judicial fundamentals, saying that she was trying to make Obama prove his innocence' to 'charges' that are based upon conjecture and speculation".
Within hours of Land's decision, Taitz told the news site ''Talking Points Memo'' that she felt Land's refusal to hear her case was an act of treason. Two days later, she filed a motion to stay Rhodes' deployment pending rehearing of the dismissal order. She repeated her treason allegations against Land and made several other intemperate statements, including claims that Land was aiding and abetting purported aspirations of "dictatorship" by Obama. Land rejected the motion as frivolous and ordered her to show cause why she should not be fined $10,000 for abuse of judicial process.
A few hours later, a letter bearing Rhodes's signature arrived, stating that Taitz filed the motion without her knowledge or consent, asking Land to remove Taitz as her attorney of record in the case, and stating that it was her "plan to file a complaint with the California State Bar due to  reprehensible and unprofessional actions". On September 26, 2009, Taitz filed a motion with the court seeking to withdraw as counsel for Rhodes, so she could divulge in court "privileged attorney-client communications" since the dismissed ''Rhodes'' case "is now a quasi-criminal prosecution of the undersigned attorney, for the purpose of punishment".
On October 13, 2009, Judge Clay Land ordered "Counsel Orly Taitz ... to pay $20,000 to the United States, through the Middle District of Georgia Clerk's Office, within thirty days of the date of this Order as a sanction for her misconduct in violation of Rule 11 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure." Land's decision stated:
Upon learning of Land's ruling, Taitz said she would appeal the sanction, declaring that Judge Land was "scared to go against the regime" of the "oppressive" Obama administration, and that the sanction was an attempt to "intimidate" her. On March 15, 2010, the Eleventh Circuit affirmed the sanctions against Taitz, ordering her to pay the $20,000 fine.
In July 2010, Taitz applied to the U.S. Supreme Court to stay the enforcement of sanctions, arguing that "allowing sanctions by judge Land to stand, will signify beginning of tyranny in the United States of America and end to the Constitutional Republic which is the foundation of this nation". The application was submitted to Justice Thomas on July 8 and denied by him on July 15. Doubting that Justice Thomas signed the denial order, Taitz claimed to have requested of Chief Justice Roberts that Thomas's signature be presented to her for verification. 
In the meantime, on August 9, the federal government filed an abstract of judgment, a document placing a lien in the amount of $20,000 plus interest on all her real property, prompting Taitz to say, "I will pay the money, and I will continue fighting," should it happen that her application for stay is ultimately denied and that the Supreme Court consents to her request to authenticate Justice Thomas's signature. On August 16, after being resubmitted to Justice Alito who in turn referred it to the full court, the application for stay was again denied. On January 10, 2011, the Court declined, without comment, to hear the case.
On January 27, 2010, Taitz, ''in propria persona'', filed a petition for writ of ''quo warranto''. On April 14, 2010, U.S. District Court Chief Judge Royce C. Lamberth dismissed the petition, and, alluding to the novel ''Don Quixote'', wrote, "The Court is not willing to go tilting at windmills with her."
Taitz has also actively promoted her theories in Israel, where she claims that "the vast majority" of the population supports her views. She has appeared on the Channel 10 nightly news show ''London and Kirschenbaum'', was the subject of a feature on Channel 1 TV, and filmed a video for the website Arutz 7. Israel's Russian language media, such as Channel 9 and ''Vesti'', the country's largest Russian-language newspaper, have also covered Taitz.|accessdate=April 29, 2011|date=August 18, 2009|last=Hartman|first=Benjamin L.|work=Haaretz}}
 Dunn had registered as a Democrat in the state of Florida in 1999, but that registration had lapsed before he filed for the Republican primary.
On May 12, 2010, Barnett (named plaintiff from Taitz's lawsuit ''Barnett v. Obama'') filed a lawsuit in the Sacramento County Superior Court alleging that Dunn is not eligible to run for Secretary of State.
 losing by over 900,000 votes.
  On March 17, 2011, the judge ruled against Taitz.
Taitz received media attention in connection with Obama eligibility questions in late 2008. She was interviewed by co-hosts David Shuster and Tamron Hall on MSNBC on August 3, 2009. Various media outlets described her appearance on the network as an "implosion", while Taitz asserted that Shuster, who is Jewish, was a "brownshirt", a charge she would repeat in a phone interview the following week.
Fox News commentator Bill O'Reilly called Taitz a "nut". In response, she and pastor James David Manning organized a protest outside Fox News headquarters in New York City in November, 2009, which drew an estimated 15 to 20 attendees. In 2010, artist Dan Lacey produced a widely discussed painting of a nude Orly Taitz after giving birth to an object resembling a pancake; Taitz herself expressed outrage at the painting, and urged Lacey to reveal the identity of his sponsor. Lacey subsequently jokingly "revealed" that he had been funded by George Soros.
In April 2011, Lawrence O'Donnell invited Taitz on MSNBC so that she could address Obama's long form birth certificate. When Taitz only wanted to talk about Obama's alleged Selective Service papers and refused to comment on his birth certificate, O'Donnell kicked her off the show, stating: "Look, she's crazy. I invited a crazy person on this show to see if the crazy person...could say something responsive, something human, to the document that was released today...and she wants to play with all of her other kid's toys."