The first school to be erected in Camilla, Georgia was located where the current Mitchell County Hospital is located and only educated whites due to Jim Crow laws. Black students were soon educated grades 1   12 at Rockdale High School. In 1940s, schools in Mitchell County were consolidated and all blacks were educated at Camilla Consolidated School (formerly Walker-Inman Elementary School, MLK, Jr. Road), and all whites were educated at the Mitchell County Board Of Education Building (formerly Mitchell County High School building, S. Harney Street).
During the late 1960s, early 1970s schools were integrated and Camilla Consolidated African American students were transferred to Mitchell County High School (S. Harney Street). And students not wanting to integrate were built a private school, Westwood Schools in the Mitchell County District to serve citizens. The former Camilla Consolidated on MLK, Jr. Road were consisted into an Elementary school soon later a Junior High School for Mitchell County students.
In the early 1980s, Mitchell County High School students were built a new school on Newton Road the current one and all students from Baker County were transferred to Mitchell County naming the schools Mitchell-Baker High School. All students at former Camilla Consolidated schools were then transferred to former Mitchell County High School on S. Harney To Become Mitchell County Junior High School grades 3-8 until building of Mitchell County Middle School and Primary Schools on Newton Road. Mitchell Co. Elementary was transferred into a central office building and students were soon transferred back to formerly to Camilla Consolidated and that school soon became Mitchell County Elementary School (MLK Jr. Rd). The school was renamed for Camilla residents Hugh Inman and former Rockdale principal Walker for making pathways for many blacks in Mitchell County and named Walker-Inman Elementary School.
Due to rapid growth of population in Mitchell County, Mitchell County Elementary School students are being transferred to South Mitchell County Elementary School (formerly Mitchell County Primary School) and the building of a new school, North Mitchell County Elementary located in Baconton, GA on Highway 93 grades Pre-K through 5th. With now North Mitchell County Elementary School, South Mitchell County Elementary School, Mitchell County Middle School, and Mitchell County High School educating children to be productive citizens in the 21st century.
There are over 60 teachers at Mitchell County High School.
Mitchell County High offers a wide rigorous curriculm to it students including College Prep Courses, AP Courses offered to students, & SWGTC course offered to give students college credit while working on their high school diploma at the same time.
Vocational classes include Agricultural classes, Business Education, Family and Consumer Sciences, Healthcare Sciences, and JROTC.
MCHS also has a very strong Fine Arts department, which includes Band, and Chorus.
The school encourages its students to engage in as many athletic teams as possible, as long as the student keeps a recommended grade point average.
The school's boys basketball team was of the most winningest basketball teams in the state of Georgia.
But the girls basketball team has been going farther the past four years.
The football program is coached by Head Coach & Offensive Coordinator: Dondrial Pinkins, Defensive Coordinator: Kerry English and Assistant coaches include: Derrick Silas,Jermaine King, Derex Woumnm, Daron Hodges, Sven Colbert, Al Brown. Athletic Trainer: Jennifer Tucker and Statistician: Paxton Crosby.
Mitchell County High Baseball Team is also coached by Kenneth Harris
Mitchell County High's tennis program is coached by Kenneth Harris.
Home games for High School are played Friday nights, Middle School and most JV are played Thursdays, Baconton Charter occupies on Thursdays and Westwood on Thursdays.