As a part of implementing his techniques, Mitchell personally waterboarded suspected terror suspects.
The CIA, in an Inspector General Report, concluded that there was no scientific reason to believe that the program Mitchell designed was medically safe or would produce reliable information.
Mitchell reportedly says he grew up poor in Florida and joined the Air Force in 1974, "seeking adventure." While stationed in Alaska, he learned to disarm unexploded ordnance and earned bachelor   s and master   s degrees in psychology. He earned his Ph.D. at the University of South Florida in 1986, with a thesis comparing diet and exercise in controlling hypertension.
In 1988, Mitchell succeeded Bruce Jessen as the "Survival, Evasion, Resistance, Escape" (SERE) psychologist at the Air Force Survival School at Fairchild Air Force Base outside Spokane, Washington.
Mitchell retired in 2001 from his last military assignment as psychologist to a special operations unit in North Carolina, and started a training company called Knowledge Works from his new home in Tampa, Florida. At the time of the September 11 attacks, he and Jessen received contracts from the Central Intelligence Agency as consultants on interrogation. 
Mitchell attended civilian conferences as well, and founded additional corporations, named Wizard Shop (later renamed Mind Science), and What If. In 2004, Knowledge Works was certified by the American Psychological Association as a provider of continuing professional education training.
In 2005, the partners formed a company called Mitchell Jessen and Associates, with offices in Spokane and Virginia and five additional associates, four of them from military SERE programs. By 2007, the company employed around 60 people, including former CIA interrogator Deuce Martinez; Karen Gardner, a former senior training official at the FBI Academy; and Roger Aldrich, a "legendary" military survival trainer.
By 2009, the "enhanced interrogation" techniques they pioneered were more controversial. In 2008, the APA cancelled Knowledge Works' certification; and in April 2009, the CIA canceled Mitchell and Jessen's contracts.
In 2010, Dr. Jim L. H. Cox filed a formal ethics complaint against Mitchell in the state of Texas, where Mitchell remains a licensed psychologist. The American Psychological Association sent a letter to the Texas State Board of Psychologists calling the allegations in the complaint "represent 'patently unethical' actions inconsistent with the organization's ethics guidelines.", If "a member of the APA were found to have committed the acts alleged against Mitchell, 'he or she would be expelled from the APA membership,'" The letter is the first of its kind issued in the board's history.
When asked about these allegations Mitchell called the complaint libelous and said it is "riddled throughout with fabricated details, lies, distortions and inaccuracies. The Board of Examiners of Psychologists dismissed the complaint against Mitchell February 10, 2011, saying there wasn't enough evidence to prove Mitchell violated its rules. This was described as one of several recent cases where such complaints about post-9/11 ethical violations were dismissed for lack of proof.