Mansion was founded in 2003 by private investors who set up operations in Gibraltar. The online casino, poker and sports betting services were launched in September 2004, under brands MansionCasino.com and MansionPoker.com.
In 2005, Mansion, in association with Fox, produced the Emmy-Award-winning Poker Dome Challenge series, in which 26 episodes were broadcast over the Fox Network in the US and then internationally.
In 2005, Mansion became the official sponsors of Tottenham Hotspur F.C.. 
In 2007, Mansion acquired Casino.com and converted it from an online marketing site to an online gaming site.
The company operates under a gaming license granted by the government of Gibraltar. Mansion owns and operates a number of gaming sites under the terms of the gaming license, including:
Launched in 1997 as an online advertising portal, Casino.com was converted into an online casino operator by the Mansion in September 2007. 
Casino.com offers traditional card and table games, as well as slots, video poker and progressive bonus jackpot games. The site is currently available in Spanish, Italian, German, French, Swedish, Dutch, Danish and Russian. Games are available in Adobe Flash or to download, and can be played for real money or for fun. Introduced in 2009, Casino.com runs a reward scheme called Loyalty Lounge.
Established in 2004, MansionCasino.com targets the British market using the tagline 'The finest English style casino on the web'. Available games include classic casino card and table games, slot machines, video poker, keno and progressive bonus jackpot games. All games are available to download, and a selection are available in Flash. MansionCasino.com software is provided by Playtech.
Established in 2004, MansionPoker.com operates daily, weekly and monthly guaranteed poker tournaments, where players can either buy-in directly, or enter via a daily satellite series. The site's gaming software is provided by Playtech. The website loyalty club is called Club Mansion and was launched in 2009.