His award citation reads:
Bertie was born on May 17, 1923. His official residence at the time of his award was listed as Eau Claire, Wisconsin.
Born in Mitchell, South Dakota, Jack grew up in St. Paul, Minnesota, and attended high school in Eau Claire, Wisconsin.
Jack was a retired Naval Captain, proud of having served during World War II as an Aircraft Carrier Fighter Pilot.  A member of a squadron based on the flagship U.S.S. Bunker Hill, he had a Hellcat practically shot out from underneath him during a sunrise attack on Tinian near Saipan on February 22, 1944.  One of the  four    Black Chickens    sent to open    the day of devastation    on Japan   s medium bomber base in the Mariana Islands, his squad flew through a rain squall emerging to find themselves wing to wing as much as three deep in Japanese Zeros. 
Only three    Black Chickens    returned to the carrier, but five Zeros ended their careers that day thanks to the squad. Ensign Bertie was the outstanding Ace of the day, bringing down three enemy aircraft himself, despite extensive damage to his fighter from Zero fire and Japanese anti-aircraft guns, and sustaining as many as twenty-two bullet wounds in his left arm and leg. Although wounded and without a compass, he managed to navigate 130 miles back to his ship by means of the sun.  With an incapacitated left arm, he managed to manually lower his flaps and wheels, put his guns on safety and land safely.  His unsalvageable  plane was pushed over the side of the ship.
He retired from the Naval Reserve in 1983.
On November 29, 1952, he married Joan B. Loiselle, of Chippewa Falls, Wisconsin and they lived in the Twin Cities.  They have two children, Eileen Anne, of Superior, Arizona and John Christopher of St. Paul.
Co-founder of Bertie and Bettenburg, Attorneys at Law, Jack graduated from the College of St. Thomas and St. Paul College of Law (now William Mitchell) following his military service.  He was a lifelong member of the Midway Kiwanis Club, the Knights of Columbus, Veterans of Foreign Wars, the American Legion, and the Military order of the Purple Heart. 
He was an avid golfer and a member of the Town and Country Club as long as he was able to swing a driver.