Sukhee Kang (         ) was born at Yeji-dong near Jongno 5-ga in Seoul, South Korea to merchant parents from the city of Kaesong. He served military draft duty at ROK Army in 1973-75  and immigrated to the United States in June 1977 from South Korea after receiving his Bachelor   s degree in agricultural economics from Korea University in Seongbuk-gu, Seoul. Also when he was in a college, he also joined the English debating club named Seoul PTC (Pine Tree Club) and served as the president in 1971-72.  He received honorary doctoral degrees in Business Administration from Dongseo University in Busan, South Korea in March 2011.  He began his professional career at Circuit City as a sales and customer service representative for 15 years (1977-92) , then since 1992, volunteered at KASF(Korean American Scholarship Foundation), KACF(Korean American Community Foundation) and the Orange County Branch of Korean American Corporation, serving as the president in KADC(Korean American Democratic Committee) .
Sukhee Kang is married to his wife Joanne Kang (nee Choi) in 1977.  His son, Alan, is a research scientist at Johnson & Johnson and is currently earning his MBA from the University of Southern California.  His daughter, Angie, is a graduate of UC Berkeley School of Law and is currently an attorney at Latham and Watkins' Los Angeles office.
Kang first got involved in politics following the 1992 Los Angeles Riots, during which more than 750 Korean businesses suffered extensive losses.  Following the riots, Kang took on a more active role in civic and community affairs, and served as Chairman of the Korean American Coalition of Orange County and the Korean American Scholarship Foundation, Western Region.
Prior to his service on the Irvine City Council, Kang was a Governor   s appointee on the California Workforce Investment Board and was the Mayor   s appointee to the Irvine Finance Commission.
In November 2004, he was elected Irvine City Councilmember, and was re-elected in November 2006. He served twice as the Mayor Pro Tem. Kang served as a member of the Orange County Great Park Board, Orange County Sanitation District Board, Transportation Corridor Agency Board, Executive Steering Committee of the League of California Cities Orange County Division, and Orange County Transportation Authority Measure M Super Committee.
In November 2008 Sukhee Kang defeated Christina L. Shea, a Republican councilwoman, with 52.2% of the vote, to become the first Korean American to serve as mayor of a major U.S. city.
Kang was elected to a second term in November 2010 after defeating Christopher Gonzales, a Republican Party candidate, with 63.2% of the vote. 
As mayor, Kang backed a $120 million deal with the Orange County Transportation Authority to lay the groundwork for a citywide public transit system.
Kang endorsed the Northwood Gratitude and Honor Memorial and worked to achieve the unanimous Irvine City Council vote for its approval in December, 2009.  The Northwood Gratitude and Honor Memorial, dedicated on November 14, 2010, has 5,714 names of U.S. service members that lost their lives in the current wars in Iraq and Afghanistan. It will be updated annually as needed.