Note:  If you are seeing this page as a result of an attempt to re-nominate an article for deletion, you must manually edit the AfD nomination links in order to create a new discussion page using the name format of  .  When you create the new discussion page, please provide a link to this old discussion in your nomination. -->
The result was    '''delete'''. Consensus seems to be that the sources are either too unreliable or too sparsely mention the company to truly meet the notability criteria. Much of the keep side relied on arguments like   without refuting the points brought up by the delete side. ''' ''' ''( )'' 21:28, 30 August 2009 (UTC)
Non-notable company, declined speedy nominee.  Makes a claim to notability, but nothing to substantiate it.   ( ) 17:34, 23 August 2009 (UTC)
Regarding your argument "I looked up both ''Lori Bongiorno'' (but she didn't have a Wikipedia article) and ''Yahoo! Green'' - which did not refer to her either."  I'm siting the Yahoo Green article about Lori Bongiorno http://green.yahoo.com/blog/the_conscious_consumer
Regarding your argument "or a news article on a TV show, rather than a quick "here is one example of such a site 'favourpals'" - 
Per their article, they had two full TV stories, one on Good Day Sacramento, and the other on KRON San Francisco TV, both are in the category of major TV Market of the USA. I do not mean any disrespect when I say that your opinion is very subjective when you chose to over look those two full stories and only signify the ones that you believe do not qualify the notability.
I really wish other environmentalists can join this conversation which I think is missing the point by focusing more on "word's definitions" rather than the green issue at hand.  Favorpals advocacy for micro-transactions and excess inventory recycling for both services and products is an avant-guard economical theory, and it might be what the world need to recover from this vulnerable stage of unbalanced economy.  It's really unfortunate to see them being dismissed over the subjective understanding of the word "notability", of which, in my opinion, they had fulfilled and qualified. -Amazis     Preceding   comment added by   ( ) 19:04, 27 August 2009 (UTC) 