In 1908, two women from Boston decided to sit for the Massachusetts bar examination. A lawyer named Arthur Winfield MacLean agreed to tutor them, and other students followed over the next few years. MacLean's wife called the school Portia Law School after the heroine of Shakespeare's ''The Merchant of Venice''. From 1908 to 1938, Portia Law School was the sister school to the then all male, Suffolk University Law School. This partnership fostered because MacLean was a law partner with Suffolk founder, Gleason Archer, Sr. MacLean also served as the school's first Dean from 1908-1943. 
 In 1922, the school moved into its first permanent building in Boston's Beacon Hill neighborhood, when enrollment had reached 228. In 1926, Portia was awarded the authority to award LL.M. degrees to both men and women. A few years later, in 1938, Portia Law School became a fully integrated coeducational institution. As the school entered the 1950s it saw its student body shift from a student body that had a majority female population to a predominately male student body. 1963 saw Portia Law School begin the process of applying for American Bar Association accreditation, and some of the steps the school took included restructuring its board of governors and launching the schools first law review. In 1969, the school changed its name to New England School of Law to coincide with its accreditation granted by the ABA.http://www.abanet.org/legaled/approvedlawschools/alpha.html
As New England Law neared its 75th anniversary, new programs were started, the first was the creation of Law Day in 1970 and then the opening of its clinical law services office in 1971. The clinical law services program is performed by the law students to those who did not have the economic means to seek paid legal assistance.
In 1980, New England moved into its current location; which is located in the Boston Common neighborhood. To honor the 75th anniversary of New England Law the 41st President, George H. W. Bush, was the keynote speaker for the celebration.
In the 1980s, the school set up a program which allowed students to study abroad and work with former Soviet Bloc nations develop their own legal systems. New England Law also became a co-founder of the Consortium for Innovative Legal Education; which allows students to study aboard at countries throughout the world and learn about foreign law and put their current education to work through externships. In 1996, New England Law students worked with Office of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Tribunals by providing legal research and analysis for war crimes in Rwanda and the former nation of Yugoslavia.
 In 2002, New England Law expanded its campus by buying adjacent buildings around the schools current location. Also, in 2008, New England School of Law began a new campaign to rebrand itself as "New England Law | Boston", with the purpose to put an emphasis on its location.
 The main academic building is a five-story building on Stuart Street in Boston's theater district, which includes classrooms, faculty offices, and the schools library. Clinic, administrative, and law review offices are in a nearby building in the Bay Village on Church Street. retrieved 6-6-2009. Offices for the school's admissions office, administrative departments, clinical law office, and student publications are located in a two-story building two blocks from the main academic building. New England Law also shares its bookstore facilities with Tufts University.
New England School of law offers full-time and part-time enrollment with an application deadline of March 15. In 2008, the school accepted 56.7% of all applicants who applied to the school. Enrolled students from that entering class had Law School Admission Test (LSAT) scores in the range of 149 to 153 (25th-75th percentile). New England Law offers full-time time and part-time (both day and evening) divisions and the student-to-faculty ratio is 23:1.http://www.nesl.edu/admissions/ataglance.cfm It is currently a medium sized law school with approximately 1,100 students, with a majority of its students in the full-time program. retrieved on 6-7-2009.
New England Law has three specializations in environmental law, international law, and tax law and offers an LL.M. in advanced legal studies. New England Law also offers a program where a student may spend a period of time up to two academic semesters at a law school associated with the . The schools taking part in the program include California Western School of Law, South Texas College of Law, and William Mitchell College of Law.
New England Law is American Bar Association (ABA) accredited and is a member of the Association of American Law Schools. It is also a founding member of the Consortium for Innovative Legal Education. According to U.S. News and World Report, New England Law ranks in the "Fourth Tier" of law schools in the United States. New England Law is ranked as the 45th best law school in the country for those who want to be public defenders.
The Center for Law and Social Responsibility, CLSR, works mostly pro bono and public service activities. It is run and supported by students, faculty and alumni. The CLSR serves as a socially responsible organization that works with numerous projects that are representative of its members, as well as issues that public service lawyers are currently working with. The CLSR also works to support classroom projects, scholarship, and other activities that convey current social problems.
The Center for Law and International Polic, CILP, is utilized by both students and faculty for research, analysis and produce resource material on numerous topics. Some of the topics include CIA renditions in Europe, intergovernmental peacekeeper accountability and hate speech. Students also have the chance to practice international law in overseas externships. Most students work assist in prosecutions related to war crimes, because of the schools relationships with international criminal courts and tribunals. CILP also hosts the annual international law conference, by creating more awareness in global legal work, for issues such as Chinese reunification and Taiwanese independence, competition laws, responses to rogue regimes, the Rwandan genocide, and the development of new countries out of the former Yugoslavia.
New England Law's Center for Business Law offers academic credit in conjunction with legal externship positions through one of the CBL   s three institutes, which individually focus on corporate governance and ethics, intellectual property, and tax law. Typical placements include Liberty Mutual, RNK Telecommunication, Natural Microsystems, Inc., the Boston Stock Exchange, and the National Association of Securities Dealers.
New England Law offers more than a dozen clinics each semester in a wide range of areas including public interest, tax law, administrative law, criminal law, family law, health law, immigration law, land use law, and mediation. Students are eligible to participate in clinics in the first semester of their second year of law school.
New England Law has some notable alumni, including Brian Darling, Director of United States Senate relations for the Heritage Foundation, Joseph R. Driscoll, Norfolk representative to the Massachusetts House of Representatives, Martha Ware, and Leonard P. Zakim, religious and civil rights leader in Boston, as well as Andrew Vachss, Class of 1975, children's lawyer and author of the Burke series of novels, and Joseph F. D'Antonio (1993- Dean's List) the Senior Associate Commissioner for Compliance and Governance for the Big East Conference, headquartered in Providence, Rhode Island. Paul Pelletier, Principal Deputy Chief at Fraud Section, Criminal Division, Justice Department who is lead prosecutor on Allen Stanford.