I want to know why most plant leaves are green. I know that is it because of the pigments in the leave reflecting green light, but what I want to know is why that holds true for most all plants. Why is the green wave lenght of light something that needs to be reflected by the plant? Why not blue? Is there something about the middle of the visible spectrum that makes it disadvantagous to absorb? Does it have have to do with the amount of energy in that part of the spectrum?--  ( ) 00:08, 26 August 2009 (UTC)
I was handingling this little black snake on a beach in southern BC and I thought it was a garter snake and I considered it harmless, but now that I am zooming in on the photo off camera it doesn't look so much like a garter snake anymore and I since I can't really identify it I was wondering if anyone recognized it or could make an id on it, as I would like to know if I almost got myself bit by a poisonous snake? 
You see nuclear plants, but they take so long to build. You always hear that solar panel electricity costs too much money (but they're very useful for portable or low power and remote things) What could be something we could do right now and will be finished quicker, so it will tide us over and help a few percent and not cost as much money?
If you lay an enormous area of continous copper plates on a desert and paint them black maybe cover it with glass plates (finally the greenhouse effect will help us), place a similar zinc plate next to it, join them with power lines, and connect the other two ends to the power grid would any electricity flow? Or would that work only with expensive doped semiconductors? Would a conductive bath replacing the short wire help? Or use more traditional methods of temperature gradient exploitation with pipes and turbines and stuff except imstead of having to continously make the gradient with fuels we just do something as simple as change the thermal properties? Desert caves could be the cool end. The temperature just a little inside a cave is constantly similar to the average annual temperature, which is not hot. I've never heard of "caval energy" before. Edit: Or nearby high altitude mountains. Or find an already naturally ''dark'' desert and do.. something. 
They can print solar panels now. On plastic film like an inkjet printer. So what about pouring them? Some sort of viscous liquid that would be dropped from planes or helicopters over a large square area of desert, left to dry set freeze cool down or whatever until it builds up a layer, and then do it all over again with the other pourable substances: the insulator, maybe a protectant and base layer, and of course the opposite semiconductor (p and n), then after that's done, we just build power lines connect it to the grid, and use it forever? If exploitation of artificially-created albedo (and thernal mass etc.) asymmetry is done on a truely massive scale, maybe we should be careful not to negatively impact local or even global climate, but even the entire global heating and precipitation from heat-island effect from partly changing the color of 0.01 of all land plus all the energy use is positively miniscule, and local precipitational changes are small, so it might be benign? Either that or find some ways to make solar panels less like microchips and more like roadwork. I'm all out of ideas now.   ( ) 06:05, 26 August 2009 (UTC)
New planets that are being found are being referred to as being in or out of their parent star's
But the concept is being used to insinuate more than water being present, it is used to suggest these systems could have life.
That is easy to accept if you ignore all the other factors involved in the process, and believe Water=Life. 
As there are many factors other than irradiances that would keep H2O from being liquid,(Mass/cohesion, Abundance of elements/Metalicity, Excessive X-rays/M-type star, Amount of CO2) it is a little deceptive and irresponsible to make the suggestion to people that a planet may have life because it is X distance from its star. The idea of a habitable planet is flawed as it is, '''but I would like to know if anyone can find fault with the Solar Constant comparison between Earth and other planets?''' Simply as a comparison of heat, a more direct comparison, no insuations, as heat does not itself equal life. (note: Irradiance, Insolation, and Solar Constant are synonymous.)
If you want liquid water, you are also going to need an atmosphere probably at least equivalent to earth at 25,000 ft or lower, or all your water might boil away.    ( ) 13:27, 26 August 2009 (UTC)
In a lot of cases the Radius and Effective temperature of a parent star '''is known''', or can be calculated using the formulas at the Luminosity article. The formula that calculates luminosity from Radius and Temperature and the formaula that calculates luminosity from distance and insolation are obviously Equal for the Sun and Earth data. and basic algebra yields:
Having said that I am not saying this should go directly into an article. 
But I do remember reading a debate where it was pointed out that using '''known data''' with '''known formulas''' is not synthesis.
In a lot of cases scientists are going as far as to speculate on on effective temperature and surface temperatures, using this albedo or that emissivity, but on the other hand if the algebra is correct then the insolation is closer to fact. Definitely less misleading than saying there may be life on Gliese 581 c:
Since you seemed to be interested in the topic, I thought you might not have seen this:
I've got a handful of different kinds of lenses and I'm trying to figure out a way to combine them into some sort of telescope. I don't need anything permanent, I'm not actually going to use it for anything, I'd just like to see how far I can see while keeping it in focus.
The different sorts of lenses I have:
18-55mm 1:3.5-5.6G
55-200mm 1:4-5.6G (both are obviously complex lenses, I don't really know what that means towards putting them together with other lenses)
I know it's kind of a random assemblage of lenses, but I really don't know very much at all about optics, and even less about the math, so can anyone see any possible configuration that might give me a little more zoom than just the binoculars (at the moment, the most powerful of the lenses)? Thanks in advance!   ( ) 08:07, 26 August 2009 (UTC)
Thanks for the tips. Would the eyepiece from a crappy "toy" telescope work? I can get one of those easily, and hey the cheaper the better. And is there any system for testing out the "oculars" I have that I might be able to find something that actually magnifies quicker than just placing them all randomly? The main problem I can see just arranging them myself is that the field of view I get is almost always incredibly small, even as small as a dot in the near distance.   ( ) 12:54, 26 August 2009 (UTC)
My understanding of a telescope is you need an object lens of long focal length to create an enlarged virtual image, then a lens of much smaller focal length to look through and magnify that image. '''Do not aim it at the sun, because it will start a fire or instantly blind you.''' If you have 2 lenses, check their focal lengths by forming an image from a distant light (do not set something on fire with a sun image). Then place the lens of longer focal length at the end of a stick or in a tube with duct tape (or precision machined holders). Aim it at the object you wish to observe and note where on the stick it forms a real image by holding a piece of paper parallel to the lens and moving it back and forth. Place your shorter focal length lens on the other side of that real image and remove the piece of paper on which the image from the object lens appeared. Adjust the spacing according to the lens formula or empirically. Look through your telescope and enjoy the world made closer. A fine adjustment method for the eyepiece lens is highly desirable. Cardboard or PVC tubes to exclude extraneous light, painted black inside to decrease reflections,  are helpful. A larger object lens collects more light.   ( ) 03:05, 28 August 2009 (UTC)
As a retired computer scientist, I've dabbled at reading some anthropological topics, including history of science, historical linguistics, and prehistoric discovery via Y-chromosome typing.
By coincidence(?) three of these topics had subtopics pointing to India.  I'll ask a question about one, and make comments about the other two.  The reason for combining three unrelated topics into one will become apparent. 
1.  History of laws of celestial motion.
The Laws of Motion of Kepler and Newton are a major triumph of Western civilization, and often treated as the single greatest discovery that ushered in Modern Science.  Yet we see in Wikipedia and other websites that Indian astronomers, notably Aryabhatta and Bhaskara, had developed similar methods.
Is this true?  I don't see a similar claim made in a 16-year old print encyclopedia.  I'd hate to think that the claims of jingoists (associated with any country), abetted by tools like Wikipedia, could distort records of the history of science!
Assuming the claims about ancient Hindu astronomy are true, can anyone point to me on-line documents based on pre-Keplerian writings?  In relevant Wikipedia pages I see no sources cited (except other source-free webpages).  The matter affects me personally, as my own page recites these (unsourced?) claims.
2. Homeland of the Indo-European speakers
This age-old riddle was solved several years ago (at least by any "preponderance of evidence" standard), but some academic Indian writers continue to insist that the language originated in South Asia.  Of these "Indocentric theorists", Harvard's eminent Professor of Sanskrit, Michael Witzel, writes:
3. Homeland of the R1a Y-chromosome Haplogroup
The most ancient Ydna Haplogroups of India (C5, H and L) are hardly found outside South Asia; this confirms that there has been no major post-paleolithic migration from India.  The strong presence of R1a among Slavs and Hindu Brahmins confirms an "Aryan migration" from Central to South Asia (although the details are a mystery).  Yet even this is denied by South Asian jingoists; nonsensical "theories" and faulty studies have polluted the relevant Wikipedia pages.  Indian genetic studies suffer severe flaws which can be explained only as deliberate obfuscation of caste-haplogroup correlations.  I have a page which discusses this:
Summary.  There is no need to debate the conclusions I offer in 2. and 3.  As time permits, I will make corrections to the relevant Wikipedia pages.  But I wonder if "Indian science" is like the caricature Americans used to have of "Soviet science."
Are the claims about the celestial motion knowledge of Aryabhatta and Bhaskara valid?  Or do they suffer from jingoist misinterpretations similar to those of Indian genetic and linguistic "science"?     Preceding   comment added by   (       ) 08:40, 26 August 2009 (UTC) 
Hi, James again.  First, my "complaint" wasn't "against" Wikipedia specifically -- I'm asking for knowledge, not Wiki editing.  One claim is that Aryabhatta wrote orbits were ellipses.  By itself this is only half of one of Kepler's Laws and of interest only if we can understand *how* Aryabhatta came to the conclusion.  Brahmagupta is said to have discovered the law of universal gravitation; again it would be nice to read something close to contemporary.  (Both these claims, by the way, are clearly made on the Wikipedia pages cited in preceding paragraph.)  The claim that Bhaskara had equations of celestial motion as good as 18th-century Europe may not appear directly in Wikipedia, but is made elsewhere on 'Net.  Again, my concern is NOT accuracy of Wikipedia itself, but rather: Are the claims true?  Are there on-line translations of early (i.e. pre-Kepler) Indian writing to help one judge the claims?  (My own pages are, of course, irrelevant to the question.  I wouldn't have mentioned them if I'd anticiapted it wou lead to the confused tangential comments above.)
Hoping for closure on this topic, I contacted a Professor of the history of math and science, who has written well-documented books on such topics; I learned that the claims about Hindu astronomy are exaggerated: Brahmagupta and Bhaskara seem to be very outstanding mathematicians but they used the Ptolemaic model and did NOT develop the celestial laws of Kepler and Newton.  (Aryabhatta's contributions may be grossly exaggerated.)
A report from a single Professor may not be dispositive, but I will correct my own webpages.  Some Wikipedia pages may parrot the exaggerations.  I do not have the time, energy, or knowledge to correct them; is this message sufficient to bring the matter to the attention of appropriate Wiki editors, or is there a more appropriate forum?
Among Wikipedia pages which may need editing are:
Bhaskara II:
The page for Aryabhata already seems more correct:
Aryabhata:
Does any animal besides some ''H. sapiens'' do this habitually? - ( ) 09:32, 26 August 2009 (UTC)
So, you guys are talking about the basal versus derived distinction, right? Are hedgehogs more basal than humans, or do we not know that? According to our article on Laurasiatheria, "''Within the Laurasiatheria, the Erinaceomorpha appears (surprisingly) to be the most divergent branch.''" Does that address the issue at hand? - ( ) 15:20, 30 August 2009 (UTC)
Hi if someone were to be standing up and then lift one of their knees off the ground towards their chest is this flexion of the hip? Is this also flexion of of the knee? Thanks   ( ) 12:42, 26 August 2009 (UTC)
Thanks a lot!   ( ) 19:48, 26 August 2009 (UTC)
Just for the record... The image of John Cleese shows him with a flexed hip with an adducted and partially extended knee? Is that right? Thanks   ( ) 19:09, 29 August 2009 (UTC)
I saw this cool video on YouTube on how to double your gas mileage. http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UHAUsGlfbx8&feature=channel
I just wanted to do a reality check with some people here. Are these tips effective and safe?   ( ) 15:06, 26 August 2009 (UTC)
Hello. Which geometric isomer is favoured when halogens react with alkynes to form alkenes? For example, does 1-butyne react with Br2 to yield 1,2-dibromo-trans-1-butene? Does the hydrogenation of haloalkynes differ? For example, does 1-bromopropyne react with H2 to form 1-bromo-trans-1-propene hypothetically? Thanks in advance. --  ( ) 15:46, 26 August 2009 (UTC)
My understanding is if we could replicate exotic matter which negated the attraction of mass (gravity) then we could practically move a bus into earth orbit using a model rocket engine since it would be essentially massless. 
So then why don't we have scientists at NASA working around the clock determining how to make this stuff? Even if we don't know exactly where to start if we know the characteristics of the final product we should be able to invent a variety of testable methods. Is this being pursued ''at all''?   ( ) 16:23, 26 August 2009 (UTC)
I checked out this section on nuclear fusion, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nuclear_fusion#Important_reactions but it didn't list fusion between two plain old hydrogen atoms to produce helium. Why is this?   ( ) 16:49, 26 August 2009 (UTC)
Approximately how long does it take for something to drift from South America to Cape Hope?  Just need a ballpark, 2 months about right?    ( ) 17:37, 26 August 2009 (UTC)
What are some Human unusual genetic trait pairings?  I mean, for instance, if you have Human genetic trait 'A' most likely you have Human genetic trait 'B'.  I think there is one pairing that I am familiar with and that is if you have unattached earlobes, you most likely are right handed.  But that can be wrong.  --  ( ) 20:25, 26 August 2009 (UTC)
I read some supposed UFO conspiracy reports online about how there are vast networks of underground tunnels all around the world that, for instance, one can travel from Wyoming to Italy in a matter of hours or something crazy like that.  If that were remotely true, wouldn't something or someone pick up on some vibrations, noise, etc?  Is it technologically possible to create something underground where it can be virtually undetected by the human population?  --  ( ) 20:37, 26 August 2009 (UTC)
See Sodium sulfate specifically the solubility curve, can anyone explain the 'knee' in the graph? Specifically does anyone know (or want to guess) 'exactly' what the species are that predominate before and after the knee.. please..expert attention only..ie no Yahoo! answers..   ( ) 21:55, 26 August 2009 (UTC)
In the thought experiment, known as Maxwell's demon, there exists a hypothetical "demon" that guards a trapdoor between two containers filled with gases at equal temperatures. By allowing fast molecules through the trapdoor in only one direction and only slow molecules in the other direction, the demon raises the temperature of one gas and lowers the temperature of the other, apparently violating the Second Law of Thermodynamics.
I know this is only a thought experiment but even so shouldn't there exist a degree of reality if the results are to be taken seriously? I don't understand how this should work if the temperature of the gas is the same in both containers the speed of the molecules would also be the same? OK there is bound to be one molecules speed that would be faster or slower but then the experiment could not have started with both containers of equal temperatures?
I'm not an expert in these things so keep it light if that's possible
Thanks     Preceding   comment added by   (       ) 21:48, 26 August 2009 (UTC) 
Good one. Thank you.     Preceding   comment added by   (       ) 22:19, 26 August 2009 (UTC) 
One can imagine all kinds of possible weird speed of light-related edits due to c, the speed of light in fiber optic cable, the different server continents, near-simultaneous edits to the same section of the same article, and the already irrational nature of relativity. What if the 3,000,000th article was created by two different people in two different continents, had the same name, but different text, the first bits arrived in Florida within 3 milliseconds of each other, and then the server synchronized. The later article had a closer sending PC, but longer fiber-optic path. The first PC to send bits had slower internet access so it wasn't finished till the other already did. The PCs were very near one other server site, and far from the other. One article version consisted of only a curse word repeated and was speedy deleted by a bot in milliseconds. Then the other was only barely above auto-bot deletion and deleted by a human doing recent changes patrol. Both PCs sent the edits in the form of a fast radio signal to their own fast private servers very close, but only to some of the Wikiservers. They automatically decoded them and made the same edits on local PCs held by fellow paradox creating comrades with senses of humor. And as we all know, if they do this fast enough, these will affect the servers before the ones on the Internet, because electromagnetic waves travel 200 million miles an hour faster through atmosphere than through glass fibers. They also did this with geostationary satellite internet connections. Another unrelated article arrived at Florida in the intervening time. Or maybe it was two other copies of 3,000,000A and B but they were encyclopedic ones. Okay, I'll stop now.   ( ) 22:21, 26 August 2009 (UTC)