A '''redirect''' is a page which has no content itself, but sends the reader to another article, section of an article, or page, usually from an alternative title. For example, if you type "UK" in the search box, or follow the wikilink UK, you will be taken to the article United Kingdom, with a note at the top of the page: "(Redirected from UK)". This is because the page UK contains the wikitext #REDIRECT&nbsp;United Kingdom, which defines it as a redirect page and indicates the target article. It is also possible to redirect to a specific   of the target page, using the #REDIRECT&nbsp;Page name#Section title syntax.
This page contains guidance on the proper use of redirects on Wikipedia. For technical help relating to how redirects work, see ''' '''. Other relevant pages are  ,   and  .
Reasons for creating and maintaining redirects include:
There are   to explain the   for a redirect. 
Note that redirects to other Wikimedia projects, other websites, or   do not work. These should be avoided or replaced with a  template. Soft redirects are also used in   (using the  template).
Most redirects are ''untargeted'', i.e. they lead simply to a page, not to any specific section of the page. This is usually done when there is more than one possible name under which an article might be sought (for example, Cellphone redirects to the article Mobile phone). For deciding which should be the actual title of the article, see  .
It is also possible to create a ''targeted redirect'', i.e. a redirect to a particular point on the target page     either a   or an  . For example, Malia Obama redirects to Family of Barack Obama#Malia and Sasha Obama. Therefore, entering "''Malia Obama''" will bring the searcher straight to that section of the article Family of Barack Obama which deals with "Malia and Sasha Obama".
Consider that when the target page is displayed, it is likely that the top of the page will not be shown, so the user may not see the helpful "(redirected from... )" text unless they know to scroll back to the top. This is less likely to cause confusion if the redirect is to a heading with the same name as the redirect.
The text given in the link on a targeted redirect page must exactly match the target section heading or anchor text, including capitalization. (In the absence of a match, the reader will simply be taken to the top of the target page.) It is often helpful to leave a   in the target text, to inform other editors that a section title is linked, so that if the title is altered, the redirect can be changed. For example:
To ensure that a redirect will not break if a section title gets altered, or to create a redirect to a point on the page other than a section heading, create an explicit target anchor in the page, e.g. by using the  template. The anchor text will not be visible (unless the  template is used), but it will serve as a permanent marker of that place on the page. Editors should generally not remove or alter such anchors without checking all incoming links and redirects.
For example, in the Google search article, the text  is placed at the point where ''Google Calculator'' is described. The title Google Calculator can then be redirected to Google search#Calculator.
The software will not follow chains of more than one redirect (see  ). A redirect should not be left pointing to another redirect page.
Double redirects often arise after a page is   (renamed)     after moving a page, check whether there are any redirects to the old title (using the link on the move result page, or using  ), and change them to redirect straight to the new title. (Double redirects are usually fixed by a   after some time.)
A redirect may be linked to from a source page the same way an article is     by placing the redirect page name within a set of double brackets, such as: Some name replacing Some name with the name of the redirect page to link.
To link to a redirect page without following the underlying redirect, use:  replacing Some name with the name of the redirect page to link. Clicking on a noredirect link will send the reader to the redirect page rather than the final redirect destination.
Most redirect pages are not placed in any  . However there are three types of exception to this:
To delete a redirect '''without replacing it with a new article''', list it on  . See   for details on how to nominate pages for deletion.
Listing is not necessary if you just want to replace a redirect with an article, or change where it points: see   for help doing this. If you want to ''swap'' a redirect and an article, but are not able to move the article to the location of the redirect please use   to request help from an   in doing that.
We follow the " "   after following a redirect, the reader's first question is likely to be: "hang on ... I wanted to read about ''this''. Why has the link taken me to ''that''?". Make it clear to the reader that they ''have'' arrived in the right place.
Normally, we try to make sure that all "inbound redirects" other than misspellings or other obvious close variants of the article title are mentioned in the first couple of paragraphs of the article or section to which the redirect goes.  It will often be appropriate to '''bold''' the redirected term.  For example:
If the redirected term could have other meanings, a   ( ) should be placed at the top of the target article directing readers to the other meanings or to a relevant   page. This is usually done using one of the   ( ).
It may also helpful to check the   for terms; adding a   and a   to the old term will make related pages easier to locate.
There is nothing inherently wrong with linking to redirects. Some editors are tempted, upon finding a link to a redirect page, to bypass the redirect and point the link directly at the target page. While there are a limited number of cases where this is beneficial, it is generally an unhelpful exercise, and it can actually be detrimental.
With a few limited exceptions, there are no good reasons to pipe links solely to avoid redirects. It is almost never helpful to replace redirect with redirect. (However target may be replaced with target if redirect is not a ).
It is likewise unhelpful to edit visible links for no reason other than to avoid redirects. That is, editors should not change, for instance, Franklin Roosevelt to Franklin D. Roosevelt just to "fix a redirect".  This rule does not apply to cases where there are other reasons to make the change, such as linking to an  .
Reasons not to change (bypass) redirects include:
Exceptions:
Avoid linking to titles which redirect straight back to the page on which the link is found. This situation may arise if a redirect is created from a red link on the page, or if the title was once a separate page but was merged. However, it is acceptable to link to a title which redirects to a section within the article, especially in a long article that cannot be viewed all at once on an average-sized computer screen.
A template can be redirected to another template in the same way, e.g. by entering the following markup at the top of a template T2:
This allows the template name T2 to be used instead of the actual template name T1.
A categorisation template such as  may be added to T2 (below the  #REDIRECT line) as follows:
Redirects for templates can cause confusion and make updating template calls more complicated. For example, if calls to T1 are to be changed to some new template TN1, articles must be searched for  and a separate search must be made for each of its aliases (including T2 in this example).  Moreover changes to syntax, corrections, scans and other processes (for example tag dating) must take into account ''all'' redirects.
Although it is possible to attempt to redirect   by adding a line such as #REDIRECT   to a category, it is not generally recommended because of limitations in the MediaWiki software. Categories "redirected" in this way do not prevent the addition of articles to the redirected category. Articles added to the "redirected" category do not show up as in the target category.
Until these issues are addressed (in future versions of the software), '''#REDIRECT''' should not be added to category pages.
When a page is moved, a redirect is automatically left behind.  Some groups of users (those who possess a suppressredirect  ) have the ability to prevent the redirect being created, by unchecking the box labelled "Leave a redirect behind." Currently these groups are administrators, bots and  . In some circumstances a page should be moved, but a redirect from its current name is inappropriate, such as reverting page-move vandalism. Suppressing the redirect can avoid an extra action (page removal) and save time in these cases.
However in general, the redirect will be a useful entry in the history, and it is best to leave it behind, unless there is a good reason to suppress the redirect, such as vandalism,   ''recently created'' malplaced items or freeing a title to be occupied immediately by another page (e.g. moving term to accurate term and term (disambiguation) to term). Redirects leave a trail to help readers find the old article, in case a new article is created at its previous location, and to prevent  .
Therefore, we usually neither suppress nor delete redirects. As Brion Vibber  , "Not breaking links helps everyone, ''especially us first and foremost''". He also   that the removal of (file) redirects is "extremely user-hostile and makes the project less useful".