 During preparations for the Sectionals round of show choir competition, Principal Figgins (Iqbal Theba) decrees that there is no money in the school budget to hire a handicap   accessible bus to transport the glee club. Artie engages in his first solo in the episode "Wheels" where he performs a routine in his wheelchair to "Dancing With Myself". The other students hold a fund   raising bake sale, but although they make enough money to hire a bus, Artie requests that they donate it to the school to pay for more wheelchair ramps in order to benefit future students. He goes on a date with club member Tina Cohen-Chang (Jenna Ushkowitz), and explains that he was left paralyzed following a car crash when he was eight years old. The two share a kiss, but Artie is hurt when Tina confesses she has been faking a speech impediment since the sixth grade. He later forgives Tina, but makes sexist remarks about her fashion sense, requesting that she begin wearing skimpier clothes if she wants to be with him. Tina shouts at him, and Artie apologizes for his behavior. Artie and fellow club members Tina, Brittany, Mercedes and Kurt later perform an impromptu rendition of "U Can't Touch This" in the school library, in an attempt to earn bad reputations, a plan which fails when the librarian asks them to perform for her church group. 
 Artie is dismayed when New Directions lose at Regionals, but thankful for having been a member of the glee club, admitting that Tina was his first kiss.
In the summer break between the episodes "Journey" and "Audition", Tina dumped Artie for Mike Chang, blaming Artie's disinterest in her and Mike's abs. Artie, upset, tries to try out for the football team to win her back, but is denied a tryout by the new football coach, Shannon Bieste. Later, he has a vision of him and Finn playing football, at which point Coach Bieste puts Finn and Artie on the team. He plays running back where he scores a touchdown in the first game in "Grilled Cheesus". In the episode "Duets", Artie loses his virginity to Brittany because he is on the football team and because he has a great voice which she needs to beat Santana in the duet competition. 
Brittany also convinced Artie to sleep with her so he could get over Tina. He breaks up with her because he feels she was using him, but is later shown to regret it. In "Never Been Kissed" Artie, with help from Puck, gets her to go out with him again. As of "Furt" they are dating. In "A Very Glee Christmas" Artie and Brittany find a ReWalk that can help Artie to walk by Brittany's Christmas tree. It is later implied that Coach Beiste put it there. In "Silly Love Songs", Artie and Mike sing "P.Y.T. (Pretty Young Thing)" to Tina and Brittany.  In the episode "Rumors" Artie confronts Brittany over her relationship to Santana and Brittany defends her, saying that they aren't cheating.  Artie calls Brittany stupid and she runs off in tears, effectively ending their relationship.
 He found it challenging to adapt to using a wheelchair, having to overcome the instinctive urge to dance along or tap his foot during musical performances. He finds it difficult to watch his colleagues dancing while he uses a wheelchair, but still learns the same dance routines as the other cast members, and is able to stand in the event of absences. McHale took part in the 2010 ''Glee Live! In Concert!'' tour, performing in character as Artie and remaining in a wheelchair during live performances. He also performed in a wheelchair when the ''Glee'' cast were invited to perform at the White House for the Obama family and guests in April 2010. McHale was able to utilize his dancing background in the episode "Dream On", in which Artie dances in a shopping mall during a fantasy flash mob sequence. He enjoyed the performance, but took time to pick up the choreography having spent so long working in a wheelchair. Although McHale prefers contact lenses, he auditioned for the part wearing glasses to enhance the "nerd" element of Artie's personality, and thick glasses are now a part of his costume.
 He believes that Artie has more confidence than he himself possesses, explaining: "I think he knows who he is and he doesn't care what anyone thinks." McHale is close to his co   star Jenna Ushkowitz, and the two of them are in support of the relationship between their characters, referred to by the portmanteau "Artina", for Artie and Tina. McHale described Artie and Tina's relationship as being similar to the one between Cory (Ben Savage) and Topanga (Danielle Fishel) in the ABC comedy   drama ''Boy Meets World'', and believes they will always be together.
 The episode "Wheels", which placed focus on Artie and his disability, drew criticism from a committee of performers with disabilities, who felt that casting an able-bodied actor to play a disabled student was inappropriate. '' '' star Robert David Hall commented: "I think there's a fear of litigation, that a person with disabilities might slow a production down, fear that viewers might be uncomfortable." ''Glee'' executive producer Brad Falchuck responded that while he understood the concern and frustration of disability advocates, McHale had the singing and acting ability and charisma required for the role and: "it's hard to say no to someone that talented". McHale has stated that he is pleased to represent a character in a wheelchair, and that: "I think what's great about it is just because he's in a wheelchair, he can still do what everyone else does."