What is quantum and quantum number? How electrons move around the nucleus?
Explain.
Here's a question related to the discussion about "White noise generator": Where I live, you ''always'' see drivers yakkin' (or textin', or even worse, ''readin' stuff on the internet'') on their cell phones and not paying attention to the road ahead (that's how that big rig rear-ended my Mustang, the driver was talkin' on his cell phone and didn't see me stop at a crosswalk to let a lady with a little kid get across the road).  So when I saw the discussion about "White noise generator", it got me thinking: is it possible to rig up some device that would prevent cell phones ''inside'' the car from transmitting / receiving any signals, while at the same time having minimal effect on cell phones ''outside'' the car?   ( ) 06:19, 30 August 2009 (UTC)
I believe most of the signals you receive on the phone in the car now come through the windows of the car, other than that they should act as pretty good faraday cages as pointed out above.  So I would think applying a film like they use on some trains to block out signals through the windows (see ) would probably work about as well as it works in these trains (I don't know how well they work).    ( ) 16:39, 30 August 2009 (UTC)
Until I gave it a good think, I had previously assumed that simpler microorganisms (particularly single-celled varieties such as the amoeba) had survived essentially unchanged since the emergence of more complex/multi-celled organisms. But this shouldn't be the case right? It doesn't make sense to me that an Amoeba proteus from 2009 would look the same as an amoeba 10 million years ago, or that the flagella of Giardia lamblia hasn't changed in the past million years or so. But certain things I've been reading seem to hint at the contrary. Chlorophyceae seems to be organised according to the type of flagella each species/family has, which implies that the same flagella is ancestral to all species within that class. This seems incredible, considering the fact that larger species such as humans have structurally very little evidence of having ever been water-breathers, and water mammals have little evidence of ever having had legs! Could it be that there are many simple organisms that have been mis-classified because of such re-evolutions, or is there really a fundamental difference in the way simple organisms evolve?
Lastly, are there any single-celled organisms that (for example) show signs of having evolved into single-celled organisms after having been multi-celled? I can imagine the analysis of the genome of such an organism showing it as a member of a group exclusive to multi-cellular organisms, despite the obvious structural differences. Sorry for asking so many questions!   ( ) 08:00, 30 August 2009 (UTC)
Micro-organisms certainly evolve.  They do it continuously and rapidly.  That's why we have so much trouble with drug resistance - we treat simple organisms with drugs that are supposed to kill them - the few that survive go on to become the whole population.  Over many generations of micro-organisms, you have a drug that no longer works anymore.  This is an extremely common phenomenon.  But our ability to track that evolution into the distant past is limited.  Looking at the appearance of bacteria doesn't tell you much about what's going on biochemically inside - and we don't have that detailed information about bacteria from the distant past.  It's not like a large organism like (say) a horse.  We can find the fossilised bones of ancient proto-horses and deduce a lot about how they evolved - but our ability to do that kind of thing for micro-organisms is extremely limited.   ( ) 13:41, 30 August 2009 (UTC)
What are the best sources for up-to-date information on the coywolf and other contorversies surrounding the family tree and phylogenetics of the genus Canis?    08:01, 30 August 2009 (UTC)
There is an article that refers to habitabilty of Extremophiles "ETs" but I was wondering if there is any matter or thought on the parameters of survivability of a planet for Human Beings? I know the Habitable zone article talks about one dimension there, temperature ranges from '''0  C to 100  C''' but most people wouldn't survive through 70% of that range. Also gravity, atmosphere composition and emissivity, atmosphere pressure, hydrosphere size, magnetosphere strength, irradiance, eccentricity, axial tilt, albedo, etc. must have referable boundry limits were '''people''' are concerned, does anyone know what these ranges are??   ( ) 08:31, 30 August 2009 (UTC)
I'm looking mostly for help with references...
You irrationally insist on ignoring the clarification "Just as we are..." and "Habitability" to continue your criticism.
Obviously torture isn't a "habitable" situation. Here is a "definition of habitiable" that you might appreciate: 
Also just because dimensions are connected doesn't mean that they don't have limits, for people. 
Is "oxides of nitrogen" or "nitrogen oxides" appropriate for a research paper to be published in an international journal? I'm cleaning up a manuscript for a Chinese professor and the original has "oxides of nitrogen" which seemed a bit off to me.
Google shows both are present in the vernacular, so I'm wondering if anyone with direct experience in a related field could give me a definitive answer (or even a definitive "they're both ok")...
Thank you,   ( ) 13:37, 30 August 2009 (UTC)
Coal, like oil, as I am lead to believe, is formed from the compression of carbon based material (i.e. animals and plants) over time. Why is it that some animals become fossils, yet others become coal? Also, related question, why do we have coal and oil fields? It seems like all these animals all died in the same place. Any info would be appreciated. --  ( ) 14:17, 30 August 2009 (UTC)
This is already on the Miscellaneous desk. We discourage cross-posting of questions.   ( ) 16:22, 30 August 2009 (UTC)
Why transparent objects are transparent.?     Preceding   comment added by   ( ) 18:13, 30 August 2009 (UTC) 
Is there a plant or animal that looks like a hair follicle, including the root (white or clear "bulb")when pulled out that is much stiffer and thicker than surrounding follicles and which does not soften or react to isotropy alcohol but dies or dissolves when iodine is applied as an antiseptic?   ( ) 19:39, 30 August 2009 (UTC)
Morgellons syndrome. --  ( ) 08:56, 31 August 2009 (UTC)
For years I've enjoyed tunafish - both as BBQed steaks and also raw in sushi. A while ago I saw sushi grade tuna for sale at a fish place, and for the first time enjoyed raw fish as a meal in its own right rather than with rice. Delicious. I've bought tunafish steaks a couple of times since.
My question is, isn't raw meat (including fish) supposed to be extremely prone to food poisoning? Is this safe? What is the difference between "safe" raw fish (used worldwide in sushi) and "unsafe" raw fish if any? (assuming it's from a reputable source, fresh, washed, cold, etc)
What's the risk if I carry on indulging myself by buying raw fish at reputable stores and taking it home to make my own sushi and raw fish meals at leisure? What precautions and other safety rules do I need to be aware of? 
Thanks for any answers.
Hi. I was looking at a Volkswagen Passat yesterday and there seemed to be rust on part of the wheel/axle but I am not sure what the part is so I can look it up (the salesman told me that it was caused by brake dust and wasn't a problem). I can't find a clear picture of the part but it was basically a drum shape that seems to be at the very end of the axle, and has the wheel bolted to it (so it sits ust behind the hub cap). It is circular, maybe six inches deep and nine inches in diameter (very rough estimates). I wondered if anybody could help me find the name please, so that I can investigate the rust issue more thoroughly. Thanks   ( ) 19:55, 30 August 2009 (UTC)