The size of the city of Orlando is very unusual for a metropolitan area of its size since most of the inhabitants of the area live in the suburbs and surrounding areas in Orange and Seminole counties, whereas the total population of the city proper is only 230,519 people (2008 estimate).
The Orlando-Kissimmee-Sanford MSA further listed by the OMB as part of the Orlando-Deltona-Daytona Beach, FL Combined Statistical Area. This includes the Metropolitan Statistical Areas of Deltona-Daytona Beach (Volusia County) and Palm Coast (Flagler County), plus the micropolitan area of The Villages (Sumter County). The Combined Statistical Area was estimated to have a population of 2,747,614 in 2009.
List of amusement parks in Greater Orlando and List of Orlando, Florida attractions
Greater Orlando is best known for its tourism industry, which attracts millions of visitors each year. Famous attractions include Walt Disney World Resort, SeaWorld and Universal Studios. Tourism has brought to Orlando numerous hotels, restaurants, and shopping malls all ranging from low-cost to upscale options.
The citrus industry has declined over the past 100 years as farmers moved orange groves further south to more frostproof areas.  Some consider the Christmas 1989 freeze to be the death knell of commercial citrus farming within Greater Orlando.  There are still three major orange juice plants remaining in the area:  Cutrale Citrus Juices in Leesburg; Florida's Natural Growers in Umatilla; and Silver Springs Citrus in Howey-in-the-Hills. Minute Maid maintains a major juice flavoring plant in Apopka.  
Other agricultural pursuits, particularly cattle farming, remain important parts of the Central Florida economy, but are now all located on the outer fringes of the metro area. Orlando is the largest city in Central Florida and is also a major food processing center.
Metro Orlando has served as a major military defense and aerospace center since the World War II.  The most prominent defense contractor in the area is Lockheed Martin, which operates both a laboratory and a manufacturing facility in Orlando.  Military presence began in the 1940s, with the opening of McCoy Air Force Base and the Orlando Naval Training Center.  McCoy AFB was a major hub of B-52 Stratofortress operations.  McCoy AFB was split between the city and NTC Orlando in 1974, and NTC Orlando closed in the mid-1990s. McCoy AFB is now the location of the Orlando International Airport. Farther north in Sanford, the Orlando Sanford International Airport was originally Naval Air Station Sanford.
Metro Orlando's economy has greatly diversified from tourism and the area is now considered a major hi-tech center.  University of Central Florida is regarded as one of the best computer, and engineering public universities in the United States, and is currently building a new medical school. The Central Florida Research Park is the seventh largest research park in the United States. In addition to having a Lockheed Martin branch, it also hosts other major hi-tech companies such as Oracle Corporation, Electronic Arts, and Siemens.
By 2012, Orlando is expected to become a major biotechnology cluster. In addition to the UCF College of Medicine, a VA Hospital, a Sanford-Burnham Institute research center and a Nemours Foundation children's hospital are being constructed.
The Beachline, Central Florida GreeneWay, East-West Expressway and Western Expressway are all run by the Orlando-Orange County Expressway Authority. Florida's Turnpike and portions of tollways not inside Orange County are run by Florida's Turnpike Enterprise, a special district of the Florida Department of Transportation.
Major surface highways include US 17, US 92 and US 441 (which overlap through Orlando as Orange Blossom Trail), US 27 (Claude Pepper Highway), US 192 (Irlo Bronson Highway), SR 50 (Colonial Drive and Cheney Highway), John Young Parkway, and International Drive.
Bus transportation in Orange, Osceola, and Seminole counties is provided by LYNX.  LYNX is also doing studies into mass transit in the form of light rail, which has received varying degrees of support over the past decade.
LYNX also has express routes to Clermont in Lake County and Deltona in Volusia County.  Volusia County is primarily served locally by Votran and Lake County is primarily served locally by LakeXpress.
The SunRail system will open for operation in 2013.  When completed by 2015, it will eventually connect from DeLand to Poinciana through Downtown Orlando.
Church Street Station is a celebrated Atlantic Coast Line Railroad station that, abandoned by the railways, is now a Downtown Orlando tourism district.
Amtrak serves stations in the area in Kissimmee, Orlando, Winter Park, Sanford and DeLand.  The Sanford station is the southern terminus for the ''Auto Train'', which transports people and their vehicles directly to Washington, D.C., via Lorton, Virginia.
Orlando is also the nominal eastern terminus of the ''Sunset Limited''.  However, damage to train bridges caused by Hurricane Katrina in 2005 has halted service to Los Angeles.  As of 2007, the ''Sunset Limited'' only runs between Los Angeles and New Orleans.  The Amtrak website still lists Orlando as the end of the route, suggesting that service will resume in the future.
Orlando is usually named as the initial focus of plans for a Florida High Speed Rail system in which the majority of its residents had supported, but  2.4 billion dollars of federal funding for this new system were refused by Governor Rick Scott of Florida after taking office in January 2011.
The primary major airports of the area are Orlando International Airport, at SR 528 Exit 11/SR 417 Exit 17, and Orlando Sanford International Airport, at SR 417 Exit 49.
Orlando International (MCO) serves as a secondary hub to AirTran Airways, and is a focus city of JetBlue Airways and Southwest Airlines.  AirTran Airways is headquartered in Orlando, but its main hub is in Atlanta. Orlando was a focus city but was re-classified as a "mini-hub", providing more nonstop destinations than any other AirTran location outside Atlanta, and connections to every AirTran destination outside Florida.  JetBlue Airways also has a training facility known as JetBlue University, and is the main training center for JetBlue   s pilots, inflight crew, plus support training for its technical operations and customer service crew. JetBlue also provides general aircraft maintenance and LiveTV installation and maintenance in Orlando.
Orlando Sanford International (SFB) is generally served by charter flights from Europe, though it is also a hub for national small-city carrier Allegiant Air and home to Delta Connection Academy, a pilot training school.
In the Combined Statistical Area, Daytona Beach International Airport also serves the area, and is used by many tourists seeking to directly connect to Daytona Beach's many local offerings, such as Daytona Beach Bike Week, Speedweeks and Spring Break.  It is located so its runways cradle Daytona International Speedway, making it convenient for some fans to arrive in Daytona, watch the Daytona 500 or Coke Zero 400, and then return home the same day. Daytona Beach International also serves as the main airport for pilot training at Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University.
Municipal airports in the region include Orlando Executive Airport, Kissimmee Gateway Airport, Ormond Beach Municipal Airport and DeLand Municipal Airport.
The primary newspaper of the area is the daily ''Orlando Sentinel'', owned by Tribune Company.  It was created as the ''Orlando Sentinel-Star'' in 1973 when the ''Orlando Morning Sentinel'' and the ''Orlando Evening Star'' were merged.  It dropped "Star" from the name in 1982.  It is also served by various weekly and semi-weekly papers, including ''Orlando Weekly'', ''The West Orange Times'', ''The East Orlando Sun'' and the ''The Osceola News-Gazette'' in Kissimmee.
The extended area is also covered by ''The Daytona Beach News-Journal'' and ''Florida Today''.
Greater Orlando makes up a large portion of the "Orlando-Ocala-Daytona Beach, FL" DMA, which ranks #19 in size with 1,466,420 households in 2007-08 according to Nielsen Media Research.
All six major broadcast networks are represented in Orlando with their own channels.  WESH brought NBC to Orlando when it moved its main operations from Daytona Beach to Eatonville in 1991.