My text message inbox on my LG EnV 3 cell phone is nearly full. Is there anyway I can download and save these messages onto my computer? Or must I delete all my old messages?   ( ) 00:16, 1 September 2009 (UTC)
What is the pin-out (live, neutral, ground)?
I have found a document confirming that this was the case for Irish wired BS546 three pin plugs. I am now 99% sure that this was the case for the old British plugs, and probably 90% sure that it would be the same in India. --   ( ) 14:40, 1 September 2009 (UTC)
Is there anyone here who knows how to get the battery cover off of this particular cell phone - the Sony Ericsson z130a? I'm having no luck with mine. I need to take the battery out because the phone won't turn on, and I think the battery may be the problem.--  ( ) 01:17, 1 September 2009 (UTC)
In big professionally produced lettering, it declares something like 'The translation application is not working at this time. Please try again later.' Does anyone know this one? Can they find it for me? I saw it years ago, and wanted to show it to a friend.
In this logo, what font is "maps" in? I know the "Google" part is in Catull, but I can't figure out the second part. Thanks for your time.   ( ) 09:02, 1 September 2009 (UTC)
If we have an Overseas identity card is it ok to travel even if the passport validity has expired, that is, is it as good as a passport with a visa.     Preceding   comment added by   ( ) 10:08, 1 September 2009 (UTC) 
Any recently based advice welcome. My wife and I are UK based and going to Cuba in January for 2 weeks - first week is an organised tour staying in several 3-4 star tourist hotels followed by 3 nights in a similar class hotel in Havana. 2nd week is on the beach in a purpose built all inclusive 4* Hotel. So, we don't smoke, we don't drink too much and all our food and transport is included, unless we want to break-out. We know Cuba is a poor country with not a lot of opportunities to buy fashion, cosmetics, jewellery etc. And we will visit famous Revolution sites and museums - possibly a late show or two (all of which we shall need to pay entrance fees for). We also know about Pesos and CUC's, and the inevitable hustlers and fake cigar salesmen etc., but we don't mind tipping for good service. So my question is, given we can't use Amex or US-based plastic, and given therefore we will neeed to take UK Sterling or Euros (which poses a significant security risk), how much cash should we take with us? As I said, any recent advice will be greatly appreciated. Thanks.  ( ) 12:58, 1 September 2009 (UTC)
What does he mean? I suppose the Scots don't include England, but do the English include Scotland? --  ( ) 17:28, 1 September 2009 (UTC)
Not only Man City.  Why exclude the millions across the world who support their opponents?  ( ) 08:12, 2 September 2009 (UTC)DT
I've always been curious as to why people (usually people who are not native monolingual English-speakers) use the term 'my country'. Does anyone know the reason for the prevalence of the expression?   ( ) 11:51, 2 September 2009 (UTC)