Yahoo! Kids, originally known as Yahooligans!, was founded in March 1996 by Yahoo! to provide children with a venue to find appropriate, safe Internet content. The website is the oldest online search directory for children. The website's editors stated that Yahoo! Kids is "cool, goofy, fascinating, fun, hysterical, philosophical, surprising, sedate, silly, seismic, popular, obscure, useful, and interesting". In October 1999, ''The New York Times'' reporter Michelle Slatalla noted that Yahooligans! was a "heavily trafficked site", with 463,000 visitors accessing the website in August 1999.
In 2004, Yahoo! entered into a partnership with DIC Entertainment to establish Yahooligans! TV, which gives users access to DIC's 3,000 hours of animated children programs. DIC Entertainment president Brad Brooks stated that the partnership "offer advertisers a cross platform purchase". Yahoo! sells the ads and the revenue from the commercials is split between the two companies.
The website can be used for both educational and entertainment purposes. The Yahoo! Kids' portal has directories such as "Around the World", "Arts & Entertainment", "Computers & Games", "School Bell", "Science & Nature", and "Sports & Recreation". Under the directory "School-Bell", the category "Homework Answers" allows children to access websites pertaining to school subjects such as geography, history, and math.
The homepage also displays links to games, jokes, news, and sports. For the latter three, the content is crafted for those younger than 12. Games provided on the Yahoo! Kids website include Chinese checkers, Go Fish, and Checkers. Age-appropriate offsite games are also accessible via the links under the "games" tab. The website offers an instant messaging gadget that allows children to participate in live chats with notable people. Bill Clinton, J. K. Rowling, and Bill Nye the Science Guy have been guests in the chats.
In June 2005, reviewer Gail Junion-Metz of the ''School Library Journal'' praised Yahooligans! Games, writing that it is "ne of the best spots to find kid-appropriate games that don't require downloads". In a September 1998 review of the website, John Hilvert and Linda Bruce of ''PC User'' wrote that "Yahooligans is one of the best specialized engines, particularly for homework answers."
In July 2007, reviewer Holly Gunn of ''Teacher Librarian'' praised Yahoo! Kids for its helpful, comprehensible results but criticized it, writing that it had too many ads and that the "interface is too busy and filled with too many diversions. Useful material is buried amidst entertainment".