Note:  If you are seeing this page as a result of an attempt to re-nominate an article for deletion, you must manually edit the AfD nomination links in order to create a new discussion page using the name format of  .  When you create the new discussion page, please provide a link to this old discussion in your nomination. -->
The result was    '''keep'''.   23:07, 2 October 2009 (UTC)
Fails  . While there are many GHits to the blog, and there is some coverage of issues raised by the blog, there is little to no discussion of the blog itself, as required by  . At the first AFD, one of the issues raised focused on the number of Google News references, but there was no mention of the depth of the references, most of which were nothing more than ''On AMERICAblog, John Aravosis...'' The article is better written, but still not adequately referenced, and there is not sufficient coverage in reliable sources to rectify the situation. The article notes three events in which the blog participated: revealing that Jeff Gannon had been an escort, buying Wesley Clark's cell phone records (which belongs in the article on John Aravosis, not his blog), and protesting a Snickers ad which ran during Super Bowl XLI. The Gannon issue can be mentioned in his article, and the Clark phone records in the article on Aravosis, but a separate article need not exist for the blog.''' '''   12:16, 20 September 2009 (UTC)
The most prominent of these has been the disclosure that a journalist given preference in the White House Press Briefing Room during the Bush administration had scant journalistic credentials and was in fact using a pseudonym, sidelining from his main career as a proprietor of a male prostitute service. This controversy raised a number of questions, which were then discussed in mainstream news both online and on television. The controversy, and AMERICAblog's role in it, then re-emerged as a point of reference more recently when the Washington Post's Dana Milbank posited that President Obama's reliance on the Huffington Post's Nico Pitney during a White House Press Briefing addressing the Iranian election crisis constituted an indecorous Presidential/press relationship.
Another controversy pertained to the public response to a legal brief filed by the current Administration's Justice Department in response to a suit that challenged the constitutionality of Bill Clinton's Defense of Marriage Act: AMERICAblog generated the analysis that the brief equated gay marriage with pedophilia and incest, a view which then permeated discussion of the brief, which then led to threats among Democratic party donors that they would upset the party's coalition by working against the Administration. The controversy was followed by the Atlantic's Andrew Sullivan, who ultimately pointed to additional analysis which undercut AMERICAblog's perspective.
These incidents affect discussion of notable political figures, which in turn affects their political sway, which in turn affects the direction of public affairs -- this is one of those "we hold these truths to be self-evident" type of things among avid users of the internet, which Wikipedians are.
Thus, I strongly disagree with the assertion that the Wesley Clark cell phone records purchase is "the most notable thing about the blog".
I also disagree with the suggestion that the blog's article should be re-directed to John Aravosis. Aside from the fact that the above-mentioned controversies were generated from the blog, it is also significant that the blog has other notable contributors. A.J. Rossmiller's book ''Still Broken: A Recruit's Inside Account of Intelligence Failures, From Baghdad to the Pentagon'' is a well-documented first-hand analysis of the conduct of the Iraq War from inside the U.S. intelligence apparatus, which deserves its own article (so I'll probably write it).
I will find appropriate sources and add them to the article (but not today). And no, I don't have any association with the blog nor do I know any of the people I just mentioned.  ( ) 11:34, 29 September 2009 (UTC)