A third generation Staten Islander, Mitchell attended P.S. 45 and the Blessed Sacrament School and St. Peter's Boys High School (a private Roman Catholic secondary school run by the Christian Brothers of St. John Baptist de la Salle). He is a graduate of Wagner College and New York Law School and is licensed to practice law in New York and New Jersey.
At age 22, Mitchell recognized overdevelopment in Staten Island to be a problem and worked to rezone his neighborhood of Barrett Park to prevent such unnecessary expansion.  He began his legal career as a Law Clerk for New York State Supreme Court Justice Michael J. Brennan and was then a Court Attorney for the New York City Criminal Court in Staten Island.  
Mitchell served as Chief-of-Staff and General Counsel to former Councilman (now Congressman) Mike McMahon for seven years.  
Mitchell was elected to the New York City Council in a special election in February 2009 and represented the North Shore of Staten Island.  He was defeated in his bid for re-election during the September 2009 Democratic primary by a community activist, Debi Rose.  He then appeared on the ballot in the general election on November 3, 2009 as a candidate for the Conservative Party of New York.  Rose beat him in the New York City general election and thus succeeded him in January 2010.
Prior to being elected to the New York City Council, Mitchell had also worked with and served on the boards of many local charities and community groups including the Dr. Theodore A. Atlas Foundation (named after the physician father of boxer Teddy Atlas), The Staten Island Zoological Society, The Children's Aid Society at Goodhue Center and the Staten Island Film Festival. He has received service awards from United Activities Unlimited, Warren Jacques Memorial Committee and the North Shore Democratic Club. Mitchell was inducted as a member into the Sons of American Legion, Livingston Post 1369.
Mitchell currently resides in West New Brighton with his wife, Jacquelyn (nee Mahoney), a local elementary public school teacher. He is the son of a retired postal worker and a hospital worker.  