The station is located at the corner of Stillwell and Surf Avenues in Coney Island, the site of the former West End Terminal; it is the southernmost terminal in the New York system. It has eight tracks and four island platforms, with trains entering from both compass north and south; however, it serves as the railroad-south terminal for all '''D''', '''F''', '''N''' and '''Q''' trains. This large facility was designed at a time when Coney Island was the primary summer resort area for the New York region, with all of the rail lines in southern Brooklyn funneling service to the area.
In 1919, a completely reconstructed ''New West End Terminal'' was built on an elevated structure to consolidate the terminals of all the former steam railroad lines terminating at Coney Island except the Long Island Rail Road-controlled New York and Manhattan Beach Railway. "West End" was gradually dropped from the terminal's name, and it is now known as Stillwell Avenue Terminal or ''Coney Island Terminal''. Station signage reads Stillwell Avenue     Coney Island.
Beginning in late 2001, Coney Island Terminal was entirely reconstructed, and the new terminal opened May 23, 2004 with 6 tracks. The project completed on May 29, 2005, with full restoration of '''''' service and all 8 tracks in service. A new entrance building was constructed, with a terra cotta facade in imitation of the former terminal, including restored BMT signs and logos. The former steel and concrete station, badly corroded by the effects of salt water and poor maintenance, was replaced with a new infrastructure, including a soaring roof with arches reminiscent of classic European train sheds. The roof is glazed with photovoltaic (solar electric) panels, consisting of 2,800 thin-film modules from SCHOTT (Germany) and covering a surface of . The solar panel system has a nominal power of about 210 kWp, which generates an annual output of 250,000&nbsp;kW hours, which the station can use to offset power needs. It is the largest renewable-energy enabled mass transit station in the United States.
While labeled a terminal, all of the tracks, with the exception of the West End Line tracks, could provide through service in either direction. The station has been used as a terminal for most of its history, but at least two through services have been offered:
In 2006, through service was offered during several weekends while track maintenance shut down portions of the BMT Brighton Line west of Kings Highway.
In May 2010, the station received new electronic train departure boards.
The terminal is the new home of Transit District 34 of the New York City Police Department.