Critical reception of "Friday I'll Be Over U" has been very positive. Lyndsey Parker, of Yahoo! Music, called it a "fun 'n' feisty opener" for Iraheta's debut album ''Just Like You'', concluding that it was "arguably the best debut single by an Idol ever.". Michael Slezak of ''Entertainment Weekly'' calls the song "an aggressively jaunty kiss-off track that juxtaposes genuine hard-edged attitude from (Allison) with a chorus as unapologetically addictive as Grape Bubble Yum," concluding that it is "exactly the kind of real world, post-''Idol'' response Allison will need to propel herself from reality TV contestant to ''Billboard''-charting threat," even if "Martin has ironed out Allison's vocals a little too aggressively on the chorus.". MJ Santilli, who the ''Los Angeles Times'' describes as the "top" blogger for idol-watchers, writes "The tune opens with a simple Kinks-like guitar riff, giving way in the chorus to some 80's-like electronica   a cool meld of old school sounds ... Allison's husky alto is front and center here. I'm relieved her vocals weren   t pro-tooled into oblivion. Teen-friendly pop/rock is exactly what I was expecting from Allison right out of the gate." 
Reviewers from publications which do not primarily cover ''Idol''-related works have also praised the song. Lehigh Valley Music writer John J. Moser describes the song as "rock-oriented (with) a very heavy pop production to make it uber-catchy." Jenny Kobiela-Mondor of FW Daily News said that "Friday I'll Be Over U" "reminds me of Kelly Clarkson, but a twinge edgier ... a solid song for teens, and one that I'm sure many girls will be singing loudly in their bedrooms and their cars." Kieran Layton, the Arts and Entertainment Editor for The Pitt News, praises the single for painting Allison "as a standout rock chick who comes across as the love child of Pink, Kelly Clarkson and Courtney Love circa her Hole days," describing the song as a "treat."
On December 22, 2009, Pop Justice selected "Friday I'll Be Over U" as its song of the day.
The music video premiered on Yahoo! Music on November 18, 2009. The music video has been very well received. Lyndsey Parker of Yahoo! Music wrote,
Andrea Reiher of Zap2it, praised the video as well, writing, 
The music video was made available for purchase via iTunes on November 24, 2009.
Source:
Iraheta recorded a version of the song in Spanish, named "'''El Viernes Te Olvido Yo'''" ("Friday I'll Forget You"), which was leaked online in early November. It will be released on Latin radio and as a track of the deluxe version of ''Just Like You'' on iTunes.