After maintaining this intensity for several hours, Rick began to weaken in response to a combination of an eyewall replacement cycle and increasing wind shear. By October&nbsp;19, the storm was downgraded to a Category&nbsp;3 hurricane and the following day to a tropical storm. The long-anticipated northeast turn took place near the end of this phase, also accompanied by a brief decrease in forward motion. On October&nbsp;21, Rick quickly moved northeast, brushing the tip of Baja California Sur before making landfall near Mazatlan with winds of . Several hours after moving inland, the final advisory from the NHC was issued as the storm weakened to a tropical depression and dissipated.
Prior to making landfall, the National Hurricane Center (NHC) initially forecasted Rick to make landfall in southern Baja California as a high-end Category&nbsp;2 hurricane, prompting hurricane watches. Officials ordered several hundred residents to evacuate from low-lying areas, although tropical storm warnings replaced the hurricane watches after the storm had weakened. Overall, the damage from Rick was significantly less than what was initially anticipated. Throughout Mexico, three people were killed by the storm, one in Oaxaca and two in Baja California Sur.
 By the morning of October&nbsp;15, the wave began to regain convection and eventually spawned a new area of low pressure roughly  south-southwest of Puerto Angel, Mexico. By the afternoon, the NHC reported that the system had become increasingly organized and was likely to develop into a tropical depression later that day. Around 11:00&nbsp;am PDT (1800&nbsp;UTC), the NHC declared that the low had developed into a tropical depression, the 20th of the 2009 Pacific hurricane season. The storm featured well-developed outflow in all directions. Environmental conditions consisting of low wind shear, high moisture content and above average sea surface temperatures in the path of the system were exceptionally favorable for rapid development. Additionally, the storm was being steered through this region by a low- to mid-level ridge over Mexico.
Six hours after being declared a depression, the system quickly intensified into a tropical storm, at which time it was given the name Rick. Deep convection, an early indication of an eye forming, had begun wrapping around the center of the system. Early on October&nbsp;16, a ragged eyewall began to develop and several hours later, Rick intensified into a Category&nbsp;1 hurricane with winds of . The rapid intensification was fueled by waters of , several degrees above average. By the evening of October&nbsp;16, microwave satellite imagery depicted a well-defined eye; however, this feature was not present on infrared images. Despite this, the NHC upgraded Rick to a Category&nbsp;2 hurricane with winds now reaching . Early the next morning, the storm intensified into a major hurricane, a storm that ranks as a Category&nbsp;3 or higher on the Saffir   Simpson Hurricane Scale. The eye was clearly visible on satellite images and deep, very cold convection surrounded it, signifying a powerful cyclone. Less than 40 minutes after this upgrade, the NHC issued a special advisory stating that Rick had further strengthened into a Category&nbsp;4 hurricane.
 The eye of the storm became very well-defined and nearly cloud free, measuring roughly  in diameter. In addition to the rapid intensification, Rick was also growing in size. By the afternoon hours, tropical storm-force winds extended up to  from the center of the storm, with a maximum gale diameter of 300. At 3:10&nbsp;pm PDT (2210&nbsp;UTC), the NHC issued its second special advisory for Rick, this time stating that the storm had become a Category&nbsp;5 hurricane, the first in the basin since Hurricane Kenna in 2002.|year=|accessdate=|url=http://www.nhc.noaa.gov/tracks1949to2010_epa.txt}} Around 8:00&nbsp;pm PDT (0300&nbsp;UTC on October&nbsp;18), Rick attained its peak intensity as the second-strongest Pacific hurricane on record. Maximum sustained winds in the eyewall reached {{convert|180|mph|km/h kn|0|abbr=on}} and the barometric pressure is estimated to have bottomed out at {{convert|906|mbar|hPa inHg|2|lk=on|abbr=on}}. The pressure was not directly measured as reconnaissance missions by Hurricane Hunter aircraft were not done because the storm was too far from land. Lixion Avila, a senior hurricane specialist at the NHC, described Rick's satellite presentation at this time as "spectacular."{{cite web|author=Lixion A. Avila|publisher=National Hurricane Center|date=October 17, 2009|accessdate=October 18, 2009|title=Hurricane Rick Discussion Eleven|url=http://www.nhc.noaa.gov/archive/2009/ep20/ep202009.discus.011.shtml?}}
Rick maintained its peak intensity for roughly two hours between 7:00&nbsp;pm and 9:00&nbsp;pm PDT (0200 and 0400 UTC) on October&nbsp;17, before it began to weaken in response to an eyewall replacement cycle and increasing wind shear. By the afternoon of October&nbsp;18, the storm had weakened to a low-end Category&nbsp;5 hurricane, with maximum winds of . Deep convection around the eye warmed slightly and a combination of dry air and wind shear restrained the extent of the storms' outflow to the west. Later that day, Rick began to turn towards the northwest as the subtropical ridge north of the system began to weaken. Early on October&nbsp;19, Rick was downgraded to a Category&nbsp;3 hurricane as it began its approach to the southern end of the Baja California peninsula. Wind shear and dry air quickly entered the core of the system, with the eye disappearing from satellite imagery later that morning.
During the evening of October&nbsp;19, the center of Rick became devoid of convective activity, resulting in the NHC downgrading it to a tropical storm. According to meteorologists at the NHC, the weakening was "...almost as fast as it strengthened several days ago." The first Hurricane Hunter reconnaissance mission into the storm took place during the afternoon of October&nbsp;20. During the mission, sustained winds of  and a surface pressure of ) were recorded. Several hours after this, convection rapidly increased, with a large area of deep convection developing northeast of the center of circulation; however, this was not associated with intensification. Around 7:00&nbsp;am PDT (1400&nbsp;UTC) on October&nbsp;21. Tropical Storm Rick made landfall near Mazatlan with winds of 60&nbsp;mph (95&nbsp;km/h). Following landfall, the storm rapidly weakened to a tropical depression and roughly seven hours after moving inland, the surface circulation of Rick dissipated over the high terrain of Mexico.
Officials in Oaxaca shut down beaches and warned people not to venture out into the water. Residents were advised of potentially heavy rainfall. Along coastal areas of Mexico, specifically around Acapulco, officials closed ports to small crafts due to rough seas. Residents around the city were also warned about the possibility of mudslides from heavy rain associated with the cyclone's outer bands. Upon Rick's intensification to a Category&nbsp;4 hurricane, officials in Mexico raised the alert level in Guerrero, Jalisco and Michoacan to severe. In Sonora, the local government placed 14 municipalities under a blue alert, the pre-storm phase; the alert was upgraded to a yellow alert for the municipalities of Alamos, Benito Juarez, Navojoa, Etchojoa and Huatabampo on October 18.
Early on October&nbsp;19, the Government of Mexico issued a hurricane watch for areas of Baja California Sur between Santa Fe and San Evaristo. Following the issuance of the watch, authorities in the region began planning to open shelters and begin evacuating residents from low-lying areas. Later that day, the watch was replaced by a tropical storm warning as Rick weakened to a tropical storm. By October&nbsp;20, a new tropical storm watch was issued for mainland Mexico for areas between El Roblito and Altata. Shortly after, officials had opened nine shelters in the region; however, schools remained open until further notice. Later in the day, the tropical storm warning for Baja California was discontinued while the watch for mainland Mexico was upgraded to a warning. This warning was later discontinued on October&nbsp;21 as Rick dissipated over the mountains of Mexico. Several cruises were affected by the storm throughout southern Baja California. The ''Carnival Splendor'' made a sudden docking as the storm formed and delayed its arrival in Cabo San Lucas by several days.  The ''Carnival Spirit'', scheduled to dock in Acapulco on October&nbsp;21, delayed its arrival until October&nbsp;22. The ''Sapphire Princess'' rescheduled its course, remaining near San Francisco, California, for several additional days instead of traveling south. The ''Norwegian Star'' skipped its planned docking in Cabo San Lucas and remained at sea until the passage of Rick. Other cruises affected by the storm include ''Radiance of the Seas'', ''Mariner of the Seas'', ''MS Veendam'' and ''MS Statendam''.
Schools throughout southern Sinaloa were closed for two days beginning on October&nbsp;21 due to the arrival of Tropical Storm Rick. Residents in low-lying areas were urged to evacuate due to both storm surge and fresh water flooding from the anticipated  of rain. Although several hundred miles from land, wind gusts up to 40&nbsp;mph (65&nbsp;km/h) were felt along coastal areas in Mazatlan. Near the coast of Oaxaca, large seas capsized a boat carrying three people. Two of the passengers were rescued; however, the third was found dead. Large swells killed one person along the southern end of Baja California Sur on October&nbsp;19. Another fatality took place in the same region after a boy was swept away from an eroded beach. Roughly 320 people near Cabo San Lucas were evacuated due to the threat of flooding. Reports near the city also indicated that there was structural damage and significant traffic issues from rain-induced mudslides. 
In Mazatlan, near where Rick made landfall, high winds downed trees and signs, leaving numerous residents without power. Heavy rain was also reported during the passage of the storm. Throughout Mazatlan, damage from Rick amounted to 2&nbsp;million pesos ($152,000 USD). On December&nbsp;29, the Government of Mexico allocated 381&nbsp;million pesos ($29.6&nbsp;million USD) to assist in recovery from both Hurricanes Jimena and Rick.
 One of these tornadoes damaged more than 10&nbsp;structures, destroyed a grain silo, flipped a tractor trailer and left numerous residents without power. In all, the tornadoes left nearly $1&nbsp;million in losses and injured one person.
 Throughout the state, flood damage amounted to $690,000, with most of this being in Travis County. Heavy rainfall in Louisiana contributed to widespread flooding that resulted in the closure of several major highways. In Union Parish, rainfall exceeding  led to flash flooding that inundated several homes and a local school, inflicting over $100,000 in damage.
On October&nbsp;17, Hurricane Rick was classified a Category&nbsp;5 hurricane, becoming the first in the eastern Pacific basin since Hurricane Kenna in 2002 and the first east of the International Date Line since Hurricane Ioke in 2006. The storm also became the thirteenth cyclone of this intensity east of the International Date Line since official records in the Eastern Pacific began in 1949. Shortly after being upgraded to Category&nbsp;5, Rick attained its peak intensity with winds of  and a barometric pressure of , making it the second-strongest hurricane ever recorded in the East Pacific, surpassing Kenna. Only Hurricane Linda of 1997 was stronger than Rick, with minimum pressure of . It also became the second storm in the basin to have sustained winds of  or higher, the other being Linda with  winds.
Upon being declared a tropical depression on October&nbsp;15, computer forecasting models already anticipated the likelihood of rapid intensification due to the unusually favorable environmental conditions ahead of the system. The Hurricane Weather Research and Forecasting model (HWRF) showed the storm attaining a minimum pressure below 900&nbsp;mbar (hPa; 26.58&nbsp;inHg), an intensity not attained by any Eastern Pacific hurricane on record. The Statistical Hurricane Intensity Prediction Scheme (SHIPS) rapid intensification index, a storm's probability of intensifying by  or more within 24&nbsp;hours, was set at 60%. This percentage quickly increased to 82% several hours later, 11 times higher than the sample mean. The official forecast from the NHC by their second advisory stated that Rick would become a Category&nbsp;4 hurricane by October&nbsp;19; however, they mentioned that due to the favorable environment, the storm could intensify faster than forecast. Once Rick had become a Category&nbsp;2 storm on October&nbsp;16, the NHC increased their forecast peak intensity to , a mid-range Category&nbsp;4 hurricane.
The first mention of Rick possibly becoming a Category&nbsp;5 hurricane was in the seventh discussion released by the NHC on October&nbsp;17. In their advisory, it was noted that the storm had a 10% chance of reaching this intensity within 36&nbsp;hours. Several hours after this advisory was released, a special update advisory was issued. This new advisory placed the peak intensity of Rick just below Category&nbsp;5 status, with maximum winds of . It was not until the late morning hours of October&nbsp;17 that the NHC officially anticipated the storm to attain Category&nbsp;5 status. Upon attaining winds of , Rick was forecast to peak with winds of , which would have tied the record intensity set by Hurricane Linda.