Formerly the seat of the ancient '''Marischal College and University of Aberdeen''' founded in 1593, the building was retained by the unified University of Aberdeen following its creation in 1860 by the merger of Marischal College and King's College, a university founded in 1495 in Old Aberdeen to the north of the modern Aberdeen city centre. The buildings of Marischal College continued to be used for general university purposes until recent times and were significantly rebuilt and expanded upon throughout this period. The construction of the modern college building began in 1835 and took its present form in the early part of the 20th century, following the demolition of previous buildings on the site. It is the second largest granite building in the world.
In recent times, teaching at the university gravitated towards King's College or Foresterhill for medicine students and a new purpose for Marischal College was considered. As a consequence, a significant portion of the building is currently leased on a long-term basis to Aberdeen City Council for office space, teaching no longer taking place on the site. The university has retained the Mitchell Hall and a number of other significant parts of the building, in addition to the Marischal Museum for its own use. The building is currently undergoing extensive interior renovation to provide this office space and is currently closed to the public. 
Marischal was the second of Scotland's post-mediaeval 'civic universities', following the University of Edinburgh, created without Papal bull and with a more modern structure, resembling more the Protestant arts colleges of continental Europe. As such, both Edinburgh and Marischal came to be known as the 'Town Colleges' of their respective cities. The university was founded with the expressed aim of training clergy for the post-Reformation Kirk. It is believed that Keith desired a protestant institution alongside the pre-Reformation King's College, although King's had been Protestant since 1569. It is possible that the founding of another college in nearby Fraserburgh in 1592 was the true cause; its founder Sir Alexander Fraser was a business rival of Marischal.
The College was constructed on the site of a medieval Franciscan Friary, disused after the Reformation. This building was later replaced by a William Adam designed building in the mid-18th century, however this, together with the Friary remains, were demolished entirely for the construction of the present building between 1835 and 1906. The college's Greek motto translates as "virtue is self-sufficient".
The Mitchell Hall, where University of Aberdeen graduations historically take place, was built in the early 20th century. It is named for Dr Charles Mitchell, an ''alumnus'' of the university and a Tyneside shipbuilder. A large stained-glass window dominates the hall, executed by TR Spence of London and representing the university's history.
The building was commended by John Betjeman following a visit to Aberdeen
It is also claimed that Marischal College was Adolf Hitler's favourite building in the United Kingdom and that he would have liked to have used it as a residence if the outcome of the Second World War had been different. .
The University of Aberdeen was created after the merger of Marischal College and King's College, Aberdeen in 1860 under the terms of the Universities (Scotland) Act 1858.
The following extract refers to this merger:
The building standing today, which replaced a number of older structures, was constructed between 1837 and 1844 by Aberdeen architect Archibald Simpson. This 1837 building formed a U-shaped quadrangle, with a small entrance via an archway amidst unrelated housing on the west side. The building was substantially extended between 1893 and 1905 by Alexander Marshall Mackenzie, and with its new "granite cage" front, enclosing the quadrangle, it became the second-largest granite building in the world (exceeded only by the Escorial Palace near Madrid).
Recently, the only parts of the college building used chiefly by the university are the Mitchell Hall, the Marischal Museum, and the Anatomy department, which was used for 1st year medicine students until March 2009. The Museum was re-established in 1907, but is not currently open to the public. It is also home to the University's Debating chamber.
The University leased the Marischal College site to Aberdeen City Council for 175 years in exchange for   4.7 million.
In 2007 plans were announced detailing the refurbishment of the college as new headquarters for Aberdeen City Council.  , by architects Holmes Partnership, involves the demolition of the Marischal College interior and its replacement by a 21st century office building, providing 17,000 square metres of modern office space on four floors for up to 1,300 city council staff.  The granite facade will be retained.  
Amongst the buildings demolished to make way for the new frontage of Marischal College was the Greyfriars collegiate church, built in 1532 and incorporated as part of the College in 1593. Following a dispute regarding the conservation of this building during the construction of the new College frontage at the turn of the 20th century, a new church building was constructed within the Marischal College complex. The building is incorporated into the College frontage, which includes the southern tower, notable for being surmounted with a spire. 
Following a merger, this church was later to become known as Greyfriars John Knox Church. The building is currently unused and is being offered for sale by the Church of Scotland for commercial or residential use.
Notable alumni of Marischal College include: