 The Norwegian Nobel Committee announced the award on October 9, 2009, citing Obama's promotion of nuclear nonproliferation and a "new climate" in international relations fostered by Obama, especially in reaching out to the Muslim world.
Obama is the first U.S. president to receive the award during his first year in office (at eight and a half months, after being nominated less than two weeks in office), although several other world leaders were awarded in the year following their election to national office, including Oscar Arias (1987) and Aung San Suu Kyi (1991);
On December 10, 2009, Obama accepted the prize in Oslo. In a 36-minute speech, he discussed the tensions between war and peace and the idea of a "just war". Obama announced early that he would donate the full 10&nbsp;million Swedish kronor (about US$1.4&nbsp;million) monetary award to charity. The largest donations were given to the housing charity Fisher House Foundation who received $250,000, and the Clinton Bush Haiti Fund which received $200,000. Eight organizations which support education also received a donation. $125,000 were donated to the College Summit, the Posse Foundation, the United Negro College Fund, the Hispanic Scholarship Fund, the Appalachian Leadership and Education Foundation, and the American Indian College Fund. $100,000 was donated to Africare, and the Central Asia Institute.
The winner is selected by the Norwegian Nobel Committee from nominations by others.  There were 205 nominations for the 2009 award, which included civil rights activists in China and Afghanistan and African politicians.  Colombian Senator Piedad Cordoba, Afghanistan's Sima Samar, Chinese dissident Hu Jia and Prime Minister of Zimbabwe Morgan Tsvangirai had been speculated to be favorites for the award.
 but was initially opposed by the Socialist Left, Conservative and Progress Party members until strongly persuaded by Jagland.
Jagland said "We have not given the prize for what may happen in the future. We are awarding Obama for what he has done in the past year. And we are hoping this may contribute a little bit for what he is trying to do," noting that he hoped the award would assist Obama's foreign policy efforts. Jagland said the committee was influenced by a speech Obama gave about Islam in Cairo in June 2009, the president's efforts to prevent nuclear proliferation and climate change, and Obama's support for using established international bodies such as the United Nations to pursue foreign policy goals. ''The New York Times'' reported that Jagland shrugged off the question of whether "the committee feared being labeled naive for accepting a young politician   s promises at face value", stating that "no one could deny that 'the international climate' had suddenly improved, and that Mr. Obama was the main reason...'We want to embrace the message that he stands for.'"
Obama said he was "surprised" and "deeply humbled" by the award. He stated that he does not feel he deserved the award, and that he did not feel worthy of the company the award would place him in. In remarks given at the White House Rose Garden on the day of the announcement, Obama stated, "I do not view it as a recognition of my own accomplishments but rather an affirmation of American leadership on behalf of aspirations held by people in all nations.", October 9, 2009, retrieved same day
The award, he said, "must be shared with everyone who strives for justice and dignity&nbsp;    for the young woman who marches silently in the streets on behalf of her right to be heard even in the face of beatings and bullets; for the leader imprisoned in her own home because she refuses to abandon her commitment to democracy; for the soldier who sacrificed through tour after tour of duty on behalf of someone half a world away; and for all those men and women across the world who sacrifice their safety and their freedom and sometime their lives for the cause of peace." He did not take questions from reporters after giving his statement.
Obama's winning of the peace prize was largely unanticipated and called a "stunning surprise" by ''The New York Times'', though major oddsmaker Centrebet had in fact put him at 7   1 odds of winning, with Piedad Cordoba and Sima Samar at 6   1 and Morgan Tsvangirai at 7   1.
The award drew initial criticism that it was undeserved or premature due to a perceived lack of significant accomplishments on Obama's part so far and his role in conflicts abroad. However, opinions were divided.
In a ''USA Today'' / Gallup Poll conducted October 16   19 with a margin of error of +/-3%, 61% of American adults polled responded that they thought Obama did not deserve to win the prize, while 34% responded that he did; when asked if they were personally glad that Obama won the award, 46% of respondents said they were and 47% said they were not glad."
There was widespread criticism of the Nobel Committee's decision from commentators and editorial writers across the political spectrum. ''The New York Times'' published a mildly-supportive editorial which said the prize was "a (barely) implicit condemnation of Mr. Bush   s presidency. But countering the ill will Mr. Bush created around the world is one of Mr. Obama   s great achievements in less than nine months in office. Mr. Obama   s willingness to respect and work with other nations is another." It said that much remains to be done. Among those agreeing that the award was a criticism of the Bush administration were the editorial pages of the ''Los Angeles Times'', ''Wall Street Journal'', and ''Washington Post'', as well as Thomas L. Friedman of the ''New York Times''. ''Today'' host Matt Lauer and Jonah Goldberg of the ''National Review'' said that less than a year into the first term, there have been "no major foreign policy achievements to date." Goldberg added: "surely someone in Iran   or maybe the Iranian protestors generally   could have benefitted more from receiving the prize" while in ''CounterPunch'', political journalist Alexander Cockburn said that, in historical context of other former U.S. Presidents winning the Nobel Peace Prize, the award to Obama it "represents a radical break in tradition, since he's only had slightly less than nine months to discharge his imperial duties." Peter Beinart of the Daily Beast scathingly called the decision a "farce", while Noam Chomsky ironically said : "In defense of the committee, we might say that the achievement of doing nothing to advance peace places Obama on a considerably higher moral plane than some of the earlier recipients".
 ''Washington Post'' columnist Michael Gerson wrote, that the committee members "have forfeited any claim to seriousness. Peace   the kind of peace that keeps people from being killed and oppressed   is an achievement, not a sentiment.  Intending to honor Obama, the committee has actually embarrassed him." ''Commentary'' magazine's Peter Wehner wrote that the award, with past awards that seemed aimed at criticizing the Bush administration, showed the Nobel Committee "long ago ceased to be a serious entity; this choice merely confirms that judgment."
According to ''The Washington Post'' news analyst Dan Balz, "ven among his supporters there was a sense of surprise and even shock on Friday , a belief that the award was premature, a disservice and a potential liability." An editorial in ''The Washington Post'' began, "It's an odd Nobel Peace Prize that almost makes you embarrassed for the honoree", and compared the Nobel Committee's statement that Obama had "created a new climate in international politics" to a recent satirical skit on television. A ''Los Angeles Times'' editorial said the committee "didn't just embarrass Obama, it diminished the credibility of the prize itself". Thomas L. Friedman of ''The New York Times'' wrote, "It dismays me that the most important prize in the world has been devalued in this way". Much of the commentary across the political spectrum involved describing the award as something risible, with the humor focusing on Obama's getting the award without having accomplished much. According to an analysis in ''The New York Times'', "it   striking how so many people seemed to greet the Nobel news with shock followed by laughter," On the morning of the announcement, several of ''The Washington Post'''s opinion-page columnists, posting at the newspaper's "Post Partisan" blog, characterized the award as laughable or directly satirized it, including such supportive columnists as Ruth Marcus ("ridiculous   embarrassing, even"), Richard Cohen (who satirized the award), and foreign-affairs columnist David Ignatius ("goofy" and "weird"), and Michael Kinsley (whose satirical response came the next day). Other prominent commentators who often supported Obama but responded with ridicule included Peter Beinart, Bienart, a columnist at ''The Daily Beast'' website, formerly was editor of ''The New Republic'' and Ann Althouse.; in addition to being a blogger, Althouse has guest blogged at Instapundit.com, The Volokh Conspiracy blog and has written for ''The New York Times'' Op-Ed page and the newspapers website; Her comment: "Riddle: Why didn't Barack Obama win the Nobel Prize for Literature? Answer: He wrote 2 books."
James Taranto wrote in ''The Wall Street Journal'' an article summarising various opinions on the Internet, concluding how the award was embarrassing for Obama. He said the award was a "staggeringly premature honor--the equivalent of a lifetime-achievement Oscar for a child star--makes yesterday's satire into today's news" Fred Greenstein, presidential historian and author and professor of politics emeritus at Princeton University, told FOX News that giving President Obama the Nobel Peace Prize is a "premature canonization" and an "embarrassment to the Nobel process."  ''Slate magazine'' blogger Mickey Kaus, ''New York Times'' columnist David Brooks and former U.N. ambassador John Bolton amongst others, called for Obama to not accept the award; pundit Michael Crowley argued that it was a "mixed blessing".
 Among elected officials, Obama not only received congratulations from allies such as House Speaker Nancy Pelosi, but kind words (if not approval) from some Republican officeholders, including Senator John McCain, who said, "I think Americans are always pleased when their president is recognized by something on this order".  RNC chairman Michael Steele discussed his disapproval of the award in a fund-raising letter, writing, "the Democrats and their international leftist allies want America made subservient to the agenda of global redistribution and control."
A poll conducted by Synovate for the newspaper ''Dagbladet'' showed that 43% of the Norwegian population believed giving Obama the prize was right, while 38% believed it was wrong. 19% had no opinion. The poll showed a sharp divide between younger and older people; of those over 60 years of age 58% were for and only 31% against it. Of those between 18 and 29 years of age, only 25% approved of the decision, while 42% disapproved.
 Siv Jensen, leader of the opposition Progress Party, said that while Obama had taken several good initiatives the committee should have waited to see their results. Erna Solberg, leader of the Conservative Party, also said that the prize came early and increased pressure on Obama to live up to the expectation. Torstein Dahle, the leader of the leftist party Red, called the award a scandal, citing the fact that Obama was the commander-in-chief of a country at war in Iraq and Afghanistan.
The response from U.S. allies was generally positive; reactions around the world have been mixed but mostly congratulatory:
Several Nobel Laureates have commented: Former Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev (winner 1990), gave his congratulations, Bangladeshi economist Muhammad Yunus, (co-winner 2006 prize), said the committee's award was "an endorsement of  and the direction he is taking." Archbishop Desmond Tutu said the award to Obama "anticipates an even greater contribution towards making our world a safer place for all." Mairead Corrigan, (co-winner 1976), expressed her disappointment, stating, "iving this award to the leader of the most militarized country in the world, which has taken the human family against its will to war, will be rightly seen by many people around the world as a reward for his country's aggression and domination." Lech Walesa, (1983) cofounder of the Solidarity trade union, and former president of Poland said the award was premature. "He has not yet made a real input." The 14th Dalai Lama congratulated Obama.
United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon praised the Nobel Committee's choice. "We are entering an era of renewed multilateralism  President Obama embodies the new spirit of dialogue and engagement on the world's biggest problems: climate change, nuclear disarmament and a wide range of peace and security challenges."
In Europe, French President Nicolas Sarkozy said the award would reinforce Obama's determination to work for justice and peace. He added that the award "finally confirms the return of America in the hearts of all the peoples of the world". Russian president Dmitry Medvedev said the award will encourage warmer U.S.   Russian relations, and he hoped it would "serve as an additional incentive" for both governments to foster a better "climate in world politics". British Prime Minister Gordon Brown sent a private message of congratulations to President Obama.  Hope that the prize would assist Obama's efforts toward nuclear disarmament was also a part of congratulatory statements from Ireland's Taoiseach Brian Cowen and German Chancellor Angela Merkel.  Vatican spokesman Fr. Federico Lombardi said the Vatican "appreciated" the nomination.
 Stuart Rees, director of the Sydney Peace Foundation in Australia, questioned the award. "Perhaps the Nobel organisation wants to give him a magic wand. I think the guy is full of promise, but I don't think the promise has been realised yet particularly in regards the Middle East."
In Asia and the Middle East: Afghanistan, President Hamid Karzai said that Obama was the "appropriate" person to win the Nobel Peace Prize. "His hard work and his new vision on global relations, his will and efforts for creating friendly and good relations at global level and global peace make him the appropriate recipient of the Nobel Peace Prize," said Siamak Hirai, a spokesman for Karzai. Taliban spokesman Zabiullah Mujahid said the decision was ridiculous, saying, "The Nobel prize for peace? Obama should have won the 'Nobel Prize for escalating violence and killing civilians.'"
Indonesia's, Masdar Mas'udi, deputy head of the Islamic organisation Nahdlatul Ulama, praised Obama   s policy towards his country as confirmation of his worthiness as a Nobel laureate. "I think it's appropriate because he is the only American president who has reached out to us in peace," he said. "On the issues of race, religion, skin colour, he has an open attitude.".
Japanese Prime Minister Yukio Hatoyama,
Indian President Pratibha Patil and Israeli President and Nobel Peace Prize laureate Shimon Peres sent congratulatory messages to Obama, but Iranian Foreign Minister Manouchehr Mottaki told reporters that "the decision was taken hastily and the award was  early."
In Latin America, former President Fidel Castro called the award "positive" and said the prize should be seen as a criticism to the "genocidal policy" carried out by past U.S. presidents. Venezuelan Foreign Minister Nicolas Maduro said the award was a surprise and perhaps premature. "As President Hugo Chavez said at the United Nations, (the Obama administration) is a government that has raised expectations and hopes in many people in the world, amid great contradictions."
In Africa, the news of the Obama Nobel Peace Prize was positively received. Kenyan President Mwai Kibaki issued a statement saying that the prize was a "recognition of the contribution  making for the well being of humanity." In South Africa, President Jacob Zuma used ''Ubuntu''   the Zulu term for    the importance of community"   in his congratulatory message,  saying that the U.S. president   s "leadership reflects the true spirit of Ubuntu because your approach celebrates our common humanity." Zimbabwe Prime Minister Morgan Tsvangirai, who was touted as a possible Nobel laureate, said Obama deserved the honor.
President Obama accepted the Nobel Peace prize in person at the Oslo City Hall in Norway on December 10, 2009. In a 36-minute speech, reportedly written by Obama and then edited by Jon Favreau and Ben Rhodes, he discussed the tensions between war and peace and the idea of a "just war". The address contained elements of the ideas of Reinhold Niebuhr, someone Obama once described as one of his favorite philosophers.
The speech was generally well received by American pundits on both ends of the political spectrum. Several noted similarities between Obama's message and the rhetoric of President George W. Bush. This was also mentioned by former Bush speechwriter Michael Gerson, who called it a "very American speech" and wrote that "Obama was recognizing that the great commitments and themes of American foreign policy are durably bipartisan". A number of prominent Republican politicians publicly praised the speech, including Newt Gingrich and Sarah Palin. Conservative ''New York Times'' columnist Ross Douthat called it an oftentimes impressive speech that was "An extended defense of using realist means in the service of liberal internationalist ends".  Columnist Andrew Sullivan distinguished between the Obama and Bush messages, stating that "Obama is ''far more conservative'' than his predecessor" in his views on human imperfection, reality, and war; he also linked the speech back to the tragic nature of Obama's line "the audacity of hope".
Abroad, British historian Simon Schama said of the speech that "in its seriousness, bravery and clarity,  was on a par with FDR and Churchill" and "summoned the spirit of Cicero".