He has worked in regional theaters including The Mark Taper Forum, Old Globe Theatre in San Diego, The Shakespeare Theatre Company in Washington, DC, The Hartford Stage, The Chicago Shakespeare Theater, Denver Center for the Performing Arts, Oak Park Festival Theater, Illinois, and The Cincinnati Playhouse.  He has appeared in the title roles of The Compleat Female Stage Beauty, as Romeo in Romeo and Juliet with Calista Flockhart as Juliet, Hamlet, Troilus and Cressida, and Sunday in the Park with George. In 2000, he was cast as one of four principal American actors in the world premiere of Sir Peter Hall (director)   s production of Tantalus by John Barton (director).  A co-production of The Denver Center Theater Company and The Royal Shakespeare Company, it opened in Denver and toured England, finishing at the Royal Shakespeare Company   s Barbican Theater.  Robert then was cast in Sir Peter Hall   s production of The Royal Family (play) at the Theater Royal Haymarket in London   s West End where he appeared with Dame Judi Dench, Toby Stevens and Emily Blunt.
His work off-Broadway includes The New York Premiere of Avow by Bill Davis, Mrs. Warren   s Profession, and More Stately Mansions directed by Ivo Van Hove, the musical Blue Flower at The Prospect Theatre Company and in 2009 he appeared in Happiness at Lincoln Center Theatre. He joined the national tour of Spamalot as Sir Robin, and then played the role on Broadway, and also starred as Algernon in the national tour of The Importance of Being Earnest with Lynn Redgrave, directed by Sir Peter Hall.
He first appeared on Broadway in Epic Proportions starring Kristen Chenowith and then appeared as Perchik in the Broadway revival of Fiddler on the Roof starring Alfred Molina and Harvey Fierstein.  He starred as Tateh for the broadway revival of Ragtime (musical), which opened at the Neil Simon Theater in November 2009 and closed January 10, 2010. This revival of Ragtime was nominated for seven 2010 Tony Awards, including Best Musical Revival; and was also nominated for nine 2010 Drama Desk Awards, including Outstanding Revival of a Musical.
Robert Petkoff starred in the '''Like Water for Chocolate''' musical with Tony Award winner Chita Rivera at the Sundance Institute's 2011 Theatre Lab in Alberta, Canada, March 29-April 23, 2011.  In addition to Chita Rivera (Kiss of the Spider Woman, Chicago, The Rink), and Robert Petkoff (Ragtime, Spamalot, Fiddler on the Roof), the cast included Nicholas Rodriguez (Tarzan, "One Life to Live"), Sharon Washington (The Scottsboro Boys) and Dan Butler ("Frasier"). 
Robert performed in a new musical "'''Rise'''", starring Kirsten Chenoweth, and also featured Tony nominee Hunter Foster as Jim Bakker, Nancy Opel as Betty Ford, Clarke Thorell as Jimmy Swaggert, Robert Petkoff as Pat Robertson and Bradley Dean as Jerry Falwell.  The musical, according to the New York daily, imagines the afterlife of Tammy Faye Bakker, who founded "The PTL Club" with her husband, who later was sent to jail, in the 70s.
Robert sang the leading role(s) in the concert staging of JEKYLL & HYDE at the New York Society for Ethical Culture on June 15, 2009.  Directed by Ilana Becker, Robert Petkoff starred in the cast as Jekyll and Hyde, with Brooke Sunny Moriber as Emma Carew, and Jennifer Hallie Rosen as Lucy Harris. Additional casting included Richard Binder as Gabriel John Utterson, Timothy Jerome as Sir Danvers Carew, Marci Reid as Nellie, Tony Wolf as Sir Simon Stride, and Brandon Ruckdashel as Spider. 
He performed the role of Mr. Briggs in a reading of a new musical version of ENCHANTED APRIL, with a book and lyrics by Kleban Award winner Charles Leipart and a score by Richard B. Evans, on March 15   16, 2010. 
Robert appeared in the benefit concert, SING FOR MY SISTER for the World AIDS Orphan Day on May 10, 2010, with Donna McKechnie, Mary Beth Peil, Karen Mason, Nicholas Rodriguez, Will Chase, Paige Davis, Chad Kimball, Aaron Lazar, Felicia Finley, Christiane Noll, and the JERSEY BOYS/Chicago company. 
Robert sang the role of Thomas Andrews in the concert version of the Tony Award-winning musical TITANIC,at the New York Society for Ethical Culture, on Monday, June 21, 2010. The company featured Robert Petkoff (Thomas Andrews), John Jellison (Isidor Strauss), Emily Loesser (Caroline Neville), Don Stephenson (Charles Clarke), Martin Moran (Harold Bride), Henry Stram (Etches), Jennifer Piech (Kate McGowan), Michael Mulheren (Mr. Thayer), Alma Cuervo (Ida Strauss), John Hickock (J. Bruce Ismay), and Tim Jerome (Captain E. J. Smith), as well as Eamon Foley, Blair Ross, Patrick Wetzel, Bailey Hanks, Brian O'Brien, Rick Hilsabeck, and Autumn Hurlbert. 
Robert performed as Guy Fawkes in BONFIRE NIGHT, July 16   18 as part of Vassar & New York Stage and Film's Powerhouse Theater summer season. Featuring book, music, and lyrics by Justin Levine, the musical was directed by Alex Timbers with a cast that included John Ellison Conlee, Pierce Cravens, Greg Hildreth, Santino Fontana, Desmond Green, Michael Izquierdo, Robert Petkoff, Charlie Pollack, Devere Rogers, David Rossmer, Ian Unterman, and Jonathan B. Wright. 
Robert performed in The second annual BORN FOR BROADWAY Concert to benefit the Christopher & Dana Reeve Foundation on October 4, 2010 at the New World Stages. Ragtime Tony nominee Marcia Milgrom Dodge directed the evening, with musical direction by Larry Yurman. Performers were: Lesley Gore, Tony winner Lillias White, Christiane Noll, Bobby Steggert, Robert Petkoff and Quentin Earl Darrington.  
Broadway cast recording, Perchik in ''Fiddler on the Roof'', from the Minskoff Theatre production, 2004 PSclassics, 
Robert has also completed several audio books including:
Film work includes VICE VERSA;  
MILK AND MONEY starring with Calista Flockhart;  
Recent TV work includes LAW and ORDER; HACK; and THE DAVE CHAPPELLE SHOW.
Robert Petkoff guest stars in '''The Good Wife''', March 29, 2011, as Dr. Ben Truestall.
April 2011, Finalist, Nominated by The Audio Publishers Association for the 16th annual Audies awards, in two categories:
Judges' Award: Paranormal: