In '''Uganda''', the '''Anti-Homosexuality Bill''', if enacted, would broaden the criminalisation of homosexuality by introducing the death penalty for people who have previous convictions, are HIV-positive, or engage in sexual acts with people of the same sex or with those under 18 years of age. The bill also includes provisions for Ugandans who engage in same-sex sexual relations outside of Uganda, asserting that they may be extradited for punishment back to Uganda, and includes penalties for individuals, companies, media organisations, or non-governmental organisations that support LGBT rights. 
The private member's bill was submitted by MP David Bahati in Uganda on 14 October 2009.
Intense international reaction to the bill caused President Yoweri Museveni to form a commission to investigate the implications of passing it. After the bill was held for further discussion for most of 2010, in May 2011, parliament adjourned without voting on the bill. It may be taken up again in the next session, expected to begin in June, but the bill would have to return to the beginning of the legislative process.
From 5 to 8 March 2009, a workshop took place in Kampala, the capital of Uganda, that featured three American evangelical Christians: Scott Lively, an author who has written several books opposing homosexuality; Caleb Lee Brundidge, a self-professed former gay man who conducts sessions to heal homosexuality; and Don Schmierer, a board member of Exodus International, an organisation devoted to promoting "freedom from homosexuality through the power of Jesus Christ". The theme of the conference, according to ''The New York Times'', was the "gay agenda": "how to make gay people straight, how gay men often sodomized teenage boys and how 'the gay movement is an evil institution' whose goal is 'to defeat the marriage-based society and replace it with a culture of sexual promiscuity'&nbsp;".Gettleman, Jeffrey (January 3, 2010). , ''The New York Times''. Retrieved on January 7, 2010.  An Anglican priest from Zambia named Kapya Kaoma was in attendance, and reported on the conference., PublicEye.org (2008). Retrieved on January 7, 2010.--> Ugandan Stephen Langa organised it, and was supported by Lively, who asserted in his workshops that homosexuality was akin to child molestation and bestiality, and causes higher rates of divorce and HIV transmission. Lively's emphasis was on the cohesion of the African family, that he said was being threatened by homosexuals looking to recruit youth into their ranks. According to Kaoma, during the conference, one of the thousands of Ugandans in attendance announced, " feels it is necessary to draft a new law that deals comprehensively with the issue of homosexuality and...takes into account the international gay agenda... Right now there is a proposal that a new law be drafted."<ref name="kaoma">Kaoma, Kapya (Winter 09/Spring 10). , PublicEye.org. Retrieved on January 7, 2010.</ref>
The legislation strengthens the criminalisation of homosexuality in Uganda by introducing the death penalty for people who are considered serial offenders, are suspected of "aggravated homosexuality" and are HIV-positive, or who engage in sexual acts with those under 18 years of age. People who are caught or suspected of homosexual activity will be forced to undergo HIV tests; Ugandans who engage in same-sex sexual relations outside Uganda will likewise fall under the jurisdiction of this law, and may be extradited and charged with a felony. Furthermore, if passed, the bill will require anyone who is aware of an offense or an offender, including individuals, companies, media organisations, or non-governmental organisations who support LGBT rights, to report the offender within 24 hours. If an individual does not do so he or she is also considered an offender and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 250 "currency points" or imprisonment up to three years.
At the time the bill was introduced, an independent MP stated he thought it had about a 99% chance of passing. Uganda's president Yoweri Museveni openly expressed his support for the bill, stating "We used to say Mr and Mrs, but now it is Mr and Mr. What is that now?" After facing intense international reaction and promises from Western nations to cut financial aid to Uganda, on 9 December 2009, Uganda's Minister of Ethics and Integrity James Nsaba Buturo said that Uganda will revise the bill to drop the death penalty (substituting life imprisonment) for homosexuals with multiple offences. Initially, however, Buturo stated Uganda's government was determined to pass the bill "even if meant withdrawing from international treaties and conventions such as the UN's Universal Declaration on Human Rights, and foregoing donor funding", according to an interview in ''The Guardian''. Since then, however, ''The Guardian'' has stated that David Bahati, the bill's sponsor, has denied these reports. On 23 December, Reuters reported that Buturo again said that the death penalty would be dropped from the bill. He claims, however, that the protest from the Western nations did not have an effect on this decision. He stated, "There have been a lot of discussions in government ... regarding the proposed law, but we now think a life sentence could be better because it gives room for offenders to be rehabilitated. Killing them might not be helpful."
On 8 January 2010, Bahati again asserted he would not postpone or shelve the bill, even after Minister of State for Investment Aston Kajara stated the Ugandan government would ask Bahati to withdraw it, and President Museveni asserted he thought it was too harsh. Bahati stated, "I will not withdraw it. We have our children in schools to protect against being recruited into (homosexuality). The process of legislating a law to protect our children against homosexuality and defending our family values must go on."Olukya, Godfrey (January 8, 2010). , ''The Washington Post''. Retrieved on January 8, 2010. The bill is scheduled to be discussed in Uganda's parliament in late February or March 2010.
On 12 January 2010, President Museveni expressed to the media that there is need to exercise "extreme caution", and his cabinet members will speak to Bahati to reach a compromise to satisfy Bahati's concerns weighed with the calls he is receiving from throughout the world.
Even apart from the legislation to punish homosexuals, Ugandan human rights have been a concern for Amnesty International, who highlighted issues such as threats to freedom of expression and association, and the use of torture by law enforcement, among their major concerns in their 2009 report. American evangelists active in Africa are being criticised for being responsible for inspiring the legislation by inciting hatred with excessive speech by comparing homosexuality to paedophilia and influencing public policy with donations from American religious organisations. Among the critics are ''The Times'', Jeffrey Gettleman in ''The New York Times'', ''Time'',Alsop, Zoe (November 19, 2009) , ''Time''. Retrieved on December 11, 2009. PublicEye.org, ''The Guardian'', a pan-African internet news journal for social justice named Pambazuka News,Nakaweesi-Kimbugwe, Solome; Mugisha, Frank (October 16, 2009) , ''Pambazuka News''. Retrieved December 10, 2009. and an international organisation with a similar objective named Inter Press Service.van der Westhuizen, Christi (November 11, 2009).  Inter Press Service. Retrieved on December 10, 2009.See also editorials addressing US evangelist influence in Africa from Australian newspaper ''The Age'': "It used to be easy to identify homophobia. But now even homophobes fail to recognise their prejudice. Bigotry is reassuringly cosseted by an evangelising rhetoric of love, and reinforced by a medicalising language that veils the savagery of its aims." (Phoon, Adrian ., ''The Age'', Retrieved on January 11, 2010.); openly gay libertarian conservative columnist Andrew Sullivan asked of the evangelists "... now that they have unleashed a proto-fascist pogrom against gay, bi and trans people in Africa, have they finally come to terms with the actual consequences of what they actually believe?" (Sullivan, Andrew . , The Daily Dish. Retrieved on January 11, 2010.); a Kenyan journalism professor writing for New America Media wrote of the poverty and still-present effects of colonialism that translates into black Africans' collective feelings of inferiority to whites with money that makes them susceptible to Western influence: "...American evangelicals are going to Africa to satisfy that calling. Is there a better place to create Christian nations than in a continent with nearly 500 million impoverished believers, and easily corruptible governments?" (Okong'o, Edwin . , New America Media. Retrieved on January 12, 2010.); ''The Seattle Times'' wrote, "The three evangelists are an embarrassment to the Christian faith and the values that inspire selfless, hardworking missionaries to work in the far corners of the Earth to help people and truly change their lives." (, ''The Seattle Times'' . Retrieved on January 12, 2010.)
American evangelicals such as Scott Lively and California pastor Rick Warren have a history of involvement in Uganda where they focus their missionary work. As a result, Warren and others have become influential in the shaping of public policy in Uganda, Nigeria and, to a lesser extent, Kenya. Stephen Langa, the March 2009 workshop organiser, specifically cited an unlicensed conversion therapist named Richard A. Cohen, who states in a book that was given to Langa and other prominent Ugandans, Homosexuals are at least 12 times more likely to molest children than heterosexuals; homosexual teachers are at least 7 times more likely to molest a pupil; homosexual teachers are estimated to have committed at least 25 percent of pupil molestation; 40 percent of molestation assaults were made by those who engage in homosexuality. 
 On 22 December, 2009, several hundred people gathered in Kampala to show their support for the bill, protesting against homosexuals. Deutsche Presse-Agentur reports, "The protesters, led by born-again clerics, cultural leaders, and university undergraduates, marched to the parliament where they presented a petition."
On 11 January 2010, Uganda's Media Centre, a government-sponsored website, released a statement titled "Uganda is being judged too harshly", reacting to the worldwide media attention the country has received about the bill, stating that, in response to the negative press they have received, it is obvious that "Ugandans (read Africans) have no right to discuss and no right to sovereignty". The message asserted "It is unfortunate that Uganda is now being judged on the actions of opportunists whose ideas are based on violence and blackmail and even worse, on the actions of aid attached strings. (Homosexuality). It is regrettable that government is pretentiously expected to observe their 'human rights', yet, by their own actions, they have surrendered their right to human rights."
On 26 January 2011, Uganda's most prominent gay activist, David Kato, was found bludgeoned to death in what authorities in Uganda are characterising as a robbery. His photograph had been published in ''Rolling Stone''; the high court in the country ordered the newspaper to stop publishing images of gay and lesbian people after Kato and several others sued the paper. Kato spoke at a United Nations-sponsored conference on the bill in December 2009. His words were barely audible because he was nervous; information in U.S. embassy cables revealed that Ugandan human rights activists and anti-homosexuality bill supporters vocally mocked him during his presentation. The U.S. diplomat reporting, whose communiques were exposed through Wikileaks, wrote that the political and economic problems in Uganda were being channeled into "violent hatred" of gay people, and David Bahati, Martin Ssempra and James Buturo were primarily responsible for promoting the wave of intolerance. The diplomat further stated that, even if the bill does not pass in Ugandan parliament, "rampant homophobia in Uganda won't go away".
Several leaders from other nations have expressed their concerns. On 27 November 2009, during the Heads of State Meeting, Gordon Brown, the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, expressed his opposition of the bill to Uganda president Yoweri Museveni. Canadian Prime Minister Stephen Harper also expressed opposition privately to Museveni during the Commonwealth leaders' meeting. The Canadian Transport Minister John Baird stated to ''The Globe and Mail'', "The current legislation before Parliament in Uganda is vile, it   s abhorrent. It   s offensive. It offends Canadian values. It offends decency." Australia's government reiterated its opposition to the criminalisation of homosexuality in the ''Sydney Morning Herald'', but as of 8 January 2010 had not made a statement to the Ugandan government, despite activists' efforts for it to do so.
 The European Parliament on 16 December 2009 passed a resolution against the bill, which threatens to cut financial aid to Uganda., European Union website (December 16, 2009). Retrieved on January 8, 2010.  On 3 December 2009 the Swedish government, which has had a long-term relationship with Uganda, said that it would revoke its $50 million (  31 million) development aid to Uganda if the bill passes, calling it "appalling". Sweden's Development Assistance Minister Gunilla Carlsson stated that she "thought and hoped we had started to share common values and understanding".Muhumuza, Rodney (December 4, 2009). , AllAfrica.com. Retrieved on January 8. 2010. Dirk Niebel, the Federal Minister of Economic Cooperation and Development in Germany, told Deutsche Presse-Agentur that financial aid to Uganda will be cut, a stepwise plan for this has already been made.
The Welsh Assembly Government says that it will not cut its   75,000 aid to Uganda, despite objection of the bill. Welsh officials state that the aid is for the city of Mbale and not the Ugandan government.
In Minneapolis, Minnesota, Kampala's sister city, the city council passed a resolution opposing the bill.
 While the Anglican Church in Uganda opposes the death penalty, its archbishop, Henry Luke Orombi, has not taken a position on the bill.  Some individuals within the Anglican church, such as retired bishop Christopher Senyonjo, from the West Buganda diocese, have been vocally opposed to the bill and supportive of LGBT rights in Uganda.  In 2010, Bishop Senyonjo was touring the United States to draw attention to the bill.  Burroway, Jim (May 25, 2010) , ''Box turtle bulletin'' Retrieved on December 29, 2010.
Uganda's Catholic Archbishop of Kampala Cyprian Lwanga stated in December 2009 that the bill was unnecessary and "at odds with the core values" of Christianity, expressing particular concerns at the death penalty provisions. Lwanga argued that instead homosexuals should be encouraged to seek rehabilitation. For its part, the Holy See has maintained excellent relations with Uganda, with Pope Benedict XVI receiving the Ugandan ambassador in December 2009 and commending the climate of freedom and respect in the country towards the Catholic Church. During this meeting, there was no mention of the anti-homosexuality bill. However, three days earlier the Vatican legal attache to the United Nations stated that "Pope Benedict is opposed to 'unjust discrimination' against gay men and lesbians".
The United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, Navi Pillay, urged Uganda to shelve the bill and decriminalise homosexuality. Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch have condemned the bill, calling it a product of a campaign by evangelical churches and anti-gay groups that has led to death threats and physical assaults against Ugandans suspected of being gay. John Nagenda, Senior Presidential Advisor to the president of Uganda, has expressed that he does not think the bill should be passed.Cobb, Ty (December 14, 2009). , Human Rights Campaign website. Retrieved on January 8, 2010. The Global Fund to Fight AIDS has stated that excluding marginalised groups would compromise efforts to stop the spread of AIDS in Uganda where 5.4% of the adult population is infected with HIV., Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (2008). Retrieved on January 9, 2010. Elizabeth Mataka, the U.N. Special Envoy on AIDS in Africa expressed her concern with the bill as it will dissuade people from getting tested for HIV if they will subsequently be punished with the death penalty.Ahmed, Saeed (December 8 , 2009). , CNN. Retrieved on January 8, 2010. Uganda experienced a rare and very successful drop in HIV transmission in the 1990s., Avert (December 24, 2009). Retrieved on January 9, 2010. The 16,000 members of the HIV Clinicians Society of Southern Africa sent a letter to the Ugandan president stating,    Encouraging openness and combating stigma are widely recognized as key components of Uganda   s successful campaign to reduce HIV infection    and the bill threatens to enact a    profoundly negative impact on Uganda   s efforts to combat HIV   .Keaton, Claire (January 8, 2010). , ''The Times'' (Johannesburg, South Africa). Retrieved on January 8, 2010.
One of the first newspaper editorials condemning the draconian nature of the bill was from ''The Sunday Times'' in South Africa, that warned Uganda is in danger of being "dragged back to the dark and evil days of Idi Amin". The UK newspaper ''The Guardian'' has said that the bill confirms the country's status as "unjust and infamous", calling the law a "wretched piece of legislation".  London-based newspaper ''The Times'' also criticised the proposed law and the BBC for sponsoring a debate titled "Should homosexuals face execution?" ''The Times'' commended recent headway in Uganda's banning female genital mutilation, but stated that the anti-homosexuality bill "...must be seen for what it is: a bigoted and inhumane Bill that will cause suffering for thousands of innocent people"., ''The Times'' (December 18, 2009). Retrieved on January 8, 2010. ''The Irish Times'' similarly characterised the bill as "medieval and witch-hunting" and stated that even with the change from the death penalty to life imprisonment, "will remain utterly abhorrent"., ''The Irish Times'' (January 9, 2010). Retrieved on January 9, 2010.
American television host Rachel Maddow, who is openly gay, has been running a continuing segment on the bill, entitled "Uganda Be Kidding Me" on ''The Rachel Maddow Show''. Maddow asserted that Richard Cohen had "blood on  hands" for providing the false inspiration for the legislation. She also questioned the truth in Pastor Rick Warren's statements when he said in an interview "...it is not my political calling, as a pastor in America, to comment or interfere in the political process of other nations", yet Maddow highlights his actions supporting Uganda's break with the Anglican Church for being "pro-gay", and asserts Warren has contradicted his condemnation of its anti-homosexuality bill. Lisa Miller in ''Newsweek'' likewise cast aspersions on Warren's actions.
An editorial in ''The New York Times'' stated unequivocally, "The United States and others need to make clear to the Ugandan government that such barbarism (in the bill) is intolerable and will make it an international pariah" and chastised the evangelicals for stirring hatred: "You can   t preach hate and not accept responsibility for the way that hate is manifested." Similarly, ''The Washington Post'' wrote that the bill is "ugly and ignorant", "barbaric", and "(t)hat it is even being considered puts Uganda beyond the pale of civilized nations". Douglas Foster, writing in ''The Los Angeles Times'', focused on the paradox of the majority of Africans' belief that homosexuality as a Western affectation while simultaneously being influenced by American conservative evangelical dogma. He wrote that gay Africans face an "impossible, insulting, ahistorical, cruel and utterly false choice" of having to choose between being gay and being African.