The ESRO TD programme initially foresaw the launch of three satellites: TD-1, TD-2 and TD-3. TD-1 was devoted to stellar astronomy, TD-2 was to be devoted to solar astronomy while TD-3 was to study the ionosphere. Later TD-2 and 3 were merged to save funds. But subsequent financial difficulties and political disagreements led to the abandonment of the TD-2/TD-3 spacecraft.
TD-1A was ESRO's first 3-axis stabilized satellite, with one axis pointing to the Sun to within   5 degrees. The optical axis was maintained perpendicular to the solar pointing axis and to the orbital plane. It scanned the entire celestial sphere every 6 months, with a great circle being scanned every satellite revolution. After about 2 months of operation, both of the satellite's tape recorders failed.
A network of more than 30 ground stations was put together so that real-time direct telemetry from the satellite was recorded for about 60% of the time. After 6 months in orbit, the satellite entered a period of regular eclipses as the satellite passed behind the Earth   cutting off sunlight to the solar panels. The satellite was put into hibernation for 4 months, until the eclipse period passed, after which systems were turned back on and another 6 months of observations were made. TD-1A was primarily a UV mission however it carried both a cosmic X-ray and a gamma-ray detector. TD-1A reentered on January 9, 1980.
The main scientific detectors were the X-ray proportional counter (24-900 keV), MIMOSA (celestial gamma-rays, solar gamma-rays), Utrecht Orbiting Ultraviolet Stellar Spectrometer S59 (200-300&nbsp;nm), and the S2/68 spectrophotometric sky survey telescope (135-300&nbsp;nm). The solar gamma-ray detector operated in the 50 to 500 MeV energy range. The spectrometer for celestial X-rays operated from 2-30 keV.
There were two stellar ultraviolet (UV) experiments on board. The Utrecht Orbiting Ultraviolet Stellar Spectrometer S59 used a small telescope and a three-slit scanner covering three bands between approximately 2100 (210&nbsp;nm) and 2800 A (280&nbsp;nm). About 200 bright stars were observed by the instrument and later published in a catalog. The S2/68 spectrophotometric sky survey telescope was developed jointly by the UK and Belgium. It operated in the range 1350 (135.0&nbsp;nm) and 2550 A (255.0&nbsp;nm). This experiment used an off-axis reflecting telescope to focus radiation onto a set of entrance slits. These in turn fed a photometer and a three-channel spectrophotometer. The light falling on the spectrophotometer entrance slit was reflected onto a diffraction grating. The dispersed light then passed through one of three slits and onto individual photomultipliers. The orbital motion of the satellite caused the dispersed beam to scan across the exit slits.
The various UV sources observed by TD-1A are listed by TD-1 number and in equatorial coordinates in right ascension (RA), declination (Dec) in the TD-1A catalog.
The Utrecht Space Research Laboratory hard X-ray spectrometer S-100 consisted of a CsI(Na) scintillator (sensitive area 5&nbsp;cm2, thickness 1.5&nbsp;cm) optically coupled to a photomultiplier tube, followed by a pulse height analyzer.
Also on board was a small spark chamber experiment called MIMOSA for observations of gamma-rays from 70-300 MeV. The instrument was equipped with a stereoscopic TV system viewing through the chamber portholes to record the particle tracks. It operated from March   October 1972. There was a significant particle-induced background, despite an anti-coincidence system. Numerous gamma-rays were detected, but no gamma-ray point sources could be identified.
A complete set of observations was made for all well-observed solar flares during the period March 12, 1972, to October 1, 1973, including four from the highly active period of August 1   8, 1972.
During the winter of 1973-1974 TD-1A measured the altitude distribution of the 279.6-280.3&nbsp;nm doublet equatorial airglow. The observations indicate the presence Mg+ ions in the evening twilight F region in the African sector with peak altitudes varying from 230 to 480&nbsp;km.
Using the S59 experiment, near-ultraviolet spectra have been obtained for about 200 stars of which four Mn stars: ''  '' Tau, ''  '' Crv, ''  '' And, and ''  '' Lep and six normal stars have been compared. The spectra of the Mn stars become hotter at shorter wavelengths.
According to SIMBAD, the TD1 catalog contains well over 10,000 stellar observations in the UV, but only one of these is also an astronomical X-ray source.
Using the X-ray proportional counters, time profiles and photon spectra of solar X-rays have been observed in the energy range above 24 keV. Most of the X-ray bursts studied were '''Elementary Flare Bursts''' (EFBs). These appear to consist of numerous short-lived spikes with rise and decay times of a few seconds which cluster together in large numbers and constitute the conventional high energy flare. The form of the EFB photon spectra was in all cases of the power-law type. For the August 4, 1972, flare, the photon spectra appear to be combinations of two power-law spectra: for the lower energies the spectral coefficient is smaller than for the higher energies, where the transition energy is about 60 keV.
Solar hard X-ray EFBs rise and decay times do not depend on the photon energy which suggests that the EFBs occur at a fairly low level in the chromosphere (    1500&nbsp;km above the photosphere). "In this region a considerable part of the ambient electrons are accelerated to energies of several tens of kiloelectron volts."
Impulsive spikes in the August 4, 1972, flare were measured with the University of Utrecht hard X-ray detector with a time resolution of 1.2 s ( 100 keV). The hard X- and   -ray consisted of several impulsive spikes with rise and decay times of 20-40 s and duration of ~1 min.