The word "smor" is Norwegian for butter, which in the Norwegian Middle Ages was an item of payment, and often one of the standard products of paying taxes with. As such, the family was named after one of the most important goods in society.
The contemporary use of the family name ''Smor'' has been contested, as it has been suggested that the name was more of a epithet for only some of the members, as not all members of the family are known to have used it. Regardless, the, at least informal, use of the name ''Smor'' for the entirety of the family has, already since the 16th century, been a common standard.Handegard, 2008, p. 111.
The first person that can possibly (although disputed) be regarded as a member of the family was Jon Smor. He was a knight and riksrad (cabinet minister). The first positively known member of the family was Jon Hallvardson Smor.
The latter Jon's son, Svale Jonson Smor, is one of the more well-known members of the family, becoming important in Norway during the early 15th century. He was a knight and Lord of Bergenhus Fortress, and possibly the first to use Smor as a family name.
One of Svale's children was Jon Svaleson Smor, also a knight, riksrad, and in 1482 was promoted to the highest title known of a member of the Smor-family, as he was elected regent of Norway in the midst of a two-year interregnum. Jon, however, drowned the year after, in 1483, as the last man of the direct male-line of the family.
Through the female members of the family, the family survived by, among others, the noble families "Orm", Galte and Benkestok, into modern times. As such, some Norwegians, especially in Western Norway, can trace their ancestry back to some of the members of the ''Smor'' family.
The following shows the family tree of the Smor-family: (Note that some uncertainty surrounds the first two generations; the following shows the most common rendering.)
The coat of arms of the ''Smor''-family had a blue background, and a golden Leopard's head under a red chevron. The family is sometimes alternatively called "Leopard's head (under chevron)" after the coat of arms.