A Pentium 4 1.7Ghz with 2GB ram and an ATI Radeon 9550. It meets the minimum requirements for Windows 7, but would it run well? Better than XP in terms of responsiveness?   ( ) 00:42, 23 October 2009 (UTC)
Can u give me a simple definition for SOFT-SOFTER HANDOFF
Is there any way to insert or import CD cover designs made by Nero Cover Designer into a blank Word document? The version installed in my PC is Nero 7. Thanks in advance!   ( ) 10:41, 23 October 2009 (UTC)
The first step is really easy.  In C++ (and, for brevity, without any kind of error checking or whatever):
But to extend this into a full-scale calculator requires that you think about whether it needs to be a command-line thing (as with the example above) or an interactive thing.  Whether you use the calculator conventions of entering operations one at a time (so that 1+2x3 produces 9 and not 7 as conventional mathematics and some fancy graphing calculators would produce), or whether you just want to enter a "normal" piece of math and have it work as it looks like it should - with bracketed sub-expressions, etc - or whether you want to use something like the "reverse polish" notation that HP calculators use:   1 2 + 3 x
Not surprisingly - behaving like a cheap calculator does (1+2x3=9) is a lot easier than doing what the fancy calculators do.  The simple approach lets you take the first number and save into a variable someplace - then read an operator and another number - apply that to the the thing you have remembered - then overwrite that location with the answer ready for the next operation.
However, if you want the standard order of operator precedence to work - with bracketing and the whole nine yards - then you have a considerably more complex problem to solve.  Basically, the best way is to break the expression down into a "parse tree" so that 1+2*3 becomes:
This  is where I asked a follow-up question.
I asked for more help and updated the situation, but the aboe question came up first.
The answer from Yahoo was simple: you can't do this.
Well, I used to be able to do it. And it still seems to work on Firefox, but I'm not changing browsers.
Anyway, I've figured out how to work around it. If I have sent an email or put an email in a folder, I had better not use the back button, and I had better never want to go back to any particular email I sent myself. Actually, with my own computer, I suppose I could start text files with what I sent myself from other computers, but then I'd have an even harder time finding anything. It was always so simple: go to Yahoo (or whatever other email service I go to on other computers), click on what email contains what I want, or if I don't see it, do a search for it. My mind just doesn't work any other way. &nbsp;'''  '''  &nbsp;'''  '''  &nbsp;'''  ''' 17:17, 23 October 2009 (UTC)
I'm not saying I couldn't, but Yahoo could make this work since it did work at one time. I also don't like tabs, or Firefox. I also don't like Gmail. What I normally do is open a new window, but at some point that can cause problems too, because there will be too many. The solution for this Yahoo problem, when I need to look up something new, will obviously be to open a new window as I won't have the ability to go back within the one I am already in. To prevent the problem, I will have to close it when I'm through. When I don't have to go back in Yahoo email, I will have to go forward with whatever buttons I can see.
If I learn too much new stuff, I start forgetting other stuff. Obviously I had to go through a lot of learning when I got a computer. But I can only take in so much, and once I've learned a way to do things, that's how I do them. &nbsp;'''  '''  &nbsp;'''  '''  &nbsp;'''  ''' 18:03, 23 October 2009 (UTC)
How can I know which files are stored in a domain xy.com/?   ( ) 17:53, 23 October 2009 (UTC)
Who invented the BIOS and when? I could not find any sources about that anywhere. --  ( ) 19:19, 23 October 2009 (UTC)
CP/M was certainly the first '''''microprocessor''''' OS to have a BIOS.  The reason was twofold:
When CP/M became CP/M-86 and Microsoft cloned it to make the first version of PC-DOS, both DOS and CP/M-86 used the same BIOS design.  The BIOS has evolved since then but it's still essentially the same thing.  So the BIOS in a modern PC, essentially IS the CP/M BIOS.  However, over time, the function of the BIOS has changed.  Because you can plug (for example) any manufacturer's graphics card into any motherboard - it's become impractical to put every screen driver into every BIOS ROM.  So the BIOS does the minimum possible to get the OS into memory - and the OS relies on drivers loaded from disk to do the work.  Once the PC has booted, the BIOS has no further function anymore.
Similar boot ROM's must have existed for mainframe and mini-computers prior to the CP/M BIOS - but I'm not aware of them ever being "open" in the way that CP/M's was - and I doubt that device drivers were kept in ROM either - so those would have been more like a modern PC's BIOS - nothing more than a boot ROM.
Other small computers of the CP/M era generally had all of their operating system software (such as it was) in ROM - so the issue of cross-compatibility didn't crop up.  Your Apple ][, PET, TRS-80 or whatever had BASIC in ROM - and that was that.  They didn't have to boot from floppy - and the ROM software was custom-written for each type of machine with little or no goal of compatibility.  Hence, no need for a BIOS.
CP/M was really the first - and quite possibly the last - truly portable OS.  Elegant in it's way - and mind-numbingly simple!
So, I suppose Gary Kildall gets the credit for the first thing called a 'BIOS' - and all modern PC BIOS's are descended from it - but he didn't invent the concept of a boot-ROM - which is really all that a BIOS is these days.  I have no clue who invented '''that'''.
In Python, what is the simplest way to detect a keypress (which key doesn't matter; all I'm concerned about is that a key was pressed)?
If it's material to the question, I use Ubuntu 9.04.  Lucas Brown 42 23:17, 23 October 2009 (UTC)
We have two Dell laptops and a similar thing is happening to both.  My wife has a D600.  The "tapping" feature on the trackpad, which registers a "click" when you tap the pad, will just stop working.  To get it back you need to open the mouse control panel, go in and turn off "tapping" and then turn it back on.  
I have an inspiron 700m and the trackpad will just forget that I have the scrolling feature turned on, where the rightmost centimeter of the trackpad is the scrollbar.  In my case all I need to do is open the mouse control panel and press the "OK" button at the bottom without changing anything and it works.  I'll be happy to provide any more detailed info about my system if it would help in solving the problem.     23:44, 23 October 2009 (UTC)