Voting America has three types of cinematic maps. The maps were developed with ArcGIS and Adobe AfterEffects with data supplied by the University of Minnesota   s National Historical Geographic Information System project.
The first type of cinematic maps displays the change of voting data over time beginning in 1840 and ending in 2008. These maps include analysis of voting at the state level, county level, raw number of votes, percentage of votes cast by party, margins of victory, and election turnout.
The second group of cinematic maps analyzes voting data for individual presidential elections from 1840 to 2008. Instead of showing change over time, these cinematic maps play a series of maps for the selected election showing analysis of voting at the state level, county level, raw number of votes, percentage of votes cast by party, margins of victory, and election turnout.
The third group of cinematic maps depicts population statistics of the United States of America for each election from 1840 to 2008. The maps that can be viewed are maps of the African American population, White population, and both African American and White populations.
The second feature involves collaboration with Google. The project made its maps since 1980 available through Google Earth and Google Maps, again allowing a user to explore the data on her or his own.
Andrew J. Torget led the development of Voting America as the director of the Digital Scholarship Lab at the University of Richmond. A historian of America in the nineteenth-century, he has also developed Texas Slavery Project and the History Engine: Tools for Collaborative Education and Research in addition to co-editing two books.
Nathaniel Ayers works at the Digital Scholarship Lab as a programmer analyst. He created the online interface in addition to developing Voting America   s depictions of electoral data.
Scott Nesbit is the associate director of the Digital Scholarship Lab. On Voting America, he served as a historical consultant, helping to create the history of political maps for the project.
Amanda Kleintop is a history major at the University of Richmond and research intern for the Digital Scholarship Lab making the project mapping   s dataset of state-level data.
Edward L. Ayers is a digital historian and the president of the University of Richmond. He was the consulting editor of Voting America.
Jerome M. Clubb, William H. Flanigan and Nacny H. Zingale   s study    Electoral Data for Counties in the United States: Presidential and Congressional races, 1840-1972,    provided data for 1840 to 1972. Polidata.org provided the data and the license for the datasets of the Presidential elections from 1976 to 2004.