In October 2009, members of the Linnean Society proposed an accompanying formal phylogenetic classification of all land plants, compatible with the APG III classification. This was needed because botanists and phycologists often disagree on the taxonomic rank to which groups are assigned.
The APG III system recognized all of the 45 orders of the previous system, as well as 14 new ones. The order Ceratophyllales was erroneously marked as a new order, but it had been recognized in both of the previous APG systems. The newly recognized orders were:
The designation of alternative "bracketed families" was abandoned in APG III, because its inclusion in the previous system had been unpopular. APG III recognized 415 families, 42 fewer than in the previous system. Forty-four of the 55 "bracketed families" were discontinued, and 18 other families were discontinued as well.
The discontinued bracketed families were: 
The other discontinued families were: 
20 families were accepted in the APG III system which had not been in the previous system, and a few families were moved to a different position. The newly recognized families are:
The number of families not placed in any order was reduced from 39 to 10. Apodanthaceae and Cynomoriaceae were placed among the angiosperms, incertae sedis, that is, not in any group within the angiosperms. Eight other families were placed incertae sedis in various supra-ordinal groups within the angiosperms. The unplaced families were: 
The circumscription of the family Icacinaceae remains especially doubtful. ''Apodytes'', ''Emmotum'', ''Cassinopsis'', and a few other genera were provisionally retained within it until further studies can determine whether they properly belong there.
Three genera (''Gumillea'', ''Nicobariodendron'', and ''Petenaea'') were placed within the angiosperms incertae sedis. ''Gumillea'' had been unplaced in APG II. ''Nicobariodendron'' and ''Petenaea'' were newly added to the list. The latter was later placed into its own family Petenaeaceae in the order Huerteales
The classification is shown below in two versions. The short version goes to the level of orders and of families unplaced in an order. The detailed version shows all the families. Orders at the same level in the classification are arranged alphabetically. Note that orders may not contain the same families as in earlier versions of the APG system (APG system, APG II system).
Further detail on relationships can be seen in the phylogenetic tree below.
Legend:
The APG III system was based on a phylogenetic tree for the angiosperms which included all of the 59 orders and 4 of the unplaced families. The systematic positions of the other 6 unplaced families was so uncertain that they could not be placed in any of the polytomies in the tree. They are shown in the classification table entitled "Detailed version" above.
The phylogenetic tree shown below was published with the APG III system, but without some of the labels that are added here.
A number of subfamilies have been proposed to replace some of the families which were optional (i.e. bracketed) in APG II, but have been discontinued in APG III. These are shown in the table below.