Electron Solar Energy was one of the first developers of solar energy systems to achieve a 150 MPH wind rating for their residential and commercial solar energy systems in 2008.  This engineering exceeded the requirements for Miami Dade County Florida building codes, which are the most stringent in the United States for wind, due to the violent hurricanes that south Florida has been known to experience such as hurricane Andrew in 1992.
With its roots in the battery industry, as a manufacturer and distributor Electron Solar Energy has rapidly expanded since its inception, entering the renewable energy business in 2004 with turn-key pre-designed grid-tie and off grid systems which it sold through its international distribution network. In January 2008 Electron acquired a cable manufacturing company based in Boca Raton Florida to help further vertically integrate the business and to bring overall costs for renewable energy systems down. The company followed up the acquisition by winning a bid to provide the Haitian medical industry with 100 pre-designed solar energy PV systems solidly establishing Electron as a large scale custom production and distributor to governments and institutions.
Previous to 2008 Electron Solar Energy   s primary business was overseas, however when gas reach over $4.00 a gallon and public interest in the US shifted to concentrate on renewable energy, Electron rapidly re-focused its business to concentrate on the markets at home. In May 2008, Ken Fields installed Uni-Solar thin film flexible solar panels on the roof of his Miami Beach home to become the first permitted Solar PV installation on South Beach.
With its experience in the Caribbean and South Florida, Electron Solar Energy has excelled at addressing the added engineering needs of renewable energy in Hurricane prone communities     both through the use of approved panels and specializing in the engineering and installation of traditional    hard PV panels   .
The high cost and long payback of renewable energy systems has historically been a barrier to widespread adoption of the various technologies. Recognizing the need for cleaner energy generation governments around the globe have been rapidly adopting financial incentives for photovoltaics and other renewable energy systems. Government incentives are often difficult to interpret and are prone to change according various funds available. Electron Solar Energy has been active in educating the public on the various incentives through neighborhood and media outreaches.
Addressing the high cost of renewable energy systems to the consumer and the need for rapid and widespread adoption in an economic climate still recovering from the late-2000s recession, Electron Solar Energy announced in October 2009 that the company would begin offering same-as-cash financing for their product line.