Green Comm Challenge achieved worldwide notoriety in 2007, when it enlisted as one of the challengers in the 33rd edition of the America's Cup, an effort meant to show how researchers, technologists and entrepreneurs from around the world can be brought together by an exciting vision: building the ultimate renewable energy machine, a competitive America   s Cup boat.
ICT is helping society become more energy efficient: think of the positive impact on  emissions of telecommuting and ecommerce for example.  Computers are helping us design more energy efficient products. But there is little doubt that, while other industries strive to become more energy efficient, computers and networks themselves risk becoming the    energy hogs    of the future, unless something is done.
Powering the over 1 billion personal computers, the millions of corporate data centers, the over 4 billion fixed and mobile telephones and telecommunications networks around the world requires approximately 1.4 Petawatt-hr a year () of electricity, approximately 8% of the global electrical energy produced in 2005. And consider that over 4 billion people around the world have never used a cell phone, almost three times as many as those who currently have access to one.  
 but these projections may fail to take into account some of the disruptive trends we are witnessing today.   Take Google for example: to power the over 75 billion searches performed in July 2009 the company needed an estimated one million servers, consuming an estimated 1.3 Terawatt-hr a year ().  The number of searches has grown over 60% between 2008 and 2009 alone.  It is no surprise that the company is planning to manage as many as 10 million servers in the future. 
The explosion of video on the net is another disruptive element. The Amesterdam Internet exchange (AMS-IX), which handles approximately 20% of Europe   s traffic, saw its aggregate data traffic increase from 1.75 Petabyte per day in November 2007 to an expected 4 Petabyte per day in November 2009. Much of this rapid increase in traffic is driven by widespread use of voice and, in particular, video over the Internet.
Green Comm Challenge   s founders believe that defining a corollary to Moore   s Law is in order:  increases in processor performance must be accompanied by a less-than proportional increase in energy consumption. 
This, of course, is no easy undertaking. It will require a new engineering approach to designing computers, cell phones and networks. It will also require a new management culture, capable of recognizing the attractive ROIs that green technology can generate, in addition to being more sensitive to the environmental impact of management's decisions. 
This is why Green Comm has fully embraced the ICT energy-efficiency challenge by establishing an interdisciplinary approach that involves some of the most innovative thinkers around the world.  We are currently involved in the following four initiatives: