In April 2009 the company won the Queen's Award, Enterprise in the Innovation category for their entire range.  
In July 2009 the solargorilla, the company's solar panel for laptops won the OutDoor Award for Best Accessory.
In November 2009, the solargorilla won The Oldie Magazine's 'Don't Leave Home Without It' award for the best travel gadget 
Launched in 2005, the powermonkey was the first portable power product to be launched by Powertraveller.  Compatible with mobiles phones, iPods, hand-held games consoles, sat navs, PDAs and GPS units, the powermonkey is supplied with ten tips for the most popular devices - including an iPod tip - plus a worldwide mains adapter.  In 2009, the powermonkey underwent an upgrade to ensure compatibility with the Apple iPhone and four additional colours were launched (black, pink, purple and blue). The powermonkey is charged up in one of two ways: from the mains or from the USB.  To fully charge a powermonkey from the mains, allow three hours, or five hours from a USB.  Once the powermonkey is fully charged it can then be used to completely charge different electronic devices - a fully charged powermonkey will recharge a mobile phone three times (iPhone around 1 1/2 times).   A fully charged powermonkey will give iPod users an additional 40 hours of power, PSP/DS users around 5 extra hours.
In 2006 the company launched the powermonkey-eXplorer as a direct result of feedback from consumers who requested the option to power and charge the powermonkey directly from the sun.  The powermonkey was redesigned with rubber casing, a LCD display to show the level of charge and importantly, the addition of a solar panel, the solarmonkey.  The powermonkey-eXplorer has exactly the same functionality as the original powermonkey, comes with the same ten tips and a worldwide mains adapter.
The solarmonkey is a small solar panel for charging portable electronic devices.  The solarmonkey uses solar power to charge devices, a completely renewable energy source. The solarnut is specially designed for use with just the solarmonkey to reserve redundant solar energy and supplement solarmonkey output current on a cloudy day, ensuring a steady flow of electric current to the device being charged.
The Powergorilla is a portable laptop backup battery. The device is able to charge laptops and other portable electronic devices, such as cell phones and mp3 players. Like the Powermonkey, the Powergorilla is able to be charged via the Solargorilla solar charger or a wall outlet. Two Solargorillas are able to be linked to the Powergorilla via a Y cable to double the solar power entering the unit. The Powergorilla can be used to charge small electronic devices and laptops. The Powergorilla features a small LCD to indicate charge levels and voltage selection. In order to charge an Apple laptop, the Powergorilla requires a MagSafe Airline Adapter. However, the Powergorilla is unable to ''charge'' Apple laptops, only ''power'' them, which is to say that an Apple laptop battery will not charge while connected to the Powergorilla. The Minigorilla is a smaller, more compact Powergorilla meant for more energy efficient laptops and netbooks.
The Solargorilla is a large but portable photovoltaic solar energy panel for charging laptops and other small electronics, as well as the Powergorilla. Like the Solarmonkey, the Solargorilla is designed to use renewable energy to charge small electronics. The Solargorilla is also able to provide power, while not necessarily charge, to laptops. The Solarmonkey features a small light to indicate the amount of solar power it is receiving. The use of the Solargorilla helps to provide portable backup power for laptops, while also reducing the carbon footprint of the electricity that might otherwise come from high-carbon emission sources such as coal.
The uvmonkey is a keychain-sized Ultraviolet index, or UV index, checker. The device changes color to indicate the UV index to notify the user of optimal solar energy charging times and, in a tongue-in-cheek way, of when to put on sunscreen. The device is meant to be used with the Solarmonkey to allow the user to charge the device during optimal conditions.
The Motormonkey is a slimline car charger for use with Powertraveller's wide selection of charging tips. The device features a number of notable features, such as selectively drawing power to only use it when a device needs it, turning off when a device's battery is fully charged, and a retractable USB cable.
The Silverback-Gorilla is a larger version of the Powergorilla that also acts as a portable Uninterruptible Power Supply unit. The Silverback-Gorilla features a 240v AC socket, with a settable voltage for different devices/territories. The Silverback-Gorilla is designed for use with a laptop or desktop computer, but can be used with smaller electronics as well. The battery life is advertised at fourteen hours. Other advertised/planned features include a small toggleable audible chime when it loses its power supply, becoming the primary power source for the devices connected to it; the ability to charge multiple devices at once or to charge the Silverback-Gorilla and charge small electronics at the same time; output auto-lock; voltage limitation protection; short circuit protection; overcharging protection; and overheating protection. The Silverback-Gorilla will be chargeable via the solargorilla-eXtreme. While not confirmed, it is also speculated that the Silverback-Gorilla will be chargeable via the Solargorilla.
The Solargorilla-eXtreme is a solar panel developed for use in conjunction with the Silverback-Gorilla. The device is expected to contain one meter by sixty centimeters of solar surfaces (appx. 39x24 inches). Expected to be designed similarly to the Solargorilla and Solarmonkey, the solar surface will be split across two panels with a hinge in the middle to fold the device, increasing portability. Advertised to charge the Silverback-Gorilla within five hours.
While Powertraveller's products have been positively reviewed by technology press sources such as PC World  and Laptopmag.com, concerns over costliness are common.  The Inquirer in their review of the minigorilla called it "Pricey, although its versatility somewhat makes up for this."
Other users have had concerns about the Powermonkey overheating while in the sun, causing the LCD screen to black out and the plastic to loosen. However, Powertraveller's website recommends that the Powermonkey be hidden from the sun while connected to the Solarmonkey during charging.
Laptopmag.com complained that the battery life of the Powergorilla was substandard, citing that it took four hours to charge their unit, and provided two to six hours of extra lifetime to laptops. Other reviews have echoed this criticism, with the Inquirer claiming the minigorilla does "not  a massive capacity, but plenty for most mobile emergencies."