The '''NGA Hooters Tour''' is a developmental men's golf tour in the United States. It includes approximately twenty 72-hole Pro Series events and three 54-hole Q School Prep Series events each year throughout the US South and Midwest. The Hooters Tour also runs a highly successful Winter Series called The Bridgestone Winter Series featuring 12 events and located in Central Florida, a Carolinas Winter Series played in Myrtle Beach, SC, as well as a summertime Carolina Series featuring 14 events located mainly in Charlotte, NC & Myrtle Beach, SC. Entry fees range from $550 for the Winter and Carolina Series events, to $1150 for the regular tour events, and prizes are paid out primarily from those entry fees. Winter and Carolina Series purses are generally around $85,000 while regular tour purses are $200,000 guaranteed each week. All told, Hooters Tour players will tee it up for more than $5.7 million dollars in 2011.
Three men's pro golf tours based in the United States pay out more in prize money than the Hooters Tour. The greatest competition is in the highest-paying PGA Tour. The second-tier Nationwide Tour offers prizes smaller than the PGA Tour but attracts many up-and-coming golfers trying to obtain their PGA Tour cards. The Champions Tour, which is restricted to competitors over aged 50 or older, has prize levels between the PGA and Nationwide Tours. The Hooters Tour is the third largest tour in the US after the PGA and Nationwide Tours.
Whereas the PGA Tour corporation organizes its namesake tour, the Nationwide Tour, and the Champions Tour, the Hooters Tour is run by a separate organization with no affiliation to the PGA. The NGA Hooters Tour is a private company founded by T.C. "Rick" Jordan in 1988 and later sold to Hooters restaurant chain owner Robert H. Brooks in 1994. While Hooters is the title sponsor, the Tour is not owned by the corporation, it is owned by the Brooks estate. The Tour is headquartered in Longs, South Carolina. The Hooters Tour predates the PGA Tour owned Nationwide Tour as the longest running developmental tour in the United States.
Unlike the PGA Tour and Nationwide Tour, for which prize funds are provided by sponsors, the bulk of the prize fund paid out in Hooters Tour events comes from player entry fees. Like poker tournaments, players are competing to win back their entry fees (and the entry fees from others). However, thanks in part to national sponsorship, Hooters Tour players actually play for 107% of their entry fees, while other developmental tours typically pay back only 65-75% of entry fees. In 2010 the total prize fund was over $5.7 million dollars, the leading money winner, Michael Thompson (Birmingham, AL), had earnings of $111,817. Russell Knox (Jacksonville Beach, FL) earned $101,960, Matthew Harmon (Grand Rapids, MI) earned $ 100,896 while 16 others made $50,000 or more. The Hooters Tour paid PGA Tour Qualifying School entry fees for 21 players (Typically $4500 per person) in 2010. In 2010 the Hooters Tour received 6 exemptions into individual Nationwide Tour events and one exemption into the annual Hootie and the Blowfish Monday After The Masters Tournament.
In 2011 The Hooters Tour's top 30 members on the season ending points list will get their PGA Tour Qualifying School fees reimbursed.
The 2011 schedule  features 20 events each with at least $200,000 in guaranteed prize funds and three Q School Prep Series events with estimated purses of $132,000 each. This is approximately one-fifth of the prize money available on the second-tier Nationwide Tour, which has over thirty events with prize pools of $525,000 to $1,000,000, and little more than twelve percent of that on the PGA Tour, which has forty-seven events with an average prize pool over $6.3 million dollars per event. 
Notable courses scheduled for 2011 are:
Each Pro Series event on the Hooters Tour follows the same structure. Entry fees range from $750 to $1350, depending on Tour membership, amateur status, and if one plays in the qualifier. A field of 168 players start on Thursday, playing one round of 18 holes each day. After two rounds, the top 65 players and ties continue on to the third and fourth round of play. Players that make the second-round cut are in the money, which ranges (approximately) from $1000 to $30,000. The 168-player field is first filled by ''exempt'' members of the Tour. Most years the top 120 points leaders from the previous year are granted exempt status. Any player may request one of limited number of exemptions granted each year. A player will usually be granted exemption by good performance in previous years (e.g. by being one of the highest money winners in the previous season), by having a successful professional career elsewhere and looking to move up to the Hooters Tour, or by having an outstanding amateur career. Exempt status can also be earned by performing well during one of the four ranking schools held by the Tour each winter.  Only the top 10-15% of players from the ranking school are fully exempt; the rest gain exempt status partway through the season. Ten players from a qualifier played the Monday before the event are also granted entry; less than ten if there are fewer than 16 players in the qualifier, but more players if there are open spots in the field. More detailed information on events, membership, etc. can be found in the Player's Handbook .
Major championship winners:
Other golfers who have won at least one PGA Tour event:
At PGA Tour Qualifying School 48% (12-25) of those players who earned their 2010 PGA Tour card played on the Hooters Tour.
27 of the 51 players (53%) who earned full exempt status on The Nationwide Tour have played on the Hooters Tour in the past.
All told, of the 170 players that competed in the 6 round final stage and 42% (71 players) have played on the NGA/Hooters Tour in the past.
This is a list of golfers who have won four or more official money events.