Missoula was founded in 1860 as Hellgate Trading Post before being renamed Missoula Mills ("Missoula" from the Salish name for the area, "Nemissoolatakoo", and "Mills" after the prosperous flour mill and sawmill that served as Missoula's first industry). "Mills" was dropped from the name and in 1877, the establishment of Fort Missoula ensured the survival of the city.
Though founded as a lumber and agricultural center as well as a trading post, the basis of Missoula's modern economy is the University of Montana, government, healthcare, tourism, and professional services.
In addition to the University of Montana, Missoula is perhaps best known for being the birthplace of first woman elected to the U.S. Congress, Jeannette Rankin, and the home of Montana's largest brewery. Missoula is also the headquarters of Montana Rail Link.  
Today's Missoula lies at the bottom of what once was Glacial Lake Missoula, a  proglacial lake which stretched from  south and east of Missoula north to today's Flathead Lake and west to Idaho's Lake Pend Oreille.   Held in place by a glacial dam, this lake drained and refilled repeatedly over 2,000 years during the past Ice Age.  When the flood waters cleared, the resultant Missoula Valley became a geographic hub of five mountain valleys formed by the Bitterroot Mountains, Sapphire Range, Garnet Range, Rattlesnake Mountains, and Reservation Divide.  
The oldest artifacts date from the end of the glacial lake period around 12,000 years ago with the first-known settlements dating from 3,500 BCE.  From the 1700s until European settlement, the region was used by Salish, Kootenai, Pend d'Oreille, Blackfoot, and Shoshone tribes.
As a natural corridor through the mountains, the valley was the scene of great conflict between local Native American tribes and those traversing the region to and from Montana's eastern plains, which were rich with buffalo.  The narrow valley at Missoula's eastern entrance was so strewn with human bones from repeated ambushes that French fur trappers would later refer to this area as "Porte d' Enfer," translated as "Hell's Gate".  Hell Gate would remain the name of the area until it was renamed "Missoula" in 1866.http://www.historicmissoula.org/History/FromtheBeginning/EarlyEarlyMissoula/tabid/192/Default.aspx Historic Missoula: Early, Early Missoula
The first European Americans to visit what would become Missoula were members of the Lewis and Clark Expedition.  The expedition stopped twice just south of Missoula at Traveler's Rest; first from September 9   11, 1805, and again from June 30-July 3, 1806.  From here, the Lewis and Clark Expedition split up on the return from the Pacific, with Clark taking the southern route along the Bitterroot River and Lewis travelling north through Hellgate Canyon on July 4.
The region was first surveyed by Washington Territory governor Isaac Stevens in the 1850s by Congressional request as a means of developing a transcontinental rail route.  Stevens would also negotiate the Treaty of Hellgate through which the Native American tribes of western Montana relinquished their territories to the U.S. government.  Stevens was assisted by Lieutenant John Mullan who would build the Mullan Road in 1853. The wagon road was the first to cross the Rocky Mountains to the inland of the Pacific Northwest, and would enable the establishment of Fort Missoula in 1877.
Settlement in Missoula began five miles (8&nbsp;km) to the west near modern Frenchtown in 1860 as a trading post founded by Christopher P. Higgins, who had been present at the Treaty of Hellgate, and business partner Francis L. Worden, with the expectation that the Mullan Road and any future railroad would necessarily pass through the valley.  Their gamble was correct and Hell Gate became the Missoula County seat in 1860; the first post office was established on November 25, 1862, with Worden as the first postmaster.  The settlement moved upstream to its modern location in 1864 as Higgins and Worden's desire to build a lumber and flour mill required a more convenient water supply to power the gristmill.
The Missoula Mills replaced Hell Gate Village as the economic power of the valley and replaced it as the county seat in 1866.  The name "Missoula" comes from the Salish name for the Clark Fork River, which runs through the city.  The name       nmesuletk        , though often mistakenly believed to translate as "River of Ambush" as a reflection of the inter-tribal fighting common to the area, actually has the approximate meaning of "place of freezing/cold liquid", or more roughly "cold water" (cf. Interior Salishan locative marker n-, Southern Interior Salishan sul, 'cold/frozen', and -etk  , 'liquid'). This name is thought by some Salish tribal members to refer to Glacial Lake Missoula.
Missoula never "boomed" as many western Montana towns did as a consequence of the gold rush, though the town did grow rapidly, and by 1872 the town had 66 new buildings.  Higgins and Worden established the town's first stores and banks, but by 1876 the pair faced its largest competition and rivalry from Eddy, Hammond and company, who established the Missoula Mercantile Company.
By the 1880s growth had slowed, but the arrival of the Northern Pacific Railway in 1883 caused growth to accelerate again and Territorial Governor Benjamin F. Potts approved a charter for the Town of Missoula.  The need for lumber for the railway and its bridges spurred the opening of multiple saw mills in the area and, in turn, the beginning of Missoula's lumber industry.  The economic frenzy led to the construction of many of the historic buildings in downtown today.  In particular, architect A. J. Gibson arrived in the late 1880s and designed many of Missoula's most recognizable buildings, including the Missoula County Courthouse and the University of Montana's Main Hall.
In an agreement with Helena that Missoula would not enter a bid to become the new state of Montana's capital and not openly support nearer by Anaconda, Missoula was able to win the vote to be the home of the state's university in 1893.  Land south of the Clark Fork River (Downtown had established itself north of the river) was donated for the construction of the campus.
The continued economic windfall from railroad construction and lumber mills led to a further boom in Missoula's population.  A.B. Hammond and Copper Kings Marcus Daly and William A. Clark competed fiercely in the region over lumber share and Missoula investments, and in 1908 Missoula became the district, and later a regional, headquarters for the United States Forest Service, which also began training smokejumpers in 1942.
In the 1930s, Missoula was able to obtain fourteen Civil Works Administration projects that helped build the airport, Orange Street Bridge, several schools, and four major buildings at the university.
Logging remained a mainstay of industry in Missoula with the groundbreaking of the Hoerner-Waldorf pulp mill in 1956, which led to subsequent protests over the resultant air pollution. In 1979, almost 40% of the county's labor income came from the wood and paper products sector.  By the early 1990s, however, many of the region's log yards, along with legislation, had cleaned the skies, though the valley's topography still makes the city susceptible to lingering smoke from forest fires and winter smog.
The start of the modern era began when all the logging yards in Missoula, which had once completely driven the city's economy, vanished.  Once logging vanished, the Missoula Downtown Association was born and downtown Missoula became what it is today.  With the completion of the First Interstate Bank, the First Security Bank, the new St. Patrick Hospital and Health Sciences Center, and the Millenium Building, the second tallest building in Missoula, downtown finally started to look modern. Recently, the brand new Garlington Building completed its construction; further increasing the number of modern buildings in Missoula.
Missoula is located at  (46.872146, -113.9939982), at an altitude of 3,209&nbsp;feet (978&nbsp;m).
According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of 23.9&nbsp;square miles (61.9&nbsp;km  ), of which 23.8&nbsp;square miles (61.6&nbsp;km  ) is land and 0.1&nbsp;square miles (0.3&nbsp;km  ) (0.46%) is water. Missoula is located in a deep valley in the western part of the state, near where the Clark Fork River is joined by the Bitterroot and Blackfoot Rivers.
  These 15   30 foot ripple marks were first noted as evidence of the rapid draining of Glacial Lake Missoula by USGS employee Joseph Pardee in his 1942 publication ''Unusual Currents in Glacial Lake Missoula'' and supporting J Harlen Bretz's popularly dismissed 1923 theory of the Missoula Floods forming the Channeled Scablands of Eastern Washington.  
Evidence of the city of Missoula's lake bottom past can be seen in the form of ancient wave-cut shorelines that can now be seen as horizontal lines on nearby mountains Mount Sentinel and Mount Jumbo. At the location of present-day University of Montana, the lake once had a depth of .
As could be expected for a former lake bottom, the layout of Missoula is relatively flat and surrounded by steep hills.  The Clark Fork River enters the Missoula Valley from the east just after it joins with the Blackfoot River at the site of the former Milltown Dam.  The Bitterroot River and multiple smaller tributaries join the Clark Fork after the river enters Missoula.
The surrounding terrain also gives Missoula its moniker of being the "Hub of Five Valleys" in reference to the five mountain ranges and valleys that converge in the valley: The Bitterroot Mountains, Sapphire Range, Garnet Range, Rattlesnake Mountains, and the '''Reservation Divide'''.
Missoula's location in the Northern Rockies has endowed the region with a typical Rocky Mountain ecology. Local wildlife includes populations of white-tailed deer, black bears, osprey, and bald eagles.  During the winter months, Mount Jumbo is home to grazing elk and mule deer, preferred for because of its rapid snow melt due to its steep slope.  
The rivers around Missoula provide nesting habitats for bank swallows, northern rough-winged swallows and belted kingfishers.  Killdeer and spotted sandpipers can be seen foraging insects along the gravel bars.  Other species include song sparrows, catbirds, several species of warblers, and the pileated woodpecker. 
The rivers also provide cold, high quality water for native fish such as westslope cutthroat trout and bull trout.  The meandering streams also attract bear and wood ducks.http://www.ci.missoula.mt.us/DocumentView.aspx?DID=4174 Missoula Conservation Land Management Plan, (2010 June 01).
Native riparian plant life includes sandbar willows and cottonwoods with Montana's state tree, the Ponderosa Pine, also being prevalent.  Other native plants include wetland species such as cattails and beaked-sedge as well as shrubs and berry plants such as Douglas hawthorn, chokecherry, and western snowberries.
Missoula is also unfortunately home to several noxious weeds which multiple programs have set out to eliminate.  Notable ones include dalmatian toadflax, spotted knapweed, leafy spurge, St. John's wort, and sulfur cinquefoil.
Missoula has a semi-arid climate (Koppen climate classification ''BSk''), with cold and moderately snowy winters, hot and dry summers, and spring and autumn are short and crisp in between. Winter conditions are usually far milder than much of the rest of the state due to its western position within the state. However the mildness is also induced by the dampness, as unlike much of the rest of the state, precipitation is not at a strong minimum during winter. Winter snowfall averages , with most years seeing very little of it from April to October. Summers see very sunny conditions, with highs peaking at  in July. However, temperature differences between day and night are large during this time and from April to October, due to the relative aridity.
In the mid-1860s C.P. Higgins and Francis Worden began plotting what would become the town of Missoula along the Mullan military road along the northern bank of the Clark Fork River.  This road, which today in downtown Missoula is known as Front St. was then intersected by Higgins Ave. which continued as a bridge to the southern side of the river.  From this intersection of Higgins and Front, which continues as the numerical center of the city, development spread along the road with homes to the north toward the surrounding hills.  The arrival of the railroad in 1883 brought with it a rapid increase in population which settled along the track.  When the university was founded in 1893, the land donated for its cause south of the Clark Fork was still little more than farm land. Development continued east along Mullan Road and south along the road to Lolo, Montana which today is known as Brooks St.
The city primarily follows a standard north-south grid pattern, though newer subdivisions and residential areas located on hills often do not follow the established pattern.  Notable exceptions to the grid pattern are Downtown where the grid follows the contour of the river and a section of the Rose Park Neighborhood where the grid instead aligns with Brooks St. (Highway 12), one of only two arterials (the other being Stephens Ave.) to traverse the city diagonally.  The Bitterroot Branch of Montana Rail Link also traverses Missoula diagonally south of the river while the main branch as well as Interstate-90 move with the river and hill's terrain north of the Clark Fork.
The city of Missoula is divided into eighteen neighborhood councils of which all Missoula residents are a member.  The city further contains ten historical districts.
Missoula is the primary city of the Missoula Metropolitan Statistical Area with all other communities within Missoula County also being part of said area.  
Missoula is home to over 60 buildings on the National Register of Historic Places beginning with the A.J. Gibson designed County Courthouse constructed in 1908 and added to the list in 1976.  The Post Office, Wilma Theatre and Higgin's Block were all added a couple years later.  In the early 1990s both the Gleim Building, a former brothel, was added to the list along with the University District.
For a full list of Missoula's tallest buildings in the city; List of tallest buildings in Missoula.
The Missoula Metropolitan Statistical Area is the second largest metropolitan area in the U.S. state of Montana. Located in the West-central portion of the state. The 2010 census shows its population at 109,299 
It is one of the largest metropolitan area between Boise, Idaho, and Calgary, Alberta, Canada, and Coeur d'Alene, Idaho and Billings, Montana. It is also the second largest media market in the state of Montana, and also has one of the best Health care facility programs in its surrounding area.
The 2010 Census put Missoula's population at 66,788. There currently are 57,053 people, 24,141 households, and 12,336 families residing in the city. The population density was 2,397.1 people per square mile (925.6/km  ) in 2000. There were 25,225 housing units at an average density of 1,059.8 per square mile (409.2/km  ). The racial makeup of the city was 93.57% White, 2.35% Native American, 1.23% Asian, 0.36% African American, 0.10% Pacific Islander, 0.51% from other races, and 1.87% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.76% of the population.
There were 24,141 households out of which 24.6% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 37.9% were married couples living together, 10.0% had a female householder with no husband present, and 48.9% were non-families. 33.6% of all households were made up of individuals and 8.9% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.23 and the average family size was 2.88.
In the city the population was spread out with 19.7% under the age of 18, 20.7% from 18 to 24, 29.4% from 25 to 44, 19.8% from 45 to 64, and 10.4% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 30 years. For every 100 females, there were 98.8 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 97.1 males.
The median income for a household in the city was $30,366, and the median income for a family was $42,103. Males had a median income of $30,686 versus $21,559 for females. The per capita income for the city was $17,166. About 11.7% of families and 19.7% of the population were below the poverty line, including 20.5% of those under age 18 and 9.3% of those age 65 or over.  40.3% of Missoula residents age 25 and older have a bachelor's or advanced college degree.
Timber demand for the railroad lead to the setting up of numerous saw mills, which were gradually consolidated, and the lumber industry remained important to the Missoula economy for much of the 20th century.
Today, Missoula's economy has diversified with Education, health care, retail, government, and professional services all playing an important part in the economy at large.  In particular, the University of Montana is the region's largest employer, while St. Patrick Hospital and the Community Medical Center follow making Missoula the regional medical center.
According to the Montana Department of Labor, the fastest growing occupations for the state as a whole are Forensic Science Technicians, Medical Assistants, Industrial Engineers, Food Prep and Service, and Physical Therapist Assistants.  The fastest growing industries are Administrative & Support Services, Administrative & Waste Services, Arts Entertainment & Recreation, Professional & Business Services, Professional & Technical Services, and Health Care & Social Assistance.
Missoula is home to the Missoula Convention and Visitors Bureau, which was founded in 2003. The Missoula Convention and Visitors Bureau has been formed exclusively for the promotion of tourism, the development of effective methods of attracting and hosting conventions and events for Missoula and the surrounding area, and to educate the local community of the significance of the tourism as an economic driver.  The promotion and development was a huge part in the making of this organization.
One of the most popular shopping destinations in the state, and servicing over 7 million customers each year, Southgate Mall is currently the largest enclosed regional shopping center of its kind in all of Western Montana.
Missoula has a thriving arts scene.  The Big Sky Documentary Film Festival, the largest film event in Montana, takes place each February and showcases over 100 non-fiction films from around the world.  The International Wildlife Film Festival, is held annually at the historic Wilma Theatre.  The Missoula Children's Theater  is an international touring program that visits nearly 1,000 communities per year. The Children's Theater routinely has residencies in all fifty states, Canada, Japan, Germany, Italy, and many other countries.  The Missoula Art Museum , exhibits a variety of contemporary art.  The museum was founded in 1975, and in 2005 the facilities were renovated and expanded.  The museum offers art classes, tours, gallery talks, and has free admission.
The city is frequently mentioned in novels of Ernest Hemingway, Stephen Frey, Chuck Palahniuk, James Lee Burke, James Crumley, and former resident Norman Maclean.  In his novel, ''A River Runs Through It'', Maclean wrote that "The world is full of bastards, the number increasing rapidly the further one gets from Missoula, Montana."
Missoula is home to a diverse and influential music scene. Members of bands such as Deranged Diction (Jeff Ament), which formed in Missoula, later moved to Seattle and became key members of groups such as Green River, Mother Love Bone, Pearl Jam, Silkworm, and Love Battery, playing an important role in the birth of the grunge movement.  The city is prominently featured in "Apology Song" by Oregon indie-band The Decemberists. Prior to moving to Portland, Decemberist frontman Colin Meloy studied at the University of Montana. In Missoula, Meloy formed the pop band Tarkio. Wantage Record hosts Totalfest, a yearly diy music festival featuring local and touring acts, in Missoula.
Missoula is located near the Rattlesnake Wilderness and Rattlesnake National Recreation Area, two areas that protect Missoula's municipal watershed and serve as wildlife habitat and recreational areas.  The Forest Service's smokejumper base, the largest of its kind, is located near the Missoula airport. Free tours of the base are popular with tourists during the summer wildfire season.  A walking bridge over the downtown yards of the Montana Rail Link railroad is a popular destination for railfans.
In April, 2011, the National Park Service officially recognized the Westside Railroad District, adding it to the National Register of Historic Places. This addition once again expands Missoula's Downtown Historic District, after the February, 2011 addition of Free Speech Corner at Higgens Avenue and West Front Street. Free Speech Corner commemorates the free speech fights of the Industrial Workers of the World, a union formed in 1905 which sought to organize timber, lumber and mining workers into one worldwide union.
Missoula is Home to the Missoula Osprey, Missoula Phoenix, the Missoula Maulers, and the Hellgate Rollergirls. The Missoula Osprey has won two League Championships in 11 years at Missoula, and 4 division titles. The Missoula Phoenix have won 1 championship, and the Missoula Maulers have won 1 division title since starting its franchise in 2005. 
Professional sports teams in Missoula include
The sports teams of the University of Montana play in Missoula:
The Caras Park Pavilion, located in the heart of Downtown Missoula on the Clark Fork River, is the epicenter of Downtown Missoula. With the help of the Missoula Downtown Association, Caras Park has been the venue for these events:
Adjacent to Caras Park is A Carousel for Missoula, a wooden, hand-carved and volunteer-built carousel.
Missoula is an outdoor enthusiast's paradise throughout the entire year. Throughout the year, activities like skiing, hiking, biking, golf and fly fishing are available.
Missoula is a focal point of bicycle travel, because of the presence of Adventure Cycling Association, North America's largest cycling membership organization. Thousands of bike travelers come through Missoula and stop at Adventure Cycling's downtown headquarters (in a former church at 150 E. Pine Street) for free ice cream, advice, and the chance to be photographed.
Missoula is governed via the mayor-council system. There are twelve members of the city council who are elected from one of six wards. Each ward elects two council members. The mayor is elected in a citywide vote.
Missoula is known as a more liberal area than the rest of the state, having 14 Democrats and one Republican in its state legislative delegation. Missoula's Mayor has been John Engen since 2006 and is currently the 50th mayor of Missoula, Montana
In 2010, the City Council proposed and approved a non-discrimination ordinance, prohibiting discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation, gender identity, and gender expression in employment, housing, and public accommodations. Although the ordinance, proposed by councilmembers Stacy Rye and Dave Strohmaier, received some opposition from members of the Missoula community and surrounding areas, it passed by a 10-2 margin, making Missoula the first city in the state with such non-discrimination protection.
Currently the City of Missoula is undergoing a rewrite of the zoning and subdivision regulations, is undertaking a study of the Urban Fringe Development Area (UFDA), is working in partnership on the Downtown Master Plan, and is finalizing a long-range transportation plan.
In 2006, voters in Missoula County passed Initiative 2, which made marijuana possession the lowest priority for law enforcement.  However, in 2008 a volunteer citizen committee
City police chief Mark Muir defended criticism of the rising number of arrests, saying the rise could be attributed to "some people  more flagrant in their pot smoking because they wrongly believe the initiative protects them within the city."
Most of the legislative districts that approved of medical marijuana overwhelmingly include the city of Missoula within their boundaries.
A statewide chapter of NORML was founded in 1998 and is based out of Missoula.
NORML's state office is located in Missoula. Other organizations that call Missoula home include the Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation, the Boone and Crockett Club, Forward Montana, Western Montana Gay & Lesbian Community Center, the Montana Justice Foundation and the American Indian Business Leaders which is housed at the University of Montana. The Missoula Downtown Association (MDA) is also located in Missoula as is the Poverello Center, the largest emergency homeless shelter and soup kitchen in Montana.
Missoula is also home to Missoula Correctional Services a non-profit company that runs a Pre-Release Center for the Montana Department of Corrections and coordinates various city and county programs such as Community Service, Misdemeanor Probation, Pretrial Supervision and the Alternative Jail Program.
The first public high school was opened in 1904, but was quickly overran with students and was converted back to a grade school when the Missoula County High School, designed by A.J. Gibson, was opened in 1908.  Expansions were made, but in 1951 it was decided that another campus was needed, and a new school was opened in 1957.  Initially the two campuses separated between upper and lower classmen, but in 1965 they became two separate schools.  By student vote, the original Missoula County High School became Hellgate High School and the new campus became Sentinel High School.  In 1980, Missoula became the first city in Montana to have four secondary schools when it Big Sky High School was established.  Missoula's forth secondary school is  Loyola Sacred Heart High School, a private Catholic school created from a merger in 1974 of the all-girls Sacred Heart Academy (est. 1873) and the all-boys Loyola High School (est. 1911).
Missoula's public schools are part of the Missoula County Public School  (MCPS) District 1 which is overseen by the Montana Office of Public Instruction.  MCPS operates nine Elementary Schools (Chief Charlo, Cold Springs, Franklin, Hawthorne, Lewis and Clark, Lowell, Paxon, Rattlesnake, and Russell) ''grades K-5'', three Middle Schools (CS Porter, Meadow Hill, and Washington) ''grades 6-8'', and five High Schools (Big Sky, Hellgate, Sentinel, Seeley-Swan, and Willard Alternative).  Missoula High Schools also encompass the elementary school districts of Bonner, Clinton, DeSmet, Hellgate, Lolo, and Target Range.  Private schools include Missoula International (k-8, Spanish), Mountain View Elementary (k-8), Sussex (k-8), St. Joseph's Elementary (k-8, Catholic), Loyola Sacred Heart High School (9-12), and Valley Christian High School (k-12).  In 2009, Next Step Prep, a summer theater arts academy for high schoolers, was opened by the Missoula Children's Theatre.
Higher education in Missoula is dominated by the main campus of University of Montana.  The university, established in 1893 is the first and largest (15,642 students in 2010) university in Montana. The campus houses 6 colleges (Arts & Sciences, Education, Forestry, Health Professions & Biomedical Sciences, and Visual & Performing Arts) and 3 schools (Business, Journalism, and Montana's only Law School). Also located in Missoula is the University of Montana College of Technology which was established in 1956 and known as the Missoula Vocational Technical Center until it became affiliated with the University of Montana in the Fall of 1994.
Missoula is also home to several vocational schools not affiliated with a university education.  These include The Rocky Mountain School of Photography, Connole-Morton Insurance School, The Dickinson Lifelong Learning Center, The Osher Lifelong Learning Institute at UM (MOLLI) (non-credit), Modern Beauty School, Montana Academy of Skin Care, Montana School of Massage, and Sage Truck Driving School.  
Interstate 90 runs east to west along the northern edge of Missoula at the base of the North Hills.  All but a small portion of the city (the Upper and Lower Rattlesnake neighborhoods) is located south of the highway.  Completed in 1965 at the expense of 60 homes, the Garden City Brewery and the Greenough Mansion, the Missoula portion of Interstate 90 has five exits: '''Exit 96''' - connection to U.S. 93 North and MT 200, '''Exit 99 (Airway Boulevard)''' - access to Missoula International Airport, '''Exit 101 (Reserve Street)''' - connection to U.S. 93 South, access to west Missoula, and I-90 Business Loop''', Exit 104 (Orange Street)''' - access to Downtown Missoula, and '''Exit 105 (Van Buren Street)''' - access to the University of Montana, connection to U.S. 12 South, and I-90 Business Loop.
US 12 enters Montana at Lolo Pass,   southwest of Lolo Hot Springs in the Lolo National Forest before meeting with US 93 at Lolo and continuing as a concurrency northeast for  to Missoula.  Here U.S. 12 breaks off U.S. 93 and continues Northeast to Downtown Missoula along Brooks Street before cutting through the University District and across the Madison Street Bridge.  U.S. 12 joins Interstate 90 East at Exit 105 (Van Buren Street) and overlaps I-90 for  , until reaching Garrison.
The original U.S. 12 was approved by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHO) in 1939 to extend into Wyoming and Montana.  The route, would not include Missoula, however, until U.S. 12 was rerouted along State Route 6 in October 1959.  In 1962, the route was extended from Missoula southeast toward Idaho along U.S. 93.  
U.S. 93 was approved by AASHO in 1927 beginning at the Canadian International Boundary through Missoula and exiting Montana near Gibbonsville.
MT Highway 200 enters Missoula along Broadway Street in northern Missoula just south of Interstate 90.  MT 200 joins I-90 at Exit 105 (Van Buren Street) and continues together west before breaking off at Exit 96 and heading north along U.S. 93 toward Flathead Lake.
The Missoula International Airport (Johnson-Bell Field) is a public airport ran by the Missoula County Airport Authority and is the largest airport in western Montana, serving 575,584 passengers in 2010.  The current building contain three boarding gates ((3 jet bridges, 3 ground-level), offers year-round direct flights to 7 destinations (Denver, Las Vegas, Los Angeles, Minneapolis, Phoenix, Salt Lake City, and Seattle) and seasonal flights to 3 others (Chicago, Portland, and San Francisco).  Four airlines operate out of Missoula (Allegiant Air, Delta Air Lines, Horizon/Alaska Airlines, and United Airlines) in addition to the Air Cargo Carriers of FedEx, and UPS.
The airport is also home to Homestead Helicopters and Fixed-Base Operators Minuteman Jet Center (an Exxon Mobil Avitat fuel provider), and Northstar Jet (a Phillips 66 fuel provider). 
Missoula's first landing strip was laid out in 1923 south of the university.  An additional strip near the Western Montana Fair Grounds on what is now Sentinel High School was sold to the county in 1927 at the request of the Missoula chapter of the National Aeronautic Association and would become Missoula's first true airport.  The current airfield is named after that chapter's first president, Harry O. Bell along with mountain flying pioneer Bob Johnson of Johnson Flying Service (now Minuteman Aviation).  The original Garden City Airport was renamed Hale Field in 1935 and would operate as such until closing forever in 1954.  The airport was gradually replaced by the Missoula County Airport opened in 1941 with WPA funds and the cooperation of the US Forest Service who needed access to an airport.  The new airport was renamed Johnson-Bell Field in 1968 and today serves nearly 600,000 passengers a year.
Missoula is served by Mountain Line, a public transit agency created by public vote in 1976 as part of the Missoula Urban Transportation District (MUTD) that began operation in December 1977. Mountain Line operates twelve bus routes  within a  area, serving Missoula, East Missoula, Bonner, Target Range, Rattlesnake, Mullan Road, and the airport. Additionally the line has offered paratransit services since 1991 to assist the disabled, senior van since 2008, and has four park-n-ride lots throughout Missoula.
Special bus service is offered to the University of Montana through three of city's park-n-ride lots in addition to late-night UDASH shuttle that offers service to Downtown.  Bus fair for university students is prepaid as part of the university's transportation fee.   Missoula is also served by Greyhound Lines, and Rimrock Trailways that provide intercity bus transportation to and from Missoula.
There is a network of bicycle and pedestrian trails throughout the community extending over .  Primary trails used for commuting in addition to recreation are those following the path of the former Milwaukee Railroad east-west along the Clark Fork River and southeast along the Bitterroot Branch Railroad.
There is no passenger rail service in Missoula, but there is an ongoing effort to restore such service along the former North Coast Hiawatha route. This route, operated by Amtrak until 1979, passed through Missoula and several other Montana cities.
In Missoula the following utilities of Power, water, sewer and garbage disposal are: Electricity is provided by Missoula Electric Cooperative or NorthWestern Energy, which also supplies natural gas service. Allied Waste services and Grant Creek Water Systems handles trash pickup. Telephone service in the area is proved by Qwest Communications and Blackfoot Telecommunications Group. Sewer services is  handled by the City of Missoula Wastewater Division, and Alltel, Verizon, and Cellular One is the most used cell phone services in Missoula.
St. Patrick Hospital opened in 1873 under the sponsorship of the Sisters of Providence. The present facility opened in 1984, the fourth St. Pat's on this site above the Clark Fork River. In May 2000, they changed the name from "St. Patrick Hospital" to "St. Patrick Hospital and Health Sciences Center" to reflect an increasing involvement with national medical research and education. The hospital has 195 acute-care beds, and 18 transitional-care beds. In 2003, St. Pat's admitted over 9,705 patients and provided more than 49,986 days of patient care. Approximately 95% of patients come from our 17-county service area.
In November 1999, after imploding the old hospital called the Broadway Building, construction began for a new outpatient services building next to the present hospital building. The Broadway Building opened in March 2002, with two underground floors of parking and six stories of physician offices and outpatient services. Physicians include those from the Western Montana Clinic, the Montana Neuroscience Institute, and the Montana Cancer Center, among others. Outpatient services include physical, occupational, and speech therapy, diabetes services, and cardiac rehabilitation.
St. Patrick Hospital and Health Sciences Center is a not-for-profit medical center under the sponsorship of the Sisters of Providence. The Sisters share sponsorship responsibilities with community leaders in the form of a governing board, which helps direct the hospital in its endeavors. This governing board, in turn, reports to and is directed by Providence Health and Services. Providence Health and Services is a holding company that represents the Sisters of Providence in leading their sponsored healthcare, higher education, and human services ministries in eastern Washington and western Montana. Sponsorship is a special type of not-for-profit ownership. As sponsors, the Sisters of Providence and Providence Health and Services are accountable to the community, the Catholic Church, and state and federal governments for fulfilling the missions of each sponsored organization.
The Community Medical Center (Montana) and its adjacent medical facilities stand as a gleaming monument to the dedication and vision of hundreds of Montanans and, in particular, two doctors who came west in the early 1900s.
Situated on a grassy plain near historic Fort Missoula, Community Hospital is part of a modern complex that includes a nursing home, the Missoula Crippled Children's Center and private offices.
The story of Community Hospital begins with two brothers who were prominent in the early history of Western Montana medicine.
Dr. Charles Thornton (known affectionately as "Dr. Charles") came west in 1905 to begin a practice in Corvallis, Montana. At that time the mortality rate of spotted or "tick" fever was 80 to 90 per cent. Of the first 11 cases Dr. Charles treated, only one patient died. He subsequently became known throughout the Bitterroot Valley for his ability to treat the dreaded Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever.
An ardent sportsman, Dr. Charles was among the first to introduce Chinese and Hungarian pheasants to Western Montana. He also imported and bred German shorthaired pointers to hunt the wily pheasants. At one time, he had more than 30 German pointers in his kennels. Dr. Charles also imported Belgian horses and brown Swiss dairy cattle.
Dr. Charles' brother, Dr. Will Thornton ("Dr. Will") came west in 1907 and started a practice in Stevensville, Montana. He had been a professor of anatomy and had worked with Dr. J. H. Kellogg, the surgeon who established the Battle Creek sanitarium in Michigan. Dr. Kellogg was the older brother of W. K. Kellogg, who developed the corn flake into a multi-million-dollar industry.
Dr. Will performed more than 15,000 major operations in 36 years of active practice, and he participated in the construction and operation of three private hospitals in Western Montana.
In 1910 he built the first hospital in the Bitterroot Valley and ran it until 1917, when he moved to Missoula. At that time, he built the Thornton Hospital, now the Thornton Apartments at the corner of Third and Orange Streets.