Michael Calce was born in the West Island, a small suburban area on the island of Montreal. When he was five, his parents separated and he lived with his mother after she had won a lengthy battle for primary custody.Calce, Michael. Mafiaboy: How I Cracked the Internet and why its Still Broken. Toronto: Penguin Group, 2008. Every second weekend he would stay with his father at his condo in the metropolitan area of Montreal. Calce felt isolated from his friends back home and troubled by the separation of his parents, so his father purchased him his own computer at the age of six. It instantly had a hold on him:    I can remember sitting and listening to it beep, gurgle and churn as it processed commands. I remember how the screen lit up in front of my face. There was something intoxicating about the idea of dictating everything the computer did, down to the smallest of functions. The computer gave me, a six year old, a sense of control and command. Nothing else in my world operated that way."
On February 7, 2000, Calce targeted Yahoo! with a project he named Rivolta, meaning    riot    in Italian. Rivolta was a denial of service type of cyber attack in which servers become overloaded with different type of communications to the point where they shut down completely.Majid, Yar. Cybercrime and Society. Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications, 2006. At the time, Yahoo! was a multibillion dollar industry and the web   s top search engine.Davis, Wall. Crime and the Internet. New York: Routledge, 2001. Mafiaboy   s Rivolta managed to shut down Yahoo! for close to an hour. Calce   s goal was not to cripple the top websites in the world, but rather to establish dominance for himself and TNT, his cybergroup, in the cyberworld. Buy.com was shut down in response. Calce responded to this in turn by bringing down  Ebay, CNN, Amazon and Dell.com via ddos over the next week.
, Calce said that the attacks had been launched unwittingly, after inputting known addresses in a security tool he had downloaded from a repository on the now defunct file-sharing platform Hotline, developed by Hotline Communications. Calce would then have left for school, forgetting the application which continued the attacks during most of day. Upon coming home Calce found his computer crashed, and restarted it unaware of what had gone on during the day. Calce says that it is when he overheard the news, that night, and recognized the companies mentioned being those he had inputted earlier in the day, that he "started to understand what might have happened". .
The U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Royal Canadian Mounted Police first noticed Calce when he started claiming in IRC chatrooms that he was responsible for the attacks. He became the chief suspect when he claimed to have brought down Dell's website, an attack that had not been publicized at that time.Information on the source of the attacks was initially discovered and reported to the press by Michael Lyle, chief technology officer of Recourse Technologies.
Calce initially denied responsibility but later pled guilty to most of the charges brought against him. His lawyer insisted the child had only run unsupervised tests to help design an improved firewall, whereas trial records indicated the youth showed no remorse and had expressed a desire to move to Italy for its lax computer crime laws. The Montreal Youth Court sentenced him on September 12, 2001 to eight months of "open custody," one year of probation, restricted use of the Internet, and a small fine.
Matthew Kovar, a senior analyst at the market research firm Yankee Group, generated some publicity when he told reporters the attacks caused USD $1.2 billion in global economic damages. Media outlets would later attribute a then-1.45:1 conversion value of CAD $1.7 billion to the Royal Canadian Mounted Police. Computer security experts now often cite the larger figure (sometimes incorrectly declaring it in U.S. dollars),
While testifying at a congressional hearing in Washington, D.C., computer expert Winn Schwartau said that    Government and commercial computer systems are so poorly protected today they can essentially be considered defenseless - an Electronic Pearl Harbor waiting to happen.    The Internet defines the era in which we live in. Whether it be banking, business or social networking, most people have various amounts of personal information online. Mafiaboy was the first to demonstrate how accessible this information is to the public and how easily it could be retrieved. The fact that the largest website in the world could be shut down by a 15 year old created widespread panic. By this time, the internet had already become an integral part of the North American economy. Consumers lost confidence in online business and the American economy suffered a minor blow as a result. Since the Internet was originally designed as a military tool, American citizens were afraid of cyber-spies and cyber-terrorists accessing government sites and infiltrating homeland security. Former CIA agent Craig Guent credits Mafiaboy for the significant increase in online security that took place over the decade.
During the later half of 2005, Calce wrote as a columnist on computer security topics for the Francophone newspaper Le Journal de Montreal.
In the Autumn of 2008, Calce, together with journalist Craig Silverman, announced a book, Mafiaboy: How I Cracked the Internet and Why It's Still Broken. On October 26, 2008 he appeared on the French-Canadian TV show Tout le monde en parle to talk about his book. The entire interview (in French) can be seen at the Television de Radio-Canada website. An English-language interview is available at:  on The Hour. The book received generally positive .