Upon Barrett's return to the Major Leagues in , he ranked among the top offensive rookies in various statistical categories. Barrett failed to stay healthy during the  season, which prompted the Expos to trade him to the Oakland Athletics, who in turn, traded him to the Chicago Cubs. During his tenure with the Cubs, Barrett won a Silver Slugger award in , and recorded near career-high statistics in  season.  The Cubs traded Barrett to the San Diego Padres in June of . Barrett sustained two major injuries, which caused him to miss 115 games with the Padres, and was subsequently released after the  season. Barrett attempted to make a comeback with the Toronto Blue Jays in 2009, but continued to struggle with injury issues, which led to his release in the subsequent offseason.
Barrett was born in Atlanta, Georgia. He attended Pace Academy, where he excelled in baseball. During his senior year, Barrett won Atlanta   s Gatorade   s Player of the Year, and was named to the All-USA High School and First Team High School All-Americans All-star teams. He was considered to be one of the top draft prospects that year, and declared eligibility for the upcoming Major League Baseball Draft shortly after graduating from high school. The Montreal Expos selected Barrett as the 28th overall selection in the  draft.Baseball-Reference.com, , Retrieved on June 4, 2007. He spent the next three years in the minors, playing in the Gulf Coast, South Atlantic, Hawaii Winter Baseball, and Florida State Leagues, during which he was converted from a shortstop to a catcher.  His Minor League Baseball career was highlighted in , when he scored 57 runs and recorded 113 hits as a member of the Delmarva Shorebirds.
The Expos called Barrett to the Major Leagues on September 19, 1998, in a game against the Cincinnati Reds as a third baseman. He managed to hit a home run and a single in the game. After only playing eight games as an Expo, Barrett was sent to play for the Harrisburg Senators, a Class AA team from the Eastern League. He recorded 145 hits, and seventy-eight runs, nineteen home runs, and eighty-seven RBI en route to winning the Double-A All-Star Catcher and Montreal Expos Minor League Player of the Year awards. His performance allowed him to claim a spot on the Expos    starting roster during the 1999. During his first full season, Barrett had fifty-nine starts as a catcher, sixty-two as a third-baseman, and six as shortstop. He also lead all National League rookies with thirty-two doubles, while ranking as one of top statistical tiers in runs, hits, and run batted in among all other rookies.
Barrett struggled to perform consistently in the  season. He committed fifteen errors during the course of the season, while earning .891 fielding percentage as a catcher. In addition, he hit for only a .214 batting average, with only a .288 slugging percentage. These difficulties combined to prompt the Expos to send him to the minors again. After playing thirty games with the Ottawa Lynx of the International League, Barrett returned to the major leagues before 2001. He was named onto the team's opening day lineup, and eventually earned a full-time spot on the team. He was one the Expos' most consistent hitters, and posted career high statistics that season; leading all National League catchers with thirty-three doubles. Barrett also managed to improve his defensive performance by raising his fielding percentage to .993, while only committing seven errors.
 Barrett was able to continue playing, but claimed the injury had hindered his playing performance. He eventually managed to overcome the injury in July. He recorded a batting average of .333 and fifteen RBI.Ladson, Bill,  (July 23, 2003) mlb.com, Retrieved on June 25, 2007. During this period, Barrett began to complain about tightness in his right hip flexor. This ailment took its toll on Barrett during a game against the Atlanta Braves, when he strained the muscles while taking a checked swing. The Expos sent Barrett on a rehabilitation assignment to play with the Edmonton Trappers, a AAA team from the Pacific Coast League. He only managed to play two games with team before fracturing his index finger on August 9.CBC Sports,  (September 10, 2003), cbc.ca, Retrieved on July 15, 2007. Barrett returned to the major leagues on September 12, although the Expos were already out of playoff contention.Baseball-Reference.com, , Retrieved on July 15, 2007.
Barrett's long tenure with the Expos ended in December 2003. The team traded Barrett to the Oakland Athletics in exchange for Minor League pitcher Brett Price. The Athletics then traded Barrett to the Chicago Cubs for Damian Miller, only days after the initial transaction. Barrett, who had just spent six days with three teams, shortly signed a one-year contract with the Cubs, which was worth nearly $1,550,000 dollars. He first practiced with Cubs during their annual spring training sessions, and reported receiving a cold reception from teammates.De Luca, Chris,  (June 21, 2007), Chicago Sun-Times, Retrieved on August 9, 2007. Barrett went on to become one of their top hitters during the 2004 season. He played a crucial role in their wild card chase; Barrett maintained a .287 batting average and hit sixteen home runs and sixty-five RBI during the 2004 season. He finished the season as one the league's top defensive catchers (fielding at .994 with six errors), and led the Cubs in triples and sacrifice flies.Baseball-Reference.com, , Retrieved on June 23, 2007.Yahoo! Sports, , Retrieved on August 9, 2007.
Barrett continued to be one of the Cubs    most consistent hitters in the 2005 season. He batted over .300 in three months of the season, and finished with 16 home runs, 32 doubles, and 61 RBI. Although he failed to meet and surpass the same statistical figures in the previous season, Barrett received a Silver Slugger Award for his efforts. Additionally, Barrett was selected to represent the United States in the 2006 World Baseball Classic. He played in four games, and recorded one run batted in. 
Barrett was unable to live up to expectations in the 2007 season. He was unable to replicate his statistical figures from the previous season, and finished May with a .244 batting average and only seven home runs. Barrett infamously made headlines when he was involved in a nationally televised dugout altercation with pitcher Carlos Zambrano. Lou Piniella dismissed both players for the afternoon, while the League proceeded to fine both players. Nearly two weeks later, a television camera caught Barrett engaging in a heated argument with Rich Hill over a pitch that resulted in an RBI. The tensions caused Barrett to lose his role as the Cubs' everyday starting catcher. While Barrett increased his batting average over the next few games, his career with the Cubs began to come to a close near the middle of June.Associated Press,  (June 14, 2007), espn.com. Retrieved on June 20, 2007.
Various news sources reported that the Cubs had traded Barrett to the San Diego Padres on the morning of June 20. The Cubs officially confirmed these details in the afternoon, and revealed that Barrett was traded in exchange for Rob Bowen and Kyler Burke. Despite stating he had no knowledge of the trade until hearing rumors in the morning, Barrett expressed his appreciation and well wishes to the Cubs organization on his homepage. He received a one game suspension on July 22, after arguing with an umpire over a third strike. Barrett sustained a concussion on August 5, after a base-running accident against the San Francisco Giants.Associated Press,  (August 11, 2007), Yahoo! Sports, Retrieved on August 11, 2007. The Padres placed Barrett on the fifteen day disabled list. Since returning from the injury, Barrett's performance declined. His batting average dropped from .266 to .244, while he produced near career low statistics.
 The Tampa Bay Rays expressed interest in signing Barrett, even though the signing would involve trading the Padres a future second round draft pick as compensation. Barrett accepted the Padres' arbitration offer on December 7. The Padres placed Barrett on the disable list on April 8, 2008, after he sustained an elbow injury.PA SportsTicker,  (May 25, 2008), National Post. Retrieved on June 2, 2008. The team later activated him on May 25, after he had recovered, and completed a minor league rehabilitation assignment. On July 2, 2008, Barrett was rushed to the hospital after fouling a pitch off his face. (July 2, 2008), Yahoo! Sports. Retrieved on July 2, 2008. He required surgery to repair the damage, and had been placed on the disabled list for the second time in 2008.Wilson, Bernie.  (July 7, 2008). USA Today. Retrieved on July 12, 2008. The Padres waived Barrett on October 11, after he previously expressed interest in testing the free-agent market.
On December 29, , Barrett signed a Minor League deal with the Toronto Blue Jays, and attended spring training as a non-roster invitee. He earned the back-up catcher role for the Toronto Blue Jays during spring training. He was scheduled to back up Rod Barajas,
Barrett signed a minor league deal with the Mets on June 29, 2010, and was assigned to the Class-A St. Lucie Mets. In early August, he was reassigned to play for their Class AAA affiliate, the Buffalo Bisons.
While playing for the Chicago Cubs, Barrett was involved in two incidents with Houston Astros pitcher Roy Oswalt during the 2004 season. On August 22, 2004, Oswalt struck Barrett. Barrett, believing the pitch was a reaction to a three-run home run that Aramis Ramirez had previously hit, confronted Oswalt, and prompted both teams to take the field. Oswalt was ejected from the game, as the Astros went on to lose, eleven to six.Associated Press, , (August 27, 2004), espn.com, Retrieved on June 2, 2007. Five days later, during another Cubs-Astros game, Barrett mouthed off to Oswalt and attempted to confront him. The game   s umpires restrained the two before a fight could break out, but not before both benches cleared out. Oswalt remained in the game, and defeated the Cubs 15-7.Carpenter, Dave,  (August 27, 2004), Yahoo! Sports. Retrieved on August 14, 2007. In a post-game press conference, Barrett condemned Oswalt's actions, and stated, "We're going to see him again."
The game   s umpires ejected Barrett, Pierzynski, Anderson, and Mabry. Barrett later received a ten game suspension, while Pierzynski was fined. Additionally, Anderson and the Sox   s third base coach were also suspended for a fewer number of games. The Cubs went on to lose the game by a score of seven to nothing.ESPN.com,  (May 20, 2006), Retrieved on August 8, 2007. On June 30, the two met during batting practice, and made amends.Associated Press, , (June 30, 2006), Comcast Sports Center, Retrieved on June 2, 2007.
 The Braves recorded twenty hits, en route to winning eight to five. However, their productivity became overshadowed by scuffle between Zambrano and Barrett. As the two returned to the dugout, they had an exchange of words, which escalated into a small fight. After Lou Piniella dismissed the two from the game, another fight ensued within the Cubs    clubhouse, and Zambrano punched Barrett's lip. The wound required Barrett to go to the hospital immediately and receive stitches. Zambrano remorsefully admitted he was at fault after the ordeal, and Barrett later stated they had resolved their differences.Associated Press, , (June 2, 2007), Yahoo! Sports, Retrieved on June 2, 2007.Associated Press, , (June 2, 2007), espn.com, Retrieved on June 2, 2007. Both players received fines for undisclosed amounts of money.
 He runs several youth baseball programs, including one in Hawaii, which was inspired from his tenure with the Hawaiian Winter Baseball League. He also works with the Make-A-Wish Foundation and the Cubs Care Program to help lesser fortunate and sick children. Of recently, he has worked with Kerry Wood and Ryan Dempster to raise money to help Derrek Lee's daughter and research for Leber's congenital amaurosis. Michael Barrett donated $50,000 to Project 3000 and pledged an additional sum of money for every home run he hits.  Barrett was also a regular guest on FOX Chicago's ''The Final Word'' television show, which is co hosted by Tom Waddle, a former Chicago Bears wide receiver.