The Founder and Creative Director of RUCKER & CO., a creative boutique that Rucker says,    has absolutely no allegiance to any specific channel of communication. We like to solve problems and place communications in new and unusual ways.    Clients include Cardinal Capital Partners, the premier national firm in the sale-leaseback financing industry; Essilor Laboratories of America, one of the world   s leading manufacturers of eyeglass lenses; Wizetrade, the country   s leading online investor education and software company; The Richardson Police Department; and Nicole Toomey, a Los Angeles-based women   s fashion brand.
Doug   s work has been recognized by the CLIO Awards, Communication Arts Annual, The One Show, The New York Art Directors' Club, Cannes Festivals, Luerzer   s Archive, ADWEEK Best Spots and many others.
Rucker led the small creative powerhouse, R&D Thinktank, from 2001 until 2007, where he created some of the country   s most lauded and awarded creative work in the healthcare industry for Medical City of Dallas. For 14 years prior to that, he honed his chops as one of the top Creative Group Heads at The Richards Group. Doug led some of the agency's largest accounts, including The Home Depot, Fruit of the Loom, Chick-fil-A, H-E-B Central Market, and many more.
Doug led the creative breakthrough for Chick-fil-A, the fastest-growing chain in the fast food segment, considered by many experts to be the toughest category in which to compete. Chick-fil-A's Cow campaign and its mantra, "Eat Mor Chikin", have become the envy of the entire industry.
Presently, Doug serves on the Advisory Board for Booker T. Washington High School for the Performing and Visual Arts. An avid collector of music, he has a growing collection of vintage Beatles memorabilia.
Mitchell moved to Los Angeles with his dog in 1991 after graduating from the University of Texas at Austin. You can take a Texan out of Texas, but you can   t take Texas out of a Texan.
Mitchell founded rednaveL fLmworx in 1997 and has produced over 20 films, shorts and features alike, starring many creative talents including John C. Reilly, Jack Black, Michael Shannon, Elle Fanning, Amber Heard, John Stamos, Rance and Clint Howard, Chris Elliott, Bob Costas, Maury Povich, Danica McKellar, Wil Wheaton, Dania Ramirez, Pharrell Williams, Will Arnett, Amy Poehler, Maya Rudolph, Kate Walsh and Jane Lynch among others. These films have achieved many accolades, including film festivals (Sundance, HBO Aspen Comedy Arts Festival, South by Southwest, Chicago Int   l., Deauville, Cinequest, Seattle Int   l., LAIFF, et al.), awards (many audience awards, best short, best new director, Canal+ award), broadcast (HBO, Cinemax, Showtime and Canal+) and featured articles in various publications including American Cinematographer.
In addition to films, Mitchell has produced numerous commercial spots for brands including Coca-Cola, Levi   s, Volvo, and Hyundai, and has produced numerous promos for Maury Pauvich   s Ad Firm, Stun Creative. These promos include the launch campaigns for the new show Crossing Over with John Edwards and a new satellite network, College Sports Television (CSTV). He was a consultant to Dick Wolf for his post-production needs on his reality venture Arrest & Trial.
Mitchell wrote, produced and directed all the 9-1-1 PSA campaign spots for APCO, the Association of Public-Safety Communication Officials and adapted, produced and directed a DVD for the Precept Ministries    book How to Study Your Bible for Kids which debuted in the 30th spot among over 7200 titles handled by the DVD   s distributor.
Most recently, Mitchell created a new company with his brother, Doug Rucker, called Three Eyed Bros. Three Eyed Bros    first project was a music video for the recording artist Meiko for her latest single Under My Bed. The video can currently be seen on MtvU and was a Top Ten iTunes video download. Their most recent work together was directing a three spot campaign for Monster.com
Mitchell is President of rednaveL fLmworx, providing post-production and production services to the film and television community which include RED Camera Rentals, Workflow and DIT Services, Offline and Online Editorial, Digital Color Correction, Titles and Effects.