.''Time magazine,'' November 4, 1966. Retrieved on July 19, 2010. America 2050,http://www.america2050.org/about.html an organization sponsored by the Rockefeller and Ford Foundations, lists 11 megaregions in the United States and Canada.http://www.america2050.org/megaregions.html Megapolitan areas were explored in a July 2005 report by Robert E. Lang and Dawn Dhavale of the Metropolitan Institute at Virginia Tech.http://www.mi.vt.edu/uploads/megacensusreport.pdf "Beyond Megalopolis" by the Metropolitan Institute at Virginia Tech A later 2007 article by Lang and Nelson uses 20 megapolitan areas grouped into 10 megaregions.http://www.surdna.org/usr_doc/The_Rise_of_the_Megapolitans.pdf The concept is based on the original Megalopolis model.
A megaregion is a large network of metropolitan regions that share several or all of the following:
More than 70 percent of the nation's population and jobs are located in 11 megaregions identified by Regional Plan Association.  Megaregions are becoming the new competitive units in the global economy, characterized by the increasing movement of goods, people and capital among their metropolitan regions. "The New Megas," asserted Florida (2006), "are the real economic organizing units of the world, producing the bulk of its wealth, attracting a large share of its talent and generating the lion's share of innovation."
The megaregion concept provides cities and metropolitan regions a context within which to cooperate across jurisdictional borders, including the coordination of policies, to address specific challenges experienced at the megaregion scale, such as planning for high speed rail, protecting large watersheds, and coordinating regional economic development strategies.   
Though identification of the megaregions has gone through several iterations, the 11 identified above are based on a set of criteria developed by Regional Plan Association, through its America 2050 initiative - a joint venture with the Lincoln Institute of Land Policy.  Two historic publications helped lay the foundation for this new set of criteria, the book Megalopolis by Jean Gottmann (1961) and The Regions    Growth,Gottman, Jean (1961). ''Megalopolis: The Urbanized Northeastern Seaboard of the United States.'' New York: Twentieth Century Fund. part of Regional Plan Association   s second regional plan.
In 1961's Megalopolis, Gottman describes the Northeastern seaboard of the United States - or Megapologis - as "...difficult to single out...from surrounding areas, for its limits cut across established historical divisions, such as New England and the Middle Atlantic states, and across political entities, since it includes some states entirely and others only partially."  On the complex nature of this regional scale he writes:
Some of the major characteristics of Megalopolis, which set it apart as a special region within the United States, are the high degree of concentration of people, things and functions crowded here, and also their variety.  This kind of crowding and its significance cannot be described by simple measurements.  Its various aspects will be shown on a number of maps, and if these could all be superimposed on one base map there would be demarcated an area in which so many kinds of crowding coincide in general (though not always in all the details of their geographical distribution) that the region is quite different from all neighboring regions and in fact from any other part of North America.  The essential reason for its difference is the greater concentration here of a greater variety of kinds of crowding.
Crowding of population, which may first be expressed in terms of densities per square mile, will, of course, be a major characteristic to survey.  As this study aims at understanding the meaning of population density, we shall have to know the foundation that supports such crowding over such a very fast area.  What do these people do? What is their average income and their standard of living?  What is the distribution pattern of wealth and of certain more highly paid occupations?  For example, the outstanding concentration of population in the City of New York and its immediate suburbs (a mass of more than ten million people by any count) cannot be separated from the enormous concentration in the same city of banking, insurance, wholesale, entertainment, and transportation activities.  These various kinds of concentration have attracted a whole series of other activities, such as management of large corporations, retail business, travel agencies, advertising, legal and technical counseling offices, colleges, research organizations, and so on.  Coexistence of all these facilities on an unequaled scale within the relatively small territory of New York City, and especially of its business district...has made the place even more attractive to additional banking, insurance, and mass media organizations.  Thus have concentration snowballed.
The methodology for identifying the emerging megaregions included assigning each county a point for each of the following:
This methodology was much more successful at identifying fast-growing regions with existing metropolitan centers than more sparsely-populated, slower growing regions.  Nor does it include a distinct marker for connectedness between cities.
The close relationship between large linked metropolitan regions and a nation's ability to compete in the global economy is recognized in Europe and Asia.  Each has aggressively pursued strategies to manage projected population growth and strengthen economic prosperity in its large regions.  
In East Asia comprehensive strategic planning for large regions, centered on metropolitan areas, has become increasingly common and has progressed further than in the United States or Europe.  Planning for the Hong Kong-Pearl River Delta region, for instance, aims to enhance the region's economic strength and competitiveness by overcoming local fragmentation, building on global economic cooperation, taking advantage of mutually beneficial economic factors, increasing connectivity among development nodes, and pursuing other strategic directions.
Fifteen of the top 100 primary census statistical areas are not included in any of the 11 emerging megaregions.
None of these 15 have any professional sports teams in the major leagues. However, college sports, especially football and men's basketball, are extremely popular in the United States. All of the metropolitan areas listed except Augusta and Rochester have at least one university that is a member of NCAA Division I. Five of these have a school that competes in Division I FBS, the highest level of college football, and two (Lexington and Syracuse) are home to a school that is a member of a Bowl Championship Series conference, an effective elite within Division I FBS.