The '''Samsung SCH U960''' (or "Rogue") is a CDMA touchscreen side-slider cell phone made by Samsung. The phone features a QWERTY keyboard, Bluetooth, MP3 Player, GPS, and a 3MP camera with Geo Tagging. It uses Verizon's EVDO Rev A data network. The Rogue runs Samsung   s TouchWiz UI with widget bar on the side (or the bottom when the phone is in landscape mode). The widget bar is heavily populated with social networking widgets including Facebook, MySpace, YouTube, Twitter and Photobucket. The Rogue also has widgets for most commonly used applications like calendar, favorite contacts and tools such as Bluetooth and settings. Like other TouchWiz phones, the user can drag widgets to the phone   s today screen and select which widgets populate the widget bar. The phone does not support downloading additional widgets.
In the U.S., the Rogue was released on September 8, 2009.
The Rogue ships with a 3.1&nbsp;inch (7.874 centimeters) resistive AMOLED touchscreen.  The screen's native resolution is 480 x 800 pixels at 262,000 colors. Besides producing a brighter, more colorful image, AMOLED screen technology uses less power, allowing for longer battery life.  Also, AMOLED screens are slimmer and lighter than similar competing technologies.
The Rogue runs on Samsung's TouchWiz user interface for "drag and drop" controls.
The Rogue can also store up to 1,000 contact names with a photo ID, email, address, work and mobile phone numbers, fax numbers, an IM screen name,info(like appearance),and birthday. The Rogue has Nuance voice command and voice dialing software.
The Rogue has an integrated 3.0-megapixel camera with flash, self-portrait mirror, camcorder and digital zoom. There is a dedicated camera and video key on the handset for quick access to camera features. The handset comes with numerous "pre-shot" options include single, multi-shot, panorama, mosaic or frame shooting; flash; brightness adjustment; timer; auto-focus; auto-shot; fine, normal or economy photo quality; white balance; metering and ISO; contrast; saturation; sharpness; normal, black and white, antique, aqua or negative color effects; and several resolution options from 2048 x 1536 px down to 320 x 240 px.
Once a photo is taken, users can add an effect (grayscale, sepia, green, blue, sketch, emboss, soft-glamorous, soft-elegant, soft-charismatic, spring sun, dawn, fright, cinema-normal, cinema-black and white, cinema-old), merge, rotate or flip, resize, adjust for weather or lighting conditions, copy and paste, save or trash the photo, or view it in a slide show. The photo can also be drawn on with a "pen", and items of selectable color, thickness and shape can be placed on the photo.
As a camcorder, recording features include optional flash for recording, adjustable brightness, selectable size/resolution (storage or sending size), timer, white balance adjustment, color effects, and quality adjustment.
To edit videos, a "Video Wizard" splices and merges files into one video, adjusts volume, edits sound, trims, splits or copies video, inserts text, or adds an effect (black and white, sepia, posterise, solarize, blur, sharpen, noise, emboss).
Videos can be sent, saved, erased, viewed in a slide show or saved as a project.
The Samsung Rogue has a built-in speakerphone, a 3.5mm stereo audio jack, Bluetooth A2DP and V CAST Music services. The phone has a microSD slot for additional storage that supports cards up to 16GB. The built-in media player can play music in MP3, AAC, AAC+, eAAC+ as well as WMA formats. The music player is not able to multi-task.
The phone uses MP3 polyphonic and truetone ringtones and has vibrate options.
Samsung Rogue specifications