Born in Larbert, Stirlingshire, he was the only son of Dr Arthur Mitchell and Margaret Hay Houston. Dr Mitchell served as Commissioner for the Board of Lunacy for Scotland, Chairman of the Scottish Life Assurance Company, President of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland, and was a director of the Commercial Bank of Scotland. After private tutoring, Sydney Mitchell attended Edinburgh University, and completed his training in the office of Robert Rowand Anderson, where he was articled from 1878 to 1883.
From being an apprentice, Mitchell went straight into professional practice in 1883, utilising family contacts to gain commissions. His first came in 1883, for the proprietor of ''The Scotsman'' newspaper, John Ritchie Findlay, whose home he remodelled. Another significant early commission from Findlay was for Well Court, a housing development in Dean Village, Edinburgh, which he worked on between 1883 and 1886. The same year, Mitchell undertook work for the Commercial Bank, and in 1884 was appointed architect to the Bank, taking over from David Rhind who had retired in 1881. This brought him a steady stream of work, and he designed or remodelled over 20 branches over the following years. 
In 1885, Mitchell was engaged to restore Edinburgh's Mercat cross.  This led to a commission to recreate several of Edinburgh's demolished medieval buildings, including the Netherbow, as part of the Edinburgh Exhibition of 1886. He continued to draw on the Scots Renaissance style, which he had employed at Well Court, in such projects as Duntreath Castle (1890).
Mitchell took his assistant, George Wilson, into partnership in 1887. Practicing as Sydney Mitchell & Wilson, they were appointed by the Board of Lunacy in Scotland, with commissions for Craighouse in Edinburgh, the Crichton Royal Institution in Dumfries, Melrose Asylum, and the Royal Victoria Hospital in Edinburgh. Later works, such as Ramsay Garden close to Edinburgh Castle, incorporated more Arts & Crafts influences. His last major project was the Church of Scotland Offices on George Street, Edinburgh (1908).
George Wilson retired in 1907, and Sydney Mitchell sold the practice around 1910. He retired to Gullane, East Lothian, where he died unmarried in 1930. He was buried in the family plot at Rosebank Cemetery in Edinburgh.