Revenge Quest is a dystopian science fiction thriller The action begins with the fugitive Trent McKormick exiting an Amtrak train. His sole mission for the film is to find Julie Meyers, "the bitch who testified against" him. We find Rick Castle, the hero, in a bar surrounded with smoke flirting with the local girls in an unintelligible conversation (it is in English, but we can't hear it due to the probable use of the filmmakers of the stock microphone attached to the video camera used in production. This leads to, in many scenes, dialog that either had to be dubbed or was left to sound like the actors were speaking into tin cans). Next we see a police officer randomly and without explanation enter Julie Meyers' apartment. Trent McKormick comes out from the shadows to kill the police officer and run off. Rick Castle is summoned by his boss and learns of the escape of Trent. He is given his mission, to protect Julie Meyers, bring in Trent alive, and avoid "elimination."
McKormick, following a party RSVP from Julie's apartment walks slowly and sternly, but purposefully to her work place where he stabs her sexually-harassing boss in the throat with his 9&nbsp;inch blade. When the dying man asks McKormick why he did this, he quips "none of your God-damn business!" He tries to hunt down Julie in the office but can't find her initially. Rick, finding the dead cop in Julie's apartment, makes his way to the office complex. Running to the scene, he is briefly thwarted by a recently released ex-con who attacks him next to a dump truck. Rick is apparently responsible for the attacker's incarceration. A brief scuffle ensues between the two, and then Rick, gaining the upper hand, throws the man in the dump truck, apparently crushing the man to death. Rick the runs to the office to help Julie.
In a stairwell shoot out where Rick narrowly escapes being shot, Rick protects Julie from Trent's wrath. After the escape, Rick decides that Julie should stay with him until they can get to a safe house. Rick takes Julie to his apartment, where she is given future-wine. She takes a bath and has a flash-back to the day of Trent's sentencing where he vowed to get revenge. Meanwhile Trent walks the streets in a simmering rage, tracking down a random pedestrian on a public transport bus and killing him while a train rolls by. He then finds an abandoned bathroom where he stares at the mirror for several minutes and then proceeds to stab it with his knife in a paroxysm.
Rick decides to take to the streets in his Dodge Viper. He drives around for a long time and decides finally to stop in at a cafe/sandwich shop where he meets an old pal from the police force. After leaving the cafe, Trent follows and brutally murders Rick's friend. Rick and Trent then have a show down at an old junkyard during tsunami rains. During this climax scene, Trent goads and baits Rick: "Does Julie know she has a man who CAN'T PROTECT HER!" "Are you ready...TO DIE)" "Do you like Julie, Rick? is she your girlfriend?!!" At one point Trent has the clear ability to shoot Rick but doesn't. At the end Rick is cornered again and Trent, standing over him, has a clear ability to shoot him but continues to wait. From the shadows Julie Meyers shoots Trent and emerges to embrace the stunned Rick Castle. The Credits Roll.
Brian Gluhak as Rick Castle. As the main protagonist of the film, he struggles to protect Julie Meyers from the murderous Trent McKormick.
Christopher Michael Egger as Trent McKormick. The main villain of the film who kills without remorse. He escaped from the Red Rock Prison on Mars and returns to Earth. He is after Julie Meyers, whose testimony against him led to his conviction.
Jennifer Aguilar as Julie Meyers. An office worker who is at first unaware of Trent McKormick's escape. She is then taken into protective custody with Rick Castle. After becoming acquainted with each other, they eventually enter into a romantic relationship.
Revenge Quest currently holds a 1.8/10 rating on IMDB based on 18 votes. There are currently no ratings or reviews on Rotten Tomatoes, although there is an entry.
Revenge Quest has not been officially released on DVD, yet it is available on DVD format in at least two action movie compilations on Amazon.com including the  and the .
Revenge Quest was released on VHS in 1995.