Note:  If you are seeing this page as a result of an attempt to re-nominate an article for deletion, you must manually edit the AfD nomination links in order to create a new discussion page using the name format of  .  When you create the new discussion page, please provide a link to this old discussion in your nomination. -->
The result was    '''no consensus'''. ''' ''' ''( )'' 21:17, 7 December 2009 (UTC)
Wikipedia is not a diary.  Wikipedia is not news.  This trip is just an ordinary trip that can be covered in other articles.  Otherwise we would have the 2009 Barack Obama visit to New York, 2009 Barack Obama visit to the bathroom (severe diarrhea incident), 2009 Barack Obama meeting #5 with Senator ---.  President Obama did not make a historic trip to China where he got them to join as a 51th state or like Nixon's trip.  If President Obama visited North Korea and kissed their leader and declared Peace in Our Time, this would be different and should be an article.   ( ) 01:22, 30 November 2009 (UTC)
And in 2009, 60 plus years later(in the long Chinese history, 60 years amounts to a few seconds), what did Obama say:'' China appreciated President Obama's repeated reiteration on the adherence to the one-China policy, the abidance of the three Sino-U.S. Joint Communiques and his respect for China's national sovereignty and territorial integrity on the Taiwan issue and other matters.'':. One has to be blind to not see the historical significance. Gone were the days when western leaders coming to China to "order" the Chinese around, buddy.    02:24, 30 November 2009 (UTC)
I have collected a number of Chinese and western main stream media websites articles, and all these articles are talking about the historical significant of the visit, so ''no secondary sources have been written for this trip yet'' statement is simply not true, the fact is these secondary sources opinions have not yet being added onto the 2009 Barack Obama visit to China. And we all know that the Obama China visit will go down history, somehow, and I wonder why we have these newly registered users all in a hurry trying to delete it?
The above three users sole purpose on Wikipedia seems to be making comment on this article.    03:10, 1 December 2009 (UTC)