In 2009, the Forbes 400 Richest Americans list ranked him as the 220th richest person in the U.S. with an estimated net worth of $1.6 billion
Pritzker is a member of one of America   s wealthiest business families. He attended Massachusetts boarding school Milton Academy and then graduated from Duke University with an A.B. in political science.  Pritzker went on to earn his J.D. from Northwestern University School of Law. Pritzker is an attorney and a member of the Illinois State Bar Association and Chicago Bar Association. He lives in Chicago, Illinois with his wife and children.
The only member of the current Pritzker family generation to start his own business, Pritzker founded New World Ventures in 1996.
Pritzker played an important role in the creation of the Illinois Venture Capital Association, the nation's top regional private equity association and in the creation of the . He also co-founded the public/private Illinois Innovation Accelerator Fund. Pritzker has received awards and community recognition for his efforts to build a stronger technology sector in the Midwest. 
He is also co-founder and managing partner of the Pritzker Group, a private investment firm acquiring late stage companies in a wide range of business sectors, including industrial manufacturing and distribution, business services, media and technology. Acquisitions have included aircraft safety products manufacturer Amsafe, investment casting manufacturer  and construction materials distributor .
Pritzker is one of the nation   s chief philanthropists in early childhood development. As the Pritzker Family Foundation   s president, he created the Children   s Initiative, which funds innovative research and programs serving children in poverty. Under the leadership of Nobel Prize-winning economist James Heckman, he supported the creation of the Pritzker Consortium on Early Childhood Development at the University of Chicago.
Along with the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, the Buffett Early Childhood Fund, the Irving Harris Foundation and the George Kaiser Family Foundation, the Pritzker Family Foundation is a founding supporter of the First Five Years Fund, an organization focusing nationwide attention and resources on comprehensive, quality early care and learning programs for children from birth to age five.
As chairman of the Illinois Holocaust Museum and Education Center, which opened in 2009, Pritzker successfully led the effort to build an international institution in the Midwest dedicated to teaching the lessons of the Holocaust and other genocides.
In 2011, Milton Academy dedicated the Pritzker Science Center for which Pritzker provided the lead gift.  Pritzker is a trustee and serves on the investment committee of Northwestern University and is a member of the Board of Governors of Northwestern University School of Law. He is a trustee of the Field Museum of Natural History and a member of the Economic Club of Chicago and the Commercial Club of Chicago.
In the 2008 Presidential election, Pritzker served as national co-chairman of the Hillary Clinton for President campaign and as a delegate to the 2008 Democratic National Convention. He supported President Barack Obama in the 2008 general election and helped bring the Clinton and Obama campaigns in Illinois together.
Pritzker founded ,
In 1998, he ran for U.S. Congress, principally focusing on the issues of education and gun control, and lost in a heavily contested five-way primary in Illinois' 9th Congressional district.