King College also runs a private secondary academy: The Academy at King.
To educate students in an academically rigorous and collegiate setting that integrates Christian faith, scholarship, service and career, leading to meaningful lives of achievement and cultural transformation in Christ.</ref>
To grow continually as a Christian comprehensive college, with pre-professional and professional schools, that builds lives for achievement and cultural transformation in Christ.
In April 1866 the Holston Presbytery assembled at the old Pleasant Grove Church, Bristol, Tennessee, to establish a Christian college. The College was built on  of land in Bristol that had been donated by Reverend James King, in whose honor it is named.  The first classes were offered in August 1867.
When the college outgrew its small campus, King's grandson Isaac Anderson donated land on a hillside east of Bristol and in 1917 the college moved to its present location.
The King College campus is located  on 135 acres approximately  from downtown Bristol, Tennessee.  All main buildings on campus are brick and of Georgian-style architecture.
King College is accredited by the Commission on Colleges of the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools (SACS). 
King is a member of numerous associations, including the Appalachian College Association (ACA), the Tennessee Independent Colleges and Universities Association (TICUA) and the Council for Christian Colleges and Universities (CCCU).
King College offers more than 80 undergraduate majors, minors and pre-professional programs.
The College offers three professional studies programs for working professionals: RN-to-BSN, Bachelor of Business Administration (BBA), and Bachelor of Information Technology (BTech).
The College offers three graduate programs: Master of Business Administration (MBA), Master of Science in Nursing (MSN), and Master of Education (MEd). 
In November 2008, King announced plans to partner with local health care providers to pursue the development of a four-year medical school and the addition of a doctor of medicine degree to its medical education program. The King School of Medicine has a vision to grow over time and be the anchor of a multi-tenant medical university structured campus.
King College is organized on a small-university model with five schools:
As noted above, a School of Medicine is currently under development.
The E.W. King library contains a collection of over 140,000 items and is located on the north side of the campus Oval.
This center serves the College   s students who attend classes in Kingsport, TN, and the surrounding area.
This center serves the College   s Graduate and Professional Studies (GPS) students who attend classes in Knoxville, TN, and the surrounding area.
King employs over 80 full-time faculty members and has a student:faculty ratio of 14:1.
The Core Curriculum of King College was last revised by the faculty during Spring, 2009. The Core is composed of a Common Experience, four semester hours of courses that all graduates must take at the college, and General Education, thirty-six hours of courses that span the traditional liberal arts.
As part of the college's First Year Experience Program, each year the entire freshman class travels to Washington, D.C. for an experiential learning trip known as Experience DC. During the trip, students visit offices of legislators, national museums, international organizations, art galleries and various public venues.  Participants are challenged to explore their views on the arts, religion, varying cultures and issues facing humankind.  The trip also helps students examine career options.
Each full time student is assigned a laptop as part of the campus' ubiquitous computing initiative. Originally IBM Thinkpads were distributed. More recently the College has switched to HP laptops.
Student governance and representation are vested in the Student Government Association (SGA). The Student Government Association oversees other student organizations and serves as the voice of the students to the administration and board of trustees. 
The 2010-2011 SGA executive officers are:
The SGA organizational structures includes a senate, with each class being represented by three senators, secretaries, and ministers. Only senators have voting privileges.
Academic organizations include: Kappa Epsilon Honors Society, History & Political Science Society, Psy Chi Honors Society, and a collegiate chapter of the Association for Computing Machinery.
Performing arts-related organizations include: Collegium Musicum, Symphonic Choir, Men's Ensemble, Jazz/Gospel Choir, Symphonic Band, Pep Band, Chapel Band, and The Trousdale Guild Players (theatrical troupe).
General interest organizations include: the Newman Club, a collegiate chapter of the International Justice Mission, the International Student Organization, College Republicans, College Democrats, TISL, and a computer/video gaming club.
Student Ministry Teams include: The Refreshment Company (a music-based ministry), The Dawn Treaders (a theatrical ministry), and Corps for Christ (a dance ministry).
Students have the opportunity to work in journalism and publishing. ''The Kayseean'' is the student newspaper, published sixteen times per year. The school's yearbook is ''The Tornado''. 
The Student Life and Activities Committee at King (SLACK) is a student-run group responsible for organizing and executing student activities.  Events in the past have included: concerts, dances, movies, outdoor adventures (canoeing, caving, ropes courses), overnight trips, International Fair, Oktoberfest, a late night exam breakfast, an end-of-the-year luau, Safe Spring Break promotion, and bingo nights.
A full program of intramural sports is offered to students. Typical sports include: indoor soccer, flag football, volleyball, dodgeball, bowling, and ultimate frisbee. In addition, intramural video game tournaments, Texas Hold'em poker tournaments, chess tournaments, and board game nights are also held throughout the year.
King's campus offers separate men's and women's residence halls, including a women's honors dorm and a hall featuring townhouse-style rooms.  High-speed internet and cable television are available in the residence halls.
Parks Hall houses women and features a formal parlor, a casual lobby with big screen television as well as kitchenettes, laundry facilities, and a guest room. Parks is the only residence hall that does not have air conditioning.
Liston Hall is a five story residence hall. The top three floors are generally referred to as Liston Hall. The first subfloor houses women and is referred to as Lower Liston Hall. The second subfloor houses men and is known as the Liston Honors Suites. Liston contains laundry facilities, two television lounges, a guest room, and a central lobby on the main floor. All rooms are air conditioned.
Lower Liston Hall houses women and is located on the first subfloor of Liston Hall. Lower Liston is separated from the men   s halls by a series of doors, which are opened during visitation times. Lower Liston Hall features laundry facilities, kitchen, and a television lounge. All rooms are air conditioned.
Liston Honors Suite houses men and is located on the lowest level of Liston Hall. Those living in Liston Honors Suite are selected based on GPA, class standing, and personal commitment to upholding college policies. Liston Honors Suites contains laundry facilities, a common area, and suite style-rooms with semi-private bathrooms. All rooms are air conditioned.
Mitchell Hall is a townhouse-style residence hall for students located on the west part of campus. Each of the five units can house either men or women. Mitchell has generally housed women but one or more units housing men have been more common in recent years. Each Mitchell Hall unit has laundry facilities and a television lounge. All rooms are air conditioned.
Hyde Hall houses women and offers semi-private bathrooms shared by four suitemates. It contains laundry facilities, a television lounge, fully equipped kitchen, and a formal lobby.  Those living in Hyde are selected based on GPA, class standing, and personal commitment to upholding college policies.
Men's intercollegiate teams compete in baseball, basketball, cross-country, cycling, golf, soccer, track and field, swimming/diving, tennis, volleyball, and wrestling. 
Women's intercollegiate teams compete in basketball, cheerleading/dance, cross-country, cycling, golf, soccer, softball, swimming/diving, tennis, track and field, volleyball, and wrestling.
The College is a member of NCAA-Division II and Conference Carolinas. The College is also a member of the NCCAA (National Christian College Athletic Association).
The College was previously a member of the Appalachian Athletic Conference of the NAIA.
The college mascot, the Tornado, was adopted in 1922 following a 206-0 football win over North Carolina rival Lenoir College (now Lenoir-Rhyne).  The local newspaper covering the event wrote the headline "King College's Victory Was 'Tornado' Of Week's Games" and began referring to the football team as the "Tornado".  This is a record score which stands in the annals of collegiate football as one of the highest ever won on the gridiron.
Students have many opportunities to explore Christian beliefs and spiritual traditions.  Opportunities abound with chapel, the Buechner Institute, Christian ministry groups, and service projects.  Each year, student teams also travel nationally and internationally for a range of missions and study trips.
All traditional King students are required to obtain fourteen chapel, convocation, or community service credit hours per semester.
Chapel is held every Wednesday at 10:30 a.m. and led by the Chaplain.
Dedicated to the work and example of Frederick Buechner, the Institute is devoted to exploring the intersections and collisions of faith and culture that define our times.  
The Buechner Institute sponsors convocations on most Mondays at 10:30 a.m. that feature speakers from a variety of backgrounds to examine the ways in which faith informs art and public life and cultivate conversation about what faith has to do with books, politics, social discourse, music, visual arts, and more.  
Additionally, the Buechner Institute sponsors the Annual Buechner Lecuture. Previous lecturers include:
Ministry groups are student led and are supported by the administration.  Groups include: Corps for Christ (dance ministry team), Refreshment Company (music ministry team), & Dawn Treaders (drama ministry).
Coats for Kids (winter coats collection), Dermid Home Team (group mentoring), Fellowship of Christian Athletes (FCA), Friends for Life (mentor program for youth), Habitat for Humanity, Liston Devos (student-led worship meeting), The Lord   s Storehouse, Widow   s Mite, Young Life Leadership (ministry to local high school students), YWCA, Boys & Girls Club, Girls, Inc., River   s Way