Argentina made major changes to its telephone numbering plan in 1999, this page describes the changes and the current dialing practices. (For a general overview of the Argentine phone network, see the relevant section of the article about Communications in Argentina.)
In Argentina, changes were made to area codes in 1999, when the telephone network was split up into three different areas, with a new digit representing the new telephone company.
At present, the valid numbers are: 
Similarly, the digit ''4'' was added to existing subscribers' numbers. For example, before the change, a number in Buenos Aires would have been dialed as follows:
After the 1999 change, it would instead be dialed as:
City Area Codes in Argentina are given by the first three digits of the Dialing Code. Examples:
Until 1998, calls from Argentina to Uruguay were made using domestic dialing codes. For example, to call a number in Montevideo from Argentina before 1998: 
After 1998, this changed to:
Although Argentina claims the Falkland Islands () as part of its national territory, calls are made using the Islands' country calling code, e.g:
Almost all cell phones in Argentina operate with a ''calling party pays'' (CPP) system. That means that whoever initiates the call pays for it. For this reason, cell phones in Argentina usually start with number 15. Since calls to cellphones are more expensive than land calls in Argentina, this prefix indicates to the calling party that this call is going to cost more. For instance if a user wanted to call a Buenos Aires CPP cell phone, from within Buenos Aires, they would have to dial:
Should the user want to call a cell phone in another area code, he/she would have to add the local prefix, e.g.:
Non-CPP phones are available for purchase, and the calling and numbering is the same as the land numbers (non ''15'') but few users choose these numbers since that means that they would have incoming and outgoing calls deducted from their monthly minute allocation as opposed to just the outgoing.
A notable exception to this rule are the calls made from payphones, as well as the ones made from locutorios. In this case, even when dialing the ''15'', the mobile party is billed for the airtime.
If the user is dialing from a cell phone to a cell phone, another option is to drop the ''15'' and simply dial the trunk code (''0''), then the area code and then the number. For instance, if a user wanted to call from a cell phone anywhere in Argentina to a Buenos Aires cell phone, he/she could dial:
This is an important dialing option because it is the format in which caller id numbers are displayed in cell phones in Argentina, i.e. cell phone users should not expect to see a ''15'' prepended to the caller id number when receiving a call from another cell phone. This number formatting option (without the "15") is also important because some cell phone companies require it to send SMSs, e.g. a message to '''011''' '''15''' xxxx xxxx may render an ''Non-existing number'' error message.
Every city code has a single set of numbers with a fixed number of digits (e.g. 8 digits in Buenos Aires) to distribute between cell phones and land lines so the above dialing option renders no ambiguity, e.g. if a cell phone has the 1234-1234 number in Buenos Aires, a land line would not exist with that same number under the same city code.
However, please note that dropping the ''15'' is just an '''option''' to dial calls and is only available when calling or texting from cell phones to cell phones. Prepending the ''15'' when calling means calling party pays, and many mobile phone owners do not answer calls if they have to pay for it; in the end, it is always better to use it to maximize the chance of completing a call.
Since 2003, the digit ''9'' has to be dialed '''before''' the city code, and the prefix ''15'' '''omitted''', when calling CPP '''mobile''' phone numbers in Argentina '''from abroad''': 
Example: My Phone # in Argentina is: 0343 15 555 1212, dialing from abroad will be: Argentina 54 9 343 555 1212
Phone calls from abroad to a '''land line''' (or non-CPP mobile phone), however, are dialed "normally." For example:
Toll-free numbers in Argentina must be dialed the following way:
Numbers that are paid as local calls countrywide start with ''0810''. These numbers are mostly used by companies that have branches in different provinces and only one call center:
Subscriber dial-up Internet access in Argentina gets a special, reduced-tariff number: 
This is because there is a number of ISPs that provide "free" dial-up access through standard cost phone numbers that do not use the ''0610'' prefix. In these cases, the user does not need to pay a subscription cost, he/she only pays for the standard telephone call (usually a local telephone number in major cities); then the telephone company gives the "free" ISP a fraction of what the user pays for the call.
However, ''0610'' tends to be confused with "gaming" phones, where a special 3 pesos + VAT tariff is quoted. These numbers always have to be dialed like this:
All ''0800'', ''0810'' and ''0609'' have the same number countrywide. However, ''0610'' only can be used in the Internet Service Provider's area.
Some of the reserved, toll-free special numbers are:
Emergencies:
Starting in January 2004, in the Province of Buenos Aires, the new emergency number will be ''911''. Unlike ''100'', ''101'' and ''107'', ''911'' will have people trained for the task of handling emergencies.
The newer 911 dispatcher sends police from a randomly selected police station, instead of the station assigned for that specific area. This measure was added to avoid the "liberated zones" where dirty cops allow crooks to commit numerous crimes without arresting them.
Services: