In the 1970s, area codes were assigned with the following pattern.
There was no standard trunk prefix like '0' - only the area code and phone number were dialed when calling from one area code to another. Thus the Kowloon number xxx-xxx would have been dialed as follows:
In the mid 1980s, 6-digit numbers starting with '0' became 7-digit numbers starting with '71', making way for subsequent change of the New Territories prefix from '12' to '0'.
Fixed-line phone numbers were either six- or seven-digit in the 1980s. Area codes were assigned with the following pattern.
Cellular phone numbers are all eight-digit starting with '9'.
On 1 January 1990, area codes were abolished. Area codes for six-digit numbers became part of subscriber's numbers. Area codes for seven-digit numbers were simply removed.  Some six-digit numbers had the first digit changed to 2 digits to make a seven-digit number.
In the mid 1990s, a '2' was prefixed to all fixed line (land line) numbers which are now eight-digit. A '7' was prefixed to existing pager service numbers.
Before the introduction of portable fixed line numbers, numbers were assigned in a pattern akin to districts. For example, in addition to the existing 3, 5 and 0 prefixes, a 4 prefix was used for Tuen Mun and Yuen Long, 6 for Tai Po and Sha Tin, and 8 for Island East.
Numbers starting with '3' were introduced when '2' for fixed lines started running out. Cell phone numbers remain eight-digit. The number '6' started to be used when numbers started with '9' were running out. In May, 2008, cellular phone numbers with '5' as the beginning were also introduced.
For example, one can request a SkypeIn number which is usually in the form of 81xx xxxx.
Calls to Macau and the People's Republic of China are international, as are calls to Taiwan.
During the years of telephone monopoly, + was 106 (through 1980s) and then 001.
Telephone number for emergency services     Police, Fire Service and Ambulance     is 999 for land or fixed lines.
For mobile and other users:
Some special numbers are three- to five-digit. Some premium rate services, for example for games, are 9-digit.
Numbers beginning with 1 are usually reserved for carrier/operator services. These services are provided by the individual telephone carrier. In general, these numbers can be used across all carriers: