Mobileye N.V. was founded in 1999 by Professor Amnon Shashua, after he was challenged to create a vision system which could detect vehicles using only a camera and software algorithms on a processor. Together with Mr. Ziv Amiram, he set up the company   s R&D headquarters in Jerusalem, Israel. At first the company developed algorithms, and a processor chip called the EyeQ chip. All of Mobileye   s proprietary image processing algorithms run on the EyeQ chip. After years of testing, the chip and software algorithms began to be sold as commercial products to OEM customers. The company   s first clients were automotive manufacturers such as  BMW, General Motors, Volvo and Nissan, whose    Tier 1    electronics suppliers integrated Mobileye   s technologies into these company   s cars, at first as an optional accessory when buying a new car, and later to be supplied as a standard fit in new cars.
In 2006 Mobileye set up an Aftermarket department, which sells finished products manufactured by Mobileye at their Philippines factory, IMI. The Aftermarket products are sold to an international network of distributors on all continents, who sell the products to fleets of trucks and buses, to car dealerships, and to car accessory shops.
The Mobileye Vehicle Detection (VD) algorithms recognizes all motorised vehicles such as cars, motorcycles and trucks, in day and night time conditions. The Vehicle Detection technology provides the core detection for some of Mobileyes' multiple functions - Forward Collision Warning & pre-crash mitigation, Headway Monitoring & Warning and Adaptive Cruise Control. Mobileye can perform all its vehicle detection based functions on a single or mono camera - this breaks from the automotive industries standard approach of using radars, laser scanners or in some cases stereo-cameras.
The importance of keeping sufficient distance between cars in order to reduce accidents has been recognized by traffic authorities worldwide and is being enforced in an increasing number of countries.
Mobileye   s Headway Monitoring & Warning (HMW) system operates in all light and weather conditions, and recognises the preceding vehicles in the host vehicle   s lane and adjacent lanes and provides accurate range estimation for the targets. Mobileye's threat assessment identifies the Closest In Path Vehicle (CIPV) and from its range and current speed the headway estimation in Seconds is derived. The HMW feature level notifies the driver of the current headway and provides a warning should a preset threshold be passed.
Lane Departure Warning Systems are in-vehicle electronic systems that monitor the position of a vehicle within a roadway lane and warn a driver if the vehicle deviates or is about to deviate outside the lane. Currently the available sustems are forward looking, vision-based systems that use algorithms to interpret video images to estimate vehicle state and roadway alignment.
Mobileye developed the Lane Departure Warning System (LDW) to address a major cause of road fatalities     unintended lane changes due to drowsy, fatigued or distracted drivers by issuing warnings to the driver in such situations.
The Mobileye Lane Departure Warning application has already been launched in multiple production platforms through 2007 and 2008 with GM, BMW and Volvo.
An additional development beyond LDW is that of Lane Keeping and Lane Guidance. These two functions interact with the vehicle steering system to provide the driver with 'silent' feedback through the steering wheel. Lane Keeping and Lane Guide differ in their driver interaction - Lane Keeping gives the driver feedback upon 'touching' the lane marks, whereas Lane Guide will advise the driver in order to guide the vehicle in the center of the lane.
Currently Mobileye appears to be the only supplier in the automotive marketplace of a combined LDW and FCW product which meets and exceeds, using a single sensor, the recommendations from the US NHTSA organisation. Mobileye currently has multiple series developments featuring this LDW and FCW feature combination. The first of which appear to be market ready for a 2011 introduction.
Mobileye's pedestrian detection technology is based on the use of mono cameras only, using advanced pattern recognition and classifiers with image processing and optic flow analysis. Both static and moving pedestrians can be detected to a range of around 30m using VGA resolution imagers. As higher resolution imagers become available range will scale with imager resolution, making detection ranges of up to 60m feasible.
From 2008, BMW 7-Series cars are equipped with Mobileye's TSR systems; which were developed in cooperation with automotive supplier Continental AG.
Mobileye   s Intelligent Headlight Control (IHC) supports the driver in automatically raising and lowering the high beams without inconveniencing oncoming or preceding traffic. The technology is in production on the BMW 7 series.
Mobileye continues to develop more advanced headlamp control features, such as Gliding or Ranging Headlamp Control as well as vehicle masking technologies, which prevent oncoming vehicles from being dazzled by the host vehicle, whilst giving the driver of the host vehicle the benefit of still driving in high beam.