Located on the eastern shore of Lake Huron, Goderich is notable for its sunsets. Queen Victoria once commented that Goderich was "The prettiest town in Canada" although no reigning monarch has ever visited Goderich. The town indicates that tourism is among its important industries.
The town participates yearly in the Communities in Bloom competition; and has won awards in many categories.
Goderich's downtown has an octagonal traffic circle known as 'The Square'. The county courthouse stands in the middle of The Square. This is where, in 1959, Steven Truscott was convicted of murdering Lynn Harper.
Contrary to a popularly held belief, plans for The Square were not intended for Guelph. It is thought this rumour started when Goderich was founded, as town planners the Canada Company originally wanted their community to be called Guelph after the Royal Family, eventually resigning to Company Superintendent John Galt's wish to keep the name Goderich.
Sifto Canada operates a salt mine underneath Goderich's harbour.
Volvo once operated a road grader manufacturing plant in Goderich.
The plant was first started by Champion Road Equipment in the 1950s and acquired by AB Volvo in the 1990s. In September 2008, Volvo announced plans to close all operations in Goderich and move operations to Shippensburg, PA.  The final stages of this plan took place by July 2010 resulting in many lay-offs. This hit the local economy quite hard.
Goderich Airport (known unofficially as ''Sky Harbour Airport'') is a community airport with three runways: two are paved, with runway lighting, and one is grass. It is located directly north of the town, and is accessible via the Bluewater Highway north of the community. During WWII, The airport was the site of an Elementary Flying Training School as part of the British Commonwealth Air Training Plan.
In addition to flight services, several industries are located in the immediate area of the airport to provide the full range of services that aviation requires, including interior and exterior re-finishing, and mechanical repairs.
The Goderich-Exeter Railway presently operates freight service to Goderich.
The line was built by the Buffalo and Lake Huron Railway in 1859.
CPR build a second railroad into Goderich in 1907.
The Huron Historic Gaol is a National Historic Site. It served as the region's gaol (old English form of ''jail'') from its opening in 1842 until 1972. It is open to the public between April and October. This is the site of the last public hanging in Canada. James Donnelly Sr. of the Black Donnellys also spent time here before his trial. As well, Steven Truscott was held here for some time.
The Huron County Museum is a community museum which offers modern exhibition galleries. Permanent exhibits depict the early settlement and development of Huron County. The museum also collects and maintains the Huron County Archives.
The Marine Museum, which is open in July and August, is dedicated to the lifestyle and culture of those who made a living on Lake Huron, highlighting The Great Storm of 1913. Admission to this museum is included in the entry fee for the Huron County Museum.
Goderich features 3 public use beaches which can be reached by car following signage in town to the beach hill, also known as West Street.  After parking, beach users can also walk along a wooden boardwalk over a mile in length.  The main beach, at the north end of the walkway is a sand and fine gravel beach where swimmers and sunbathers can watch lake freighters loading up with salt on the other side of the pier.  Further south is St. Christopher's beach and at the far end of the boardwalk is "Rotary Cove", a family-friendly sand beach with lifeguards and playground equipment.  Of interest as well, are the man-made groynes along the beach, put in place to control sand migration from the action of water currents.
Besides school teams, during the winter season, hockey is prevalent in most Canadian small towns, Goderich being no exception. The town supports both the Sr. A Pirates and the Jr. C Sailors, much of the talent on both teams being of local origin.
Goderich is home to two elementary schools and one high school. Goderich Public, and St. Mary's Catholic separate school are the in town elementary schools, with more elementary schools serving the rural areas outside of town. Goderich District Collegiate Institute (G.D.C.I.), the local high school, was founded in 1841. The Huron County Museum now uses the original schoolhouse as part of the museum.
Goderich has its own official flag which was adopted in 1977 for the town's 125th birthday celebration. A contest was held, open to all Goderich schools and residents which was won by Judge Carter of Wilson Street, Goderich. The flag shows the royal crown centered in an octagon (representing the 1/4 mile octagon 3 lane town square) with 3 waves at the bottom on a blue background representing Lake Huron and the Port of Goderich. 
The Town also has a full town crest. 
The local newspaper paper is the '''', owned by Quebecor/Sun Media Corporation through Bowes Publishers.