The '''2010 V8 Supercar Championship Series''' was an FIA sanctioned international motor racing series for V8 Supercars. It was the twelfth V8 Supercar Championship Series and the fourteenth series in which V8 Supercars have contested the premier Australian touring car title. The championship began on February 19 in the Middle East at Abu Dhabi's Yas Marina Circuit and finished on December 5 at the Homebush Street Circuit after 26 races at 15 events. These events were held in all states of Australia and in the Northern Territory as well as in the United Arab Emirates, Bahrain and New Zealand. The 51st Australian Touring Car Championship title was awarded to the winner of the Drivers Championship by the Confederation of Australian Motor Sport.
James Courtney won the Drivers Championship for Dick Johnson Racing by 86 points from Triple Eight Race Engineering's Jamie Whincup in the final race of the season at the Sydney Telstra 500. Championship Team of the Year was awarded to TeamVodafone and Champion Manufacturer of the Year to Holden. Retrieved from www.speedcafe.com.au on 7 January 2011
 The proposed event for Queensland Raceway in early May was cancelled in January after V8 Supercar and circuit operators were unable to agree to terms. The Ipswich venue was later restored to the calendar. Barbagallo Raceway was later removed with V8 Supercar citing workplace health and safety regulations.
Calendar is as follows:
The following teams and drivers have been confirmed for the 2010 series.
On July 29, 2009, it was officially announced that Team Vodafone would switch from Ford to Holden following Ford's withdrawal of funding from all of their teams except for Ford Performance Racing and Stone Brothers Racing.
Rod Nash Racing, owners of the #55 Racing Entitlement Contract which has been operated by Tony D'Alberto Racing for the last two years, will switch their operating teams for 2010 and will support a third Ford FG Falcon for Ford Performance Racing. Paul Dumbrell has been confirmed as driver.
Fabian Coulthard was released from his Paul Cruickshank Racing contract to join Walkinshaw Racing. Andrew Thompson will join Walkinshaw Racing with expanded sponsorship from Bundaberg Rum.
Paul Cruickshank Racing's Racing Entitlement Contract was sold to the sponsors of Tim Slade. A revived team, James Rosenberg Racing will be formed around Slade and will drive a customer Stone Brothers Racing Ford.
Tasman Motorsport was officially disbanded on 20 November 2009, with the team selling its Racing Entitlement Contracts to Tony D'Alberto Racing and the newly formed Lucas Dumbrell Motorsport.
Jason Bargwanna was announced as a new signing for Kelly Racing joining Rick and Todd Kelly. The team's fourth driver was announced just two days before cars took to the track in Yas Marina. Multiple Sports Sedan Champion, Tony Ricciardello was confirmed to drive the #16 car with the support of Super Max for the first three events, from the Hamilton 400 the car will have sponsorship from Stratco.
Greg Murphy has joined Paul Morris Motorsport to drive the team's second car alongside Russell Ingall.  The car will carry Castrol sponsorship. Murphy will miss the opening round of the series at Yas Marina Circuit due to a date clash with his hosting duties for Top Gear Live in New Zealand. Team principal Paul Morris substituted.
Brad Jones Racing team owner Kim Jones confirmed that Jason Bright will join the team for the 2010 season. Part of the deal will see the survivng Britek Motorsport licence operated as a third BJR Commodore with Karl Reindler to drive the additional car. Immediately prior to the Norton 360 Sandown Challenge, Jason Richards withdrew from the rest of the 2010 championship to have surgery to remove a tumor. Andrew Jones took over the seat.
Lucas Dumbrell Motorsport was formed by Paul Dumbrell's brother, Lucas Dumbrell. The team acquired a VE Commodore and employed Daniel Gaunt as driver. After the Hidden Valley round Gaunt was replaced with Cameron McConville, the team citing the need for an experienced driver to progress further. On 28 October 2010, it was announced that Warren Luff would drive the Lucas Dumbrell Motorsport Holden Commodore for the rest of 2010 and 2011.
Three Fujitsu V8 Supercar Series teams were granted wildcard entries to the two co-driver endurance events, the Phillip Island 500 and the Bathurst 1000. The three teams, Greg Murphy Racing, MW Motorsport and Sieders Racing Team, were also the three teams who started both 'enduros' in 2009. A fourth team, Adrenaline Motor Racing (who last raced at Bathurst as Novacastrian Motorsport in 1998) withdrew their application. The three teams have not confirmed whether they would be upgrading existing Fujitsu Series specification chassis, or leasing an eligible chassis from another team, as Sieders Racing Team did in 2009. Greg Murphy Racing do possess the former Tasman Motorsport Commodores. MW Motorsport subsequently confirmed it would use one of its own BF Falcons. Sieders Racing Team later withdrew their wildcard entry after a budget shortfall.
Full-time drivers will no longer be allowed to partner one another for the endurance races at the L&H 500 at Phillip Island and the Supercheap Auto Bathurst 1000 at Mount Panorama in an effort to make both the championship and the endurance races more competitive.
For the Armor All Gold Coast 600, each team had to include a driver who races in a overseas series. The majority of nominated drivers were sourced from the Indy Racing League.
Following a failed attempt to get former champion Marcos Ambrose to make a one-off guest appearance at the 2009 Telstra 500, the V8 Supercars Executive Board approved plans to allow for one-off guest drives. The system would work in a similar fashion to the "Wildcard" entries that the series allows to drivers and teams from the Fujitsu Development Series to step up to the V8 Supercars during the endurance races. Ambrose has been earmarked as a target for such an appearance, with the series looking to allow international drivers to take part in the offshore races in Bahrain and Abu Dhabi at the start of the season.
Immediately prior to the season start, V8 Supercar launched a new publicity campaign, centred around American singer Pink and her 2001 recording Get the Party Started. The advertising campaign is called  "The Greatest Show on Wheels" and is the first of a three year deal between V8 Supercar and Pink.
Points are awarded to the driver or drivers of a car that completes 75% of the race distance and is running at the completion of the final lap.
Holden took out the Champion Manufacturer of the Year award, having clinched the title at the Gold Coast 600 event with its 14th race win of the year. Retrieved from www.speedcafe.com.au on 7 January 2011 The award is given to the manufacturer that scores the most race wins during the Championship season.
2010 V8 Supercar season