The history of '''French cartography''' can be traced to developments in the Middle Ages. This period was marked by improvements in measuring instruments and also by an upgrade of work in registers of all types. 
The first map of France is drawn up by Oronce Fine (available on the site of ). It testifies to the will of the political power to mark its presence on the territory; to affirm, to build limits, borders, to arrange its territory, and to consolidate the internal economic markets.
In the sixteenth century Dieppe appeared as an important school of cartography. Pierre Desceliers, allowed the realization of many maps. At the same time, the Portolan maps of the Portuguese sailors had the most recent knowledge obtained by the Dieppois sailors in their exploration of Canada.
Then, cartography progressed more and more, through the development of new techniques and by the will of the political powers to control their territories. Very powerful companies testify support to some of the cartographic missions at the end of the nineteenth century.
There were two decisive stages in cartography. One was determining longitude and latitude. Florence Trystram, 2001, '' the lawsuit of the stars ''is an account of the research of three French scientists that was done in South America, 1735-1771.
In France, the first general maps of the territory were by the family Cassini with the eighteenth century, on a line scale percent measuring apparatuses, in other words, a scale of 1 . One centimeter on the chart corresponds to approximately 864 meters on the ground.
This map constituted for the time, a true innovation and a decisive technical projection. It is the first map to be rested on one triangulation geodetic whose establishment took more than fifty years. The four generations of Cassini followed one another to complete this work. This map, still called '' Cassini Maps '' or '' maps of the Academy '', are now referred to by researchers (geographers, historians, genealogists, etc.).
The work of Cassini left his print on the world: one still finds today toponyms known as '' Signals of Cassini '', which reveals the places where measurements of the time were carried out. This bench mark corresponds to the tops of the some thousand triangles which formed it geodetic of the map of Cassini.
The ''' map of Cassini ''' or ''' map of the Academy ''' is the first general map of the kingdom of France.
It would be later better known as the ''' map of Cassini ''', because it was drawn up by the family Cassini, mainly Cesar-Francois Cassini (Cassini III) and her son Jean-Domenica Cassini (Cassini IV) with the eighteenth century.
The adopted scale is of one line for undred toises, is a scale of 1/86400 (a measuring apparatus is worth 864 lines).
This map constituted for the time a true innovation and a decisive technical projection. It is the first map to be rested on one triangulation geodetic whose establishment took more than fifty years. The four generations of Cassini followed one another to complete this work.
The map does not locate the dwellings or the limits of the marshes and forests, but the level of precision of the road networks is such as by superimposing satellite photographs corresponding almost completely with drawn roads more than 200 years in the future.
This map is still consulted today by researchers. It interests historians in particular, the geographers, the genealogists, as they Hunting for the treasure and ecologists which need to make retrospective ecology or to include/understand the history of landscape.
Here shows how Cesar-Francois Cassini (Cassini III) was going to begin the map:
The surveys were carried out between 1756 and 1789 and the 181 sheets composing the chart were published between 1756 and 1815.
Deceased in 1784, Cesar-Francois Cassini never completed his lifelong work on mapping. His son, Jean-Domenica Cassini (1748   1845) later finished the work of his father.
Departments of Savoy, of Haute-Savoie and part of that of the Maritimes alps did not form part of the Kingdom of France at the time as the taxes operated at the eighteenth century. They are thus not represented on the map of the Academy. Moreover, the island of Yeu and Corsica will never be raised.
The majority of the sheets were the subject of a new edition dating back to 1815.
In 1808, Napoleon I decided to establish a map intended to replace that of Cassini; however during the empire, geographical engineers who were attributed to it
The implementation of this new map can begin with the first work from a triangulation supported on
1817 and 1866, by testing several different scales.
It was a map for the use of the soldiers: Geological Survey map, on the scale 1:80,000. This ''
Geological Survey map '' was raised and drawn
Institut geographique national (IGN).
At the beginning of First World War (1914   1918), the difficulties of reading on this scale led the generals to make new map to the 1:, more convenient, on which appears a very practical kilometric squaring on the ground. It is on the basis of this map to the 1: which will be created the map to the 1: of the IGN, called today '' map of excursion ''.
The Institut Geographique National (English: National Geographic Institute) or IGN is a French public state administrative establishment founded in 1940 to produce and maintain geographical information for France and its overseas departments and territories.
Its activities abroad begin into 1986 within a new subsidiary private company IGN France International.
From 2000, the IGN develops the concept of Reference frame on a Large Scale (referentiel a grande echelle = RGE); it is a question of completing within a deadline short digitalization the cartography of the French territory with a meter scale and according to four components: topography, land registry and address. This RGE is entirely completed at the end of 2008. Then it enter in a cycle of maintenance In June 2006, the IGN opened the service Geoportail allowing the cartographic visualization of the French territory on a Web navigator and using on one hand funds of air photographs and on the other hand the digitized maps to the 1/25 000.    Phase 2    of Geoportail was put on line one year later, with a new ergonomics.
At the end of 2006, the IGN was implied in the production of a receiver GPS, for the excursion and automobile navigation, called Evadeo. The software of navigation was provided by BCI navigation (replaced in 2008 by ), the road data are of Navteq and it puce GPS of SiRF, and the IGN provides a part with extracts of its maps at various scales.
In June 2007, the IGN started offering a service whereby it is possible to have a map printed centred on any location in France. This is similar to the service offered in Great Britain by the Ordnance Survey.
In July 2007, Geportail - an online map service - began offering 3D movable views in a similar style to GoogleEarth. To use this function, it is necessary to install the plugin TerraExplorer.
The IGN is the successor to the geographical Service of the Army (SGA), which was founded in 1887 and disbanded in 1940. The old maps produced by the SCA were divided into two batches: one which remained at the Institute and one which joined the military files of Vincennes. The general Louis Hurault, who was at the origin of these modifications, was the first director of the IGN. He tried, in vain, to recover the material shared by the Germans. A law in ten articles is signed the 14 in order to define the functions of the IGN. The statutes had been signed the 8. This established, in example, the national School of geographical sciences in order to train Cartographical engineers.
During the Second World War, the IGN became famous for its counterfeiters. The cartographers are indeed experts in penmanship and the material necessary to the production of fake identity papers was available to the Institute. Certain engineers of the IGN were in contact with the services of allied information based in London. In secret, they brought a complete set of maps to London covering France and North Africa in order to replace maps destroyed in a bombardment.
The agents of the IGN took an active part in armed resistance in 1943. Several agents were shot by the Germans or died in action. Between September 1944 and on May 8, 1945, the IGN was under the control of the    provisional government    and most of its personnel and of his services are transformed into    military geographical Service   . At the end of the war, the IGN received the thanks of Generals Bradley and Eisenhower.
Between 1945 and 1946, the debate is intense concerning the future of the IGN, last creation of the Third Republic. A law is finally signed the 8. It confirms the membership of the IGN to the Ministry of works and create the    geographical Section of staff of the Army   , new section in charge of the military map.
In 1947, the IGN receives the mission of covering the whole France, but also all the dependents    territories, like North Africa, Western Africa, Madagascar, the countries associated with Indochina and the departments and overseas territories. The task is considerable with more than 12 million km    being covered. The independence of these countries will have as a consequence the creation of national services in each country (examples: DTGC in Senegal, IGN-N in Niger). 
The IGN then initiates a period of active co-operation with the majority of these organizations by providing some engineers of the IGN and also receive the students of the ENSG who intended to become the executives of the cartographic services of new independent countries. The activity of the IGN apart from the French territory also develops by the control geodesic project(Ecuador 1975, Libya 1979, Saudi Arabia 1981), of cartography (Saudi Arabia, Burundi, Senegal, Mali, Ivory Coast, Togo, Benin   ).
1982 to 1988, the control of a large topometric project and numerical cartography in Riyadh is the occasion to massively introduce digital techniques into the processing production; in parallel, the idea of a topoland data base emerges at meetings of the    national Commission of the geographical information    chaired by Guy Lengagne; this commission returns his report in 1983 and outlines numerical geographical information then in agreement with the period of the basic map with 1:25 000.Publicly-owned establishment related to administration since the January 1, 1967, it is placed under the supervision of the ministry for Transport, the equipment, tourism and the sea.
In 1971, the IGN and the CNES form the    Group of research of geodesic space   . This collaboration between the IGN and the CNES continues with the launching of the program SPOT the 5. The launching of satellite SPOT-1 takes place the 22.Six days after take SPOT-1 in orbit, the IGN create its programme of    data bases launches   , the    data bases   . The data base of the cities, the data base of leveling distribution, the data base of geodesic distribution , the aerial missions data base and the toponyms data base were progressively establish . The    Topo data base   , bases of topographic data digitized, covers from now on the whole
France and include nearly two million toponyms .