By blending family comedy with music, Razzle Bam Boom educate audiences on a wide array of topics, ranging from the story of the Wright Brothers    first flight to the history of contemporary rock music.
Mark Beckwith performed in touring rock bands throughout the 1980   s before concentrating on children   s music. Beckwith wrote and produced songs included in Knowledge Adventure   s award winning JumpStart series, and appeared on Nickelodeon and the Family Channel. His songwriting has won him awards from Billboard Magazine, the Family Channel, and USA Today.
Obediah Thomas has a degree in Music Performance, Jazz Studies with an emphasis on Trumpet from the University of Cincinnati. Thomas made a career as a stand-up comic, touring major comedy clubs across America. In addition to his work with Razzle Bam Boom, Thomas performs nationally in a stilt-walking musical troupe, Lou Wow and the Poi Boys. He also performs for children as a solo-juggler.
In the 1990   s Beckwith was a member of Beckwith and Towner, a comic duo for children. After the death of Towner, Beckwith sought out another musically oriented comic who performed well for children. After being introduced to Thomas through a mutual friend, the two began performing at local events.
For July 4 of 2001 they wrote    200 Years of American Music    a revue of the diversity of American music, and marketed the show for elementary schools. This was released around the time of September 11, 2001, and many Southern California schools booked the show because of its patriotic theme. Razzle Bam Boom soon-after they released their first CD of the same name.
In 2002 they wrote    The Wright Brothers Musical Comedy,    adapted from an original musical, music written by Beckwith and book by Towner. It was ready for the 100th anniversary of the Wright Brothers    first flight in 1903. The two-man version play teaches the story and the perseverance of Orville and Wilber Wright. That year Razzle Bam Boom produced a DVD of their Wright Brothers Musical Comedy as performed at the Madrid Theater in Canoga Park, California in summer 2004.
In 2003, Razzle Bam Boom began performing for the Orange County Performing Arts Center in the ArtsTeach program, which sends performing artists to schools throughout Orange County, California. Razzle Bam Boom has since performed for over 500,000 students at over 500 different schools.
Razzle Bam Boom has appeared at theaters such as Orange County Performing Arts Center, The Clark Center in Arroyo Grande, Reed Whipple Center and Charleston Arts Center In Las Vegas, Ocotillo Performing Arts Center, Scottsdale Center for the Arts, and the Wells Fargo Center for the Arts in Santa Rosa, CA. On August 17, 2008 Razzle Bam boom opened for The Knack at the Warner Center in Canoga Park, California.
To date, Beckwith and Razzle Bam Boom have released 6 albums CDs of children   s music. The duo   s most recent album, Rockology, included the tagline    For kids 4 to 94.   
In 2008, Beckwith founded Shows That Teach, a group of shows from a variety of performers designed to educate children in recycling, water conservation, and other environmental topics.
Beckwith and Thomas model themselves as a music-comedy musical straight-man/comic team like the Smothers Brothers   while aiming their shows at children and families. Beckwith, the straight man, often plays guitar. Thomas, the comic, plays trumpet.
Together the two combine musical numbers, skits, and audience participation, to educate children of all age groups while also appealing to families.
200 Years of American Music     2002
Singing American History (songs written by Jeff Lantos)     2003
The Wright Brothers Musical (DVD)     2004
The History of Rock    n    Roll     2005
The Word Wits (DVD)     2007
Singin    in the Mud (   Mark & Puey   )     2007
Rockology (songs written by Mark Beckwith)    2007
Singin    Green (   The Earthworms   ) - 2009