Susan Samueli attended UC Berkeley where she received a bachelors of science degree (1972) in Mathematics.  From 1972 until 1985, she was with IBM Corporation Federal Systems Division, as a software programmer and IBM Corporation National Marketing Division as a Systems Engineer.  In 1985 she left IBM to focus her energy on raising her children at which time she developed a keen interest in alternative health care.  She developed an active consulting practice in the areas of nutrition, homeopathy and American/Chinese herbs.  Subsequently she received a Ph.D. in Nutrition from the American Holistic College of Nutrition in 1993 and a Diploma in Homeopathy form the British Institute of Homeopathy in 1994.
In June 2005 Susan and her husband, Henry Samueli purchased the NHL   s Mighty Ducks of Anaheim, which has been renamed the Anaheim Ducks from the Walt Disney Company.  Henry and Susan also own the management company that operates the city-owned Honda Center, the home of the Anaheim Ducks.
Under the ownership of Susan and Henry, the Anaheim Ducks won the 2007 Stanley Cup Championship.
Susan and her husband, Henry together co-founded the Samueli Foundation in 1997.  This family foundation grants to agencies that work in the areas of health, youth services, religion, and education. 
Health
In 2001 the Samueli   s established the Susan Samueli Center for Integrative Medicine at the University of California, Irvine and the Samueli Institute located in Washington DC.  Both organizations seek to research, identify and promote best practices in the field of alternative medicine.  Henry and Susan have also supported the John Wayne Cancer Institute   s ground-breaking research in the area of cancer prevention and treatment.  Susan serves on both the SSCIM Advisory Board and she serves as the Chairman of the Samueli Institute Board.
Youth Services
The Samueli Foundation supports The Orangewood Children   s Foundation as well as other Orange County agencies that provide both preventative and restorative care for at-risk families and foster youth.  Susan has resided on the Orangewood Children   s Foundation Board since 2001 and she also founded the Orangewood Children   s Foundation auxiliary, 44 Women For Children.  This auxiliary supports the Orangewood Children   s Foundation by raising scholarship money for foster youth who desire to attend school following emancipation.  
Jewish Culture and Values
The Samueli Foundation supports organizations that promote Jewish education, spirituality, heritage and community identity.  The Sala and Aron Samueli Holocaust Library located at Chapman University in Orange CA, funded by the Samueli Foundation houses Holocaust artifacts as well as books and testimonies from survivors.  The Jewish Community Center in Irvine CA also bears the Samueli name as well as the Reform Synagogue located in Ra   anana, Israel.
The Foundation also sponsors many programs that promote tolerance and diversity and are working toward a solution to end anti-Semitism globally.  Susan presently resides on the Hillel Board in Orange County, CA.
Education
The Samueli Foundation is very interested in the following areas of education:
The Schools of Engineering at the University of California at Los Angles and Irvine bear Henry Samueli   s name. Institutions of education that have received grants from the Samueli Foundation are listed as follows:  Chapman University, El Viento, HOPE University, KOCE, Tarbut V   Torah Day School, The Discovery Science Center, The Ocean Institute, The Orange County High School of the Arts (OCHSA), Orangewood   s Guardian Scholar Program and THINK Together.