Male and Female Tennis,
Male and Female Cross Country,
Male Baseball,
Female Softball,
Male and Female Volleyball,
Male and Female Swimming,
Male and Female Basketball,
Male and Female Football, Male Wrestling,
Male and Female Ultimate Frisbee (separately named "East Side Riders")
Obama High School is one of three new 6-12 schools in the Pittsburgh Public Schools. It is housed in the Reizenstein Facility in Pittsburgh's  Shadyside neighborhood. The school is an international baccalaureate school with a middle years and diploma program.
In 2009, the school was named after US President Barack Hussein Obama II.
Obama 6-12 was born out of the phase out of Schenley High School and Frick Middle School. In 2008 Pittsburgh Public Schools' school board voted to close down the Schenley High School building in Oakland due to severe internal Asbestos problems. With a 76 million dollar price tag on renovations, the school board voted to move the staff and student body to the Reizenstein Middle School facility and begin a phase out of the school. Each year the school will lose one grade so that by 2010-2011 school year the last grade of Schenley will graduate. The school will be replaced with Obama Academy which was spawned from Frick middle School. Under the plan Schenley would lose a grade each year, while Frick 6-8 would gain a grade every year so that by the 2011-2012 school year it would have grades 6-12.
Obama 6-12 features both a Middle Years Programme and a Diploma Programme. The Diploma Programme teachers at Obama were inherited from Schenley High School.
The middle school has standard Pittsburgh Public schools curriculum with IBMYP as a supplement curriculum. Many middle schoolers come from international studies feeder schools from around the district. Middle schoolers have access to many academic activities such as the African American History Bowls.
The High School portion of Obama 6-12 has its own Vice Principal and teachers. It follows standard Pittsburgh Public Schools regulations such as graduation credits and separate classes for gifted students.
9th and 10th graders are enrolled in either Pittsburgh Scholars Program (PSP) classes or Center for Advanced Studies (CAS) classes with IBMYP as a supplement to both sections. CAS classes are for higher achieving students with a minimum IQ. Students in these classes receive a weighted GPA and may take AP courses such as AP U.S. History. They are also required to complete a Long Term Project (LTP), and will receive a special seal on their diplomas. 9th and 10th grade students have access to many IBMYP electives such as visual arts, concert band, technology, Choir, and Ceramics. 9th and 10th Grade students attend the majority of their academic classes on the south side of the 1st floor of the Reizenstein complex. 10th Grade students are required to complete a personal project so that they may earn their IB MYP certificate.
Obama 6-12 will begin enrolling 11th graders for the 2010-2011 school year and 12th grade students for the 2011-2012 school year. Starting in the 11th grade students are no longer separated by CAS and PSP. Students are placed together in IB DP classes. Students are required to fulfill requirements for Creativity, Action, Service (CAS), complete an extended essay, complete a theory of knowledge course (TOK), and pass the IB exams to receive college credit for their work. During 10th grade  Obama students choose an elective that they will have for the rest of their 2 years. These choices include Psychology, Theater, Film, Arts, and Band.
Obama currently shares its sports teams with Schenley High School which it shares a building with. Together Schenley and Obama have Boys and Girls Tennis, Boys and Girls Cross Country, Boys Baseball, Girls Softball, Boys and Girls Volleyball, Boys and Girls Swim, Boys and Girls Basketball, Boys and Girls Soccer Wrestling.
Obama 6-12 is housed in the Florence Reizenstein Facility located on the edge of Pittsburgh's Shadyside neighborhood and adjacent to Ellis School. The building also houses the remainder of Schenley High School as well as an early childhood center. The building was originally a middle school built in the 1970s but was closed due to population concerns in the early 21st century. The school was renovated in the summer of 2008 and for the 2008-2009 school year housed Schenley high school grades 10-12. In the 2009-2010 school year Schenley's population was scaled back by a grade and the school for the first time shared the facility with Obama 6-12.
Reizenstein features: