Born in Smithton, Pennsylvania, Ryan Madar completed high school and enrolled as a midshipman in the Naval Reserve Officer Training Corps at the University of Jacksonville.  However, Mitchell opted not to accept a commission in the US Navy, deciding instead to pursue a career in professional wrestling. Mitchell debuted in 2004 for Coastal Championship Wrestling in Yulee, Florida and wrestled for them mainly until starting to wrestle for Dory Funk Jr.'s "Funkin' Conservatory". Within a year, he had held all four of its championship titles including the promotion's heavyweight title. He wrestled there, briefly appearing for All Japan Pro Wrestling, until being scouted by Rocky Johnson.  Rocky would take Mitchell on to sign a deal with World Wrestling Entertainment where he would wrestle for their developmental league Florida Championship Wrestling.  A contract issue would have Mitchell's WWE deal recalled soon after.  Mitchell then moved on the wrestle mainly for NWA East/Pro Wrestling Xpress, and other northern independent promotions.
Mitchell made his debut for the Tokyo-based All Japan Pro Wrestling in January 2008 at Korakuen Hall, where he cut a promo in English thanking AJPW president Keiji Mutoh for signing him for the tour.  Mitchell would go on to team with Dory Funk Jr., Osamu Nishimura, and others while facing Japanese talents such as Kensuke Sasaki, Katsuhiko Nakajima, and Mutoh. He later escorted Dory Funk, Jr. to the ring during his retirement match at Sumo Hall against Masanobu Fuchi & Genichiro Tenryu on March 1, 2008. Mitchell left Japan after the 2008 Excite Series.
Mitchell faced Afa A'noai, Jr. in Florida Championship Wrestling, who would later become known as Manu on the WWE RAW brand. During this time, Mitchell appeared numerous times as a television extra for World Wrestling Entertainment on all three of their televised shows. His time in FCW was very brief, however, as the contract dispute between Mitchell and Marti Funk resulted in his contract being cancelled by WWE on July 30, 2008.
Mitchell has since been a mainstay on the US northern indy scene.  On September 26, 2009, Mitchell wrestled NWA National Heavyweight Champion Phill Shatter at NWA East's 15th Anniversary Show, in a losing effort. However, he would go on to defeat Dash Bennett for the NWA East Three Rivers Championship in McKeesport, Pennsylvania on January 30, 2010. He followed this up three days later at RWA Uprising II with a victory over Sterling James Keenan in a 30-minute Iron Man match to win the RWA Heavyweight Championship.
Mitchell recently wrestled on an episode of WWE Superstars in a losing effort against Vladimir Koslov on May 13, 2010.  This match was filmed during a WWE Monday Night Raw (May 10, 2010) in Pittsburgh, PA,  the last WWE event at the Mellon Arena, known to the locals as the Igloo.  This made Ryan Mitchell the last Pittsburgh-born professional wrestler to perform at the Igloo.  Mitchell would also wrestle Dos Caras Jr. the next night in a dark match at the WWE Smackdown tapings from the HSBC Arena in Buffalo, NY.