The album debuted at number three on the US ''Billboard'' 200 chart with first-week sales of 54,000 copies, becoming Cash's third posthumous top-ten album in the U.S. In the United Kingdom, it entered at number nine on the UK Albums Chart. ''American VI: Ain't No Grave'' also attained international chart success, charting within the top-ten of several other countries.. acharts. Retrieved on 2010-05-02.
Upon its release, the album received generally positive reviews from most music critics.. Metacritic. Retrieved on 2010-05-02. At Metacritic, which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics, the album received an average score of 78, based on 19 reviews, which indicates "generally favorable reviews". Critics praised Cash's ability to record at his age and to communicate the album's content through minimalist, emotional arrangements. ''The Times'' writer Pete Paphides gave the album 4 out of 5 stars and wrote that Cash's "most soulful performances on ''American VI'' are invested in Nashville standards". However, some critics remarked that the song selection was weaker than some of the previous installments and that after five earlier collections, this particular installment somewhat fell into a formula  employed by earlier albums. Slant Magazine writer Jesse Cataldo gave the album 3 out of 5 stars and wrote that "the angle imposed here is a double-edged sword, granting a too-strict formula for these songs to occupy, but also granting a greater measure of artistic freedom". Pitchfork Media's Stephen M. Deusner expressed a mixed response towards Rick Rubin's production, stating "''Ain't No Grave'' isn't really Cash's farewell as much as it is Rubin's memorial mixtape".
Giving it 4 out of 5 stars, Andy Gill of ''The Independent'' has declared the album less strong than '' '', but maintains that this installment, "comes so close to those heights  is cause for rejoicing." Jerry Shriver of ''USA Today'' gave it 31/2 out of 4 stars and stated "Though some of the others in the series have stronger songs and performances, this one still is indispensible".Shriver, Jerry. . ''USA Today''. Retrieved on 2010-05-02. ''The Washington Post''s Bill Friskics-Warren wrote that the album presents Cash as "an unwavering man of faith" and perceived a "spiritual, even biblical quality to the record". ''Los Angeles Times'' writer Ann Powers called it "Cash's hospice record" and lauded his musicianship.Powers, Ann. . ''Los Angeles Times''. Retrieved on 2010-05-02. In his consumer guide for MSN Music, critic Robert Christgau gave ''American VI: Ain't No Grave'' an A rating and called it "both the grimmest and the most hopeful" of "those nearness-of-death albums". ''The Daily Telegraph''s Andrew Perry gave it 5 out of 5 stars and called it "Cash   s final, life-affirming masterpiece".