The township was incorporated in 1797 out of part of the existing Newton Township, and was supposedly named after Frankford, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, after a visitor who hailed from that area came to help out at the rural school in the township.  Lafayette Township later separated in 1845 and then Branchville (which is completely surrounded by the township) separated and became incorporated in 1898.
The township is the home of the Farm and Horse Show, which relocated from Branchville to the Plains Road in 1976 when it needed more area for expansion. Now called The New Jersey State Fair / Sussex County Farm & Horse Show, it is the site of numerous activities and events throughout the year. Another large recreation area is Skylands Park, a 4,300-seat ballpark which hosts the Sussex Skyhawks of the Can-Am League starting with the 2006 baseball season.
A large outlet mall has been proposed for the intersection of U.S. Route 206, Route 15, and County Route 565 in front of Skylands Park. This mall has met a large amount of local opposition, but has been approved and is awaiting approval by the State of New Jersey.
According to the United States Census Bureau, the township has a total area of 35.4&nbsp;square miles (91.8&nbsp;km2), of which, 34.1&nbsp;square miles (88.3&nbsp;km2) of it is land and 1.3&nbsp;square miles (3.4&nbsp;km2) of it (3.70%) is water. Culver Lake and Lake Owassa, two natural lakes nestled below the Kittatinny Mountain, form the northern border. The township is located in the Kittatinny Valley which is a section of the 700 mile long Great Appalachian Valley that stretches from Canada to Alabama.
Elevation ranges from 450 feet above sea level to 1500 feet. Where the Paulinskill River is the elevation is 500 feet.  There are several hills with elevations of 800 feet and one hill of 908 feet.
Most of Frankford Township is on the Ordovician Martinsburg Formation. This is a shale, slate, and limestone formation created four hundred fifty millions of years ago when a chain of volcanic islands collided with proto North America.  The islands went over the North American plate, creating the Highlands of Sussex County and the Kittatinny Valley.  Millions of years of erosion occurred and there was a second event.  About four hundred million years ago small continent that was long and thin, collided with proto North America creating folding and faulting. The Silurian Shawnangunk conglomerate that was under a shallow sea, lifted due to pressure.  Heat which melted the silica, later cooled, and  thus the Kittatinny Mountain was born.
The Wisconsin Glacier covered all of the township from 21,000 BC to 13,000 BC. The glacier covered the top of Kittatinny Mountain.  End moraines exist in Stokes State Forest as well as just off Route 565 north of the Skylands Park. Also about a mile south of Ross's Corner is an end moraine. An esker was created when the glacier retreated due to climate warming. Many ponds and lakes created.  Culver Lake was created at this time, as the drainage became blocked. The township is drained by two river systems.  The Paulinskill and the Wallkill. The Paulskill travels in a northwesterly direction throughout the township before turning southwest.  Papakatkin Creek starts east of Branchville Reservoir and drains into the Wallkill River north of the town of Sussex.  Another creek starts near the base of Sunrise Mountain and empties into the Papakatkin Creek near Pellettown. Dry  Creek starts at the Branchville Reservoir and travels south then empties into the Paulinskill. There is a chain of  hills between Dry Creek and Papakatin Creek and these hills are what separate the two river drainage systems. The drainage divide is just north of Route 206 and the goes northwest toward Branchville Reservoir.  Water near Route 206 or south of Route 206 drains into the Paulinskill. Water north of Route 206 drains into the Wallkill River.
After the glacier melted, the area was cold and that of a Tundra Biome. As the area became warmer, the coniferous forests of spruce and pine began to grow.  The area was then a Taiga Biome. This is when Paleo Indians came into the area around 10,500 BC.  Culvers Gap was made by a ancient stream that was later diverted. The Gap bottom is 400 feet below the top of Kittatinny Mountain, which can be seen for many miles. Paleo Indians carried spears with fluted points made of black chert or jasper.  They used Culver's Gap to travel from the Flatbrook Valley to the Kittatinny Valley.  This route was later used by Native Americans.  Paleo Indians made temporary camps and traveled often as they were hunter gatherers.  It is difficult to locate their camps as they are located many feet below the present ground surface of today. One would have to search the Pleistocene gravels.
Mastodons, Musk Ox and Caribou roamed the area.  The bones of Mastadons were found in Highland Lakes, Swartswood Lake, Great Meadows, and in Orange County, New York. As climate warmed they either traveled north or became extinct.  
Climate warmed between 8000 BC to 6000 BC.  At this time more deciduous trees such as oak, maple, birch,  and willows began to grow.  Other big game then slowly inhabited the area, such as deer, elk, bear, and moose.
By 3000 BC other deciduous trees grew such as hickory, cherry, walnut, beech, butternut, chestnut, ash and elm.  Hunter gatherers populations slowly grew as now there was more food in the forests.  The Paulinskill River is shallow which allowed for easy fishing. The valley has small hills which allowed for easy travel and setting up camps. Due to the diversity of the deciduous trees and plants growing in the grasslands, game was everywhere.  Gathering became more intensive.
Around 1000 BC pottery was invented which allowed the storage of seeds, nuts and other food.  The bow and arrow was also invented around  this time.  Hunter gatherer populations began to rise more due to the ability to store nuts in pottery and procure game through the bow and arrow.  However camps were still temporary and traveling was still done often in search of game and plants. As populations grew, camps became more seasonal.  These camps were along rivers.  It was at this time that the Lenape Native Americans entered the area.
The Lenape settled this area around 1000 BC or slightly later.  They settled their seasonal extended family camps along the river valleys as food was abundant there.  They had a trade route that went through the township.  The path started at Minisink Island on the Delaware and went to Raritan Bay.  The path went from Minisink Island to Culver's Gap, and continued through Frankford Twp. where it crossed the Paulinskill River and went south, east of Newton.
Around the year 800 to 1000, triangular projectile points were developed.  This was the beginning of the bow and arrow in North America.  It was also at this time around the year 1000 that agriculture began to be developed. With potter, the bow and arrow and gardening, Native American populations grew even more.  The Lenape were still hunter gatherers and supplemented their food intake with corn, beans and squash.  The had gardens that were round or oval in fertile river valleys. The Paulinskill River and the surrounding valley offered excellent area for family camps of Native Americans.  The Paulinskill River is shallow and narrow which allowed for easy fishing, bathing, and gathering of plants.  Game also is attracted to the river valley such as deer, bear, waterfowl and other small game.  Since the land is flat, this allowed for easy traveling, hunting and food gathering such as various nuts. Many trees were huge, which allowed for large nut crops each autumn. The Native American populations continued to grow even though they were living in a late stone age culture. Populations expanded until the Little Ice Age and European arrival.
The Little Ice Age began in the early 17th century and ended in the mid 19th century.  In the late 17th century is when Europeans came into contact with the Lenape Native Americans in this area.  The Little Ice Age had to have a drastic effect on Native American populations in this area.  The area had late frosts in June and early frosts in August.  This would have had not only an effect on corn crops, but on hunting game as well for the Native Americans. Corn took longer to grow than the corn farmers grow today. Trees bearing nuts such as Oak, Hickory, Beech, Walnut, Butternut, and Chestnut would had reduced nut crops by cold weather. Game animals tend to go into a semi hibernation during cold spells which would make game more difficult to find.  Extreme cold weather and deep snow also made finding game difficult. Shallow rivers such as the Paulinskill and Wallkill froze quickly, thus reducing the ability to fish. Due to these factors many Native Americans starved in this area.
Native Americans had no immunity to European diseases because of separation from Europe and Asia for thousands of years made them vulnerable to European diseases.  Because Native Americans traveled and traded with each other, getting small pox was not that difficult. Population of Native Americans perished because of this also.  The Native populations decreased during the late 17th century and early 18th century in Frankford Township and the rest of New Jersey due to disease.
By 1750 nearly all the Native Americans were gone from this area.  This was due to land purchases, disease, and starvation.
The first permanent settlement of European settlers in the township probably happened around the 1740s.  The land was flat with fresh water from the Paulinskill, Dry Creek or Papakatkin Creek.  Soil was fertile for farming.  Huge trees in virgin forests were everywhere. Game, fish and waterfowl were abundant.  The land was cleared for farming.  The forests were slowly cut down with axes. Fire was used to clear land.  The area was still cold due to the Little Ice Age so farming progressed slowly.  The area was controlled by England and part of Morris County at this time.
Settlers came from New York State by way of the Wallkill River drainage or by route through Culver's Gap.  The Highlands to the east were difficult to cross.
As of the census of 2000, there were 5,420 people, 1,839 households, and 1,473 families residing in the township. The population density was 158.9 people per square mile (61.4/km2). There were 2,295 housing units at an average density of 67.3 per square mile (26.0/km2). The racial makeup of the township was 98.15% White, 0.39% African American, 0.06% Native American, 0.39% Asian, 0.50% from other races, and 0.52% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.77% of the population.
There were 1,839 households out of which 37.4% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 70.4% were married couples living together, 6.7% had a female householder with no husband present, and 19.9% were non-families. 16.5% of all households were made up of individuals and 6.1% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.81 and the average family size was 3.17.
In the township the population was spread out with 25.0% under the age of 18, 6.6% from 18 to 24, 26.4% from 25 to 44, 29.0% from 45 to 64, and 13.0% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 41 years. For every 100 females there were 96.7 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 92.9 males.
The median income for a household in the township was $64,444, and the median income for a family was $69,449. Males had a median income of $49,781 versus $31,383 for females. The per capita income for the township was $25,051. About 3.5% of families and 5.1% of the population were below the poverty line, including 5.3% of those under age 18 and 6.0% of those age 65 or over.
Frankford Township is governed under the Township form of government with a three-member Township Committee. The Township Committee is elected directly by the voters in partisan elections to serve three-year terms of office on a staggered basis, with one seat coming up for election each year. At an annual reorganization meeting, the Township Committee selects one of its members to serve as Mayor and another as Deputy Mayor.
Constitutional Officers are: Clerk - Patricia Bussow, Chief Financial Officer - Gail Magura, Tax Collector - Stephen Lance, and Tax Assessor - John Dyksen.
Frankford Township is in the 5th Congressional district.  
Frankford is in the  
As of March 23, 2011, out of a 2010 Census population of 5,565 in Frankford, there were 4,054 registered voters (72.8% of the population, vs. 65.8% in all of Sussex County). Of registered voters, 510 (12.6% vs. 16.5% countywide) were registered as Democrats, 2,349 (57.9% vs. 39.3% countywide) were registered as Republicans and 1,192 (29.4% vs. 44.1% countywide) were registered as Undeclared. There were three voters registered to other parties (one Green and two Libertarians).
On the national level, Frankford is a stronghold for the Republican Party. In the 2004 presidential election, Republican George W. Bush received 70% of the vote here, defeating Democrat John Kerry, who received 28%.  In the 2008 presidential election, Republican John McCain received 65% of the vote here, defeating Democrat Barack Obama, who received 32%.  This gives Frankford Township a Cook PVI of R+20.
Students in public school for Kindergarten through eighth grade attend the Frankford Township School District, located in Branchville, which served 658 students as of the 2008-09 school year. Students from Branchville attend the district's school as part of a sending/receiving relationship.
For grades 9 - 12, public school students attend High Point Regional High School, located in Wantage Township. Attending the school are students from Branchville, Frankford Township, Lafayette Township, Sussex Borough and from Wantage Township.
U.S. Route 206, Route 15 and County Route 565 all pass through the township.