Note:  If you are seeing this page as a result of an attempt to re-nominate an article for deletion, you must manually edit the AfD nomination links in order to create a new discussion page using the name format of  .  When you create the new discussion page, please provide a link to this old discussion in your nomination. -->
The result was    '''Merge 2009 Barack Obama visit to China  to Sino-American relations - Delete 2009 Kevin Rudd visit to Japan '''. Considering the comments on the   for Barack Obama   s visit, the existing merge tag and comments on the   alongside the comments on this AfD, there is an actionable consensus to merge 2009 Barack Obama visit to China into Sino-American relations. Such a merge would need to be done with care as there is too much material in 2009 Barack Obama visit to China to merge wholesale into Sino-American relations. Consideration of what material to be kept should bear   and   in mind. I note that all the references in the article are from November 2009, and that much of the content is worded in terms of events that are about to happen     a successful merge would include a source summing up the impact of the visit, as that is unclear from the material in the article as it currently stands, and would cut out the speculation  and the future tense (example:    Obama is expected to raise the issue of the Renminbi in his talks with Hu Jintao   ).  The consensus for 2009 Kevin Rudd visit to Japan is to delete it, and I will go with consensus, though if somebody wishes to make a mention of the visit in Australia   Japan relations and would like to view the content to make such a merge I would be willing to userfy the content for them. I will comment that it is unhelpful to list two unrelated articles in the same AfD, though I will not comment on the possible motives for this as I as	sume good faith on the part of the nominator. ''' ''' *  20:43, 15 January 2010 (UTC)
I see two articles that are similar and of questionable notability.  I can't say 100% that it is a keep so a AFD is noted.  (The converse is that I can't say it's a 100% delete either).  Both articles are very much like news.  One editor said that the Rudd visit was merely a stop.  There are reliable sources that say the Obama visit was a stop, too, after the Asia Pacific Summit.  There were serious issues and a publicity point (whaling issue) for the Rudd visit but it was short.  The Obama trip was a little longer but little was accomplished.  It could have been notable if Obama publically demanded that the PRC force North Korea to act or demanded that the PRC buy American cars or shame them on human rights but it was an uneventful, non-notable trip.  Both border on news but both also have multiple news sources (newspapers report the news, not necessarily notable on an encyclopedic level).  The Obama visit was covered in several countries, the Rudd visit covered in at least Australia, Japan, UK, France, India, Pakistan, Singapore, United States.  So there is no clear answer to this except that both are very similar articles.   ( ) 07:20, 6 January 2010 (UTC)