Prior to this, he founded and was chief executive officer of InPhonic, an online wireless retailer based in Washington, DC. As the public face for Inphonic, he greatly increased the online cellphone selling business (although it never became profitable), but it was said about him that "Steinberg creates the image of success and carefully guards it until, like wet cement, it sets and becomes real". 
He has served on the Washington & Jefferson College Board of Trustees.
In 1993 David Steinberg founded Sterling Cellular, Inc. in the basement of his house in Bethesda, Maryland with the use of maxed out credit cards and a parental loan. Sterling Cellular grossed $1.3 million in sales its first year in business. It was a business that sold cellular phones with high quality customer service. Sterling offered free, on-time delivery and a warranty/repair program from day one and a free loaner phone program from its third month. By 1997 Sterling Cellular grew to 12 retail locations and $22 million in sales.
Recognizing the opportunity that the internet provided for selling cell phones, Mr. Steinberg broke up Sterling Cellular. He sold off the retail chain and telemarketing operations of Sterling Cellular and founded Inphonic, Inc. Over a seven year period, Inphonic grew into the largest seller of new cell phones on the internet with over $300 million in revenue. As a result of the company's rapid growth, in November 2007, InPhonic filed a Chapter 11 petition in the United States Bankruptcy Court for the District of Delaware.
After Inphonic, Steinberg secured support to start a new corporation . Per their website, CAIVIS Acquisition Corp is an investment firm looking to purchase small companies in the internet space and combine them in order to maximize their opportunities. CAIVIS acts like a holding company to achieve an economy of scale for the standard infrastructure required for every internet business: such as human resources, legal and accounting departments. At the same time there is a multiple arbitrage play in combining the smaller companies into a larger business. Small companies typically command a PE of 5 while larger companies command a PE of 10. In a recent interview, CAIVIS's strategy is outlined by Mr. Steinberg.