He lives in Orange County, California. He has been married to  journalist Roberta Green Ahmanson since 1986. He is somewhat reclusive and has Tourette syndrome;Doward, J.   ''The Observer.''  March 6, 2005. his wife usually communicates with the media and others on his behalf. 
 His father then married beauty and fashion expert Caroline Leonetti in 1965. His mother Dorothy Grannis Ahmanson (1907-1979) married Denis Emmons Sullivan, a San Diego attorney, in 1966. Despite the trappings of wealth, Howard, Jr. was a lonely child. He has said, "I resented my family background,  could never be a role model, whether by habits or his lifestyle, it was never anything I wanted." Haas, Jane Glenn. "The Salvation of H.F. Ahmanson Jr." Orange County Register. 1985. Howard Ahmanson, Sr. died when his son was 18, and Ahmanson Jr. inherited a vast fortune.
Ahmanson Jr. went to Occidental College, where he obtained a degree in economics.  He then toured Europe, but he returned because of arthritis.  He earned a master's degree in linguistics at the University of Texas at Arlington and has fluency in several  languages., Fieldstead & Co. - Who We Are.
In the 1970s Ahmanson became a Calvinist and joined R. J. Rushdoony's Christian Reconstructionist movement. Ahmanson served as a board member of Rushdoony's Chalcedon Foundation for approximately 15 years before resigning in 1996. In 1996, Ahmanson said he had left the Chalcedon board and "does not embrace all of Rushdoony's teachings."
In the 1970s Ahmanson was instrumental in starting the career of conservative Christian intellectual Marvin Olasky who then became an important figure in the conservative Evangelical media and political scene.
Ahmanson is a board member of the John M. Perkins Foundation and (along with his wife) the Claremont Institute. He was a member of the Council for National Policy in 1984   85, 1988 and sat on its Board of Governors in 1996 and 1998. He has written articles appearing in ''The Los Angeles Times'', ''Philanthropy'', ''Religion and Liberty'', and other publications.
Howard Ahmanson Jr. is a trustee of The Ahmanson Foundation, which was established by his father and is still operated by members of the Ahmanson family. The Ahmanson Foundation serves Los Angeles County non-profit organizations "by funding cultural projects in the arts and humanities, education at all levels, health care, programs related to homelessness and underserved populations as well as a wide range of human services."
Ahmanson's ties as a young man to the Christian Reconstructionist movement and R. J. Rushdoony have been a source of controversy over the years. In an article on the Episcopal Diocese of Washington website attacking the American Anglican Council, Jim Naughton gratuitously emphasized Ahmanson's ties with Rusdoony. Ahmanson has softened his tone and denounced Rushdoony's radical beliefs, but said to the ''Orange County Register'' in 1985 that, "My purpose is the total integration of biblical law into our lives".
After a $3,000 contribution to Linda Lingle, a Republican running for governor of Hawaii, was returned in 2002, the Ahmansons admitted they had an image problem and let the ''Orange County Register'' do a five-part series on them in 2004 to give the public a more accurate view of their work and beliefs.
Ahmanson is reported to have "never supported his mentor's calls for the death penalty for homosexuals"; instead, as the ''Orange County Register'' reported in 2004, he "no longer consider  essential" to stone people who are deemed to have committed certain immoral acts. Ahmanson also told the ''Register'', "It would still be a little hard to say that if one stumbled on a country that was doing that, that it is inherently immoral, to stone people for these things. But I don't think it's at all a necessity." 
Also in 2004, when asked by Max Blumenthal for ''Salon'' if "she and her husband would still want to install the supremacy of biblical law", Roberta Ahmanson replied: "I'm not suggesting we have an amendment to the Constitution that says we now follow all 613 of the case laws of the Old Testament ... But if by biblical law you mean the last seven of the Ten Commandments, you know, yeah." After the initial publishing of the 2004 Blumenthal piece in ''Salon'', Ahmanson wrote a response letter identifying several inaccuracies and assumptions on the part of ''Salon''. ''Salon'' then published a response with changes made to the original text and addressing some, but not all of the concerns raised by the Ahmansons.
Ahmanson has supported certain organizations of the ex-gay movement in that they regard homosexuality as a condition to be dealt with similarly to alcoholism and drug addiction. In 2008 Ahmanson's company, Fieldstead and Co., contributed $1,395,000 to the "YES on 8" campaign according to the Los Angeles Times "Follow the donors" page. Proposition 8, on the California November 2008 ballot, eliminated the rights of same-sex couples to marry.
Howard and Roberta Ahmansons' personal philanthropic organization is , also known as the Fieldstead Institute, an unincorporated entity which has never had a telephone number.  
Fieldstead does not disclose its finances, but in 2004 they gave the ''Orange County Register'' a list of the top 20 organizations they support. In order of the total amount they had given up to that point: Fullhart-Carnegie Museum Trust, Perry, Iowa; Drew University, Madison, N.J.; Discovery Institute, Seattle, Wash.; Claremont Institute; St. James Episcopal Church, Newport Beach; Calvin College, Grand Rapids, Mich.; American Anglican Council, Washington, D.C.; Food for the Hungry, Phoenix, Ariz.; Mariners Christian School, Costa Mesa; Ethics and Public Policy Center, Washington D.C.; Biola University, La Mirada, Calif.; Orange County Rescue Mission, Santa Ana, Calif.; The Chalcedon Foundation, Vallecito, Calif.; INFEMIT USA, Washington, D.C.; Hudson Institute, Washington, D.C.; World Vision, Federal Way, Wash.; Maranatha Trust, Washington, D.C.; National Coalition for the Protection of Children and Families, Cincinnati, Ohio; SEN USA, Hobart, Ind.; InterVarsity Christian Fellowship, Madison, Wis.
Ahmanson has funded the magazine Chalcedon Report, the magazine of the Chalcedon Foundation. He funds the Claremont Institute and has been an important donor to the Reason Foundation.  He has donated to numerous political candidates and organizations associated with the United States Republican Party.  Some of his donations have been returned because of his views and associations.
Ahmanson was the chair of the California Independent Business Political Action Committee (PAC) and later Allied Business Pac. Since the 1980s, he has successfully worked with a small number of conservative businessmen and multi-millionaires, principally Rob Hurtt of Container Supply Corporation, to organize political action committees and increase conservatives' control of the California state government. Ahmanson and Hurtt created the Capitol Resources Institute, which became a major lobbying force for Christian conservatives in Sacramento. The Ahmansons made political donations to the 1993 California school voucher initiative (which failed) and a 1992 voucher initiative in Colorado. Donations from the Ahmansons, Howard's former associate Rob Hurtt and the PACs they are involved with added up to almost $3 million split between 19 conservative candidates and various causes in 1992. Hurtt himself was elected State Senator in 1994 and became chairman of the Republican campaign committee for the State Legislature. At that time, the GOP was only four seats away from majority control in 1994. This political success has been seen as the result of planning undertaken at the Third Annual Northwest Conference for Reconstruction in 1983 by Wayne Johnson, who, according to ''The Public Eye'', helped craft California's 1990 term limits initiative and "managed the campaigns of several Ahmanson-backed candidates in 1992." The Ahmansons supported Proposition 22, a ban on same-sex marriage in California. Howard Ahmanson contributed $62,500 to the Western Center for Law and Religious Freedom, which, among other things, aided the citizens and leaders of the Kern County school district defend their choice to ban ''One Hundred Years of Solitude'', a book by Gabriel Garcia Marquez, for its "profanity"  and "vulgarity." (Other Ahmanson political initiatives and their results are discussed in Blumenthal's 2004 ''Salon'' article.) Since the year 2000 his influence on California politics and his spending of money on it has somewhat lessened. 
Through Fieldstead, Ahmanson is a primary backer of the Institute on Religion and Democracy and has supported groups such as the American Anglican Council on projects to resist efforts to liberalize mainline Protestant churches, particularly with respect to issues concerning homosexuality.
Ahmanson is also a major backer of the Discovery Institute, whose Center for Science and Culture opposes the theory of evolution and manages a public relations campaign promoting Intelligent Design.  
Ahmanson has been the major funder for the Capitol Resource Institute, the California political front of Focus on the Family; the Western Center for Law and Religious Freedom, and the California Pro-Life Council.  Ahmanson helped found the Rutherford Institute and has been a major donor to Paul Weyrich's Free Congress Foundation. Fieldstead has acted as co-publisher with Crossway Books to publish the "Christian Worldview Series" of books under the title ''Turning Point'', in which some critics have perceived the influence of Reconstructionist ideas. The leadership of the Institute for Religion and Democracy and of the Discovery Institute, though both in the conservative Christian  category, are not Dominionist or theonomic. 
Fieldstead funded for a few years a summer seminar at Calvin College that started in 1996 with a grant from The Pew Charitable Trusts. The Ahamansons also fund Christian scholars such as James Davison Hunter, a chaired professor of sociology and religious studies at the University of Virginia. The Ahmansons pledged support of $1 million through 2005 for Hunter's Institute for Advanced Studies in Culture, which publishes ''The Hedgehog Review''. This journal received an award from the Modern Language Association in 2000 as the best new academic journal.
Ahmanson has funded a four-year series of conferences on holistic development co-sponsored with Food for the Hungry International, held in Thailand, Zimbabwe, Ecuador, and the Philippines, an international photo exhibit and book on the victims of war in Nagorno-Karabakh, support for music education for elementary students in public schools in Orange County, California, sponsorship of ''Stanley Spencer: An English Vision'', a retrospective exhibition at the Hirshhorn Museum in Washington, D.C., the Museum of Contemporary Art in Mexico City, and the Palace of Fine Art in San Francisco.  
Rev. John Perkins, an African American minister who promotes racial reconciliation and holistic community development, has been financially supported by Howard Ahmanson through the Christian Community Development Association, a coalition of inner-city ministries.
Ahmanson has donated $1,395,000 through Fieldstead And Co. to support California Proposition 8 (2008), a November 2008 ballot initiative that would amend the state's Constitution to ban same-sex marriage, which had been legalized in a California Supreme Court case earlier in the year.  He had also been a six-figure donor to California's previous initiative, Proposition 22.Dan Morainm , ''Los Angeles Times'', June 29, 2008, Accessed June 29, 2008.
In late 2008, Howard Ahmanson, worried about the narrowing focus of the California Republican Party (lowering taxes), announced that he switched parties and is now a registered Democrat. 
In late 2009 Ahmanson launched his personal blog, BlueKennel.com, reflecting on interests "from the realms of world events, politics, religion, history, morality, ethics, travel, health and medicine, and the arts.  In other words, it will be pretty wide ranging."  