As someone who has edited and watched many energy-related articles for a long time, I have had my suspicions for a while, as Nopetro became more active after Mac was blocked in November 2008. Now I've compared  with  and there are a lot of common editing patterns and pages which both have edited, across similar subject areas. For example, plug-in hybrid is the top edited article for Nopetro and the second top for Mac and both have been active at  . Both have also been very active on pages related to solar cells. 
And (at the other end of the spectrum) there are some quite obscure pages which both have edited, eg.,   and those related to  . Both have also been active in creating many dubious category pages, some of which have later been deleted.
In summary, there is a strong correlation between the editing habits of Mac and Nopetro, and it seems that the Nopetro account is being used to evade the indef block on Mac.   ( ) 21:37, 11 December 2009 (UTC)
Now editing (by his own admission) under the newly created ID "Nudecline," Nopetro's talk page had borne a tag for being a suspected sock of banned user Mac until just days ago, when it was . However, I ''think'' I may have found some proof. At  , he links to the obscure and improbable redirect Nuclear decline, created by Mac back in July 2008, and then promptly changes his ID to Nudecline accordingly. I find it highly unlikely that he would know of this redirect's existence -- nor feel compelled to assume it as his online identity -- had he not created it. I realize I don't have a whole lot of diffs to present here, but the pattern of editing and the interests appear similar to Mac. Indeed, the interests cited on the three userpages are also similar enough. So I am also requesting a CheckUser as I believe it is warranted in this case, please.   ( ) 22:20, 30 May 2010 (UTC)
I think these are socks.   was also suspected.  I've made some charts to show editing from all four accounts. Same timezones, patterns, interests. 
The contributions also fit very well together. Take a look at June 30, 2008 in the more detailed summer 2008 chart. On that day, Mac was mostly editing, except for some spells when Nopetro was editing. They both voted at   within minutes of each other. An even better example is June 24, 2008. On this day,  from 0541 pretty much continuously until 1357, '''except for a one-hour gap from 1003 to 1108'''. On the same day, ''' from 1006 to 1106'''. Given their shared interests and common editing times, I don't think this is a coincidence. I think all four accounts are piloted the same user.
Whether this merits a block or some other sanction, I leave to others. If I understand Mac's block, it was just because he refused to respond to complaints about very annoying behavior related to redirects.  . If he doesn't do that anymore, maybe this is moot? Or was there another reason for blocking Mac?   '' '' 20:17, 1 June 2010 (UTC)
The overlap in pages edited between Mac and Nopetro includes a whopping , including . That, plus the editing time pattern CHL noted above and similarity pointed out by Good Olfactory , is sufficient to convince me that these are socks. I'll hear from others on what sanction, if any, should be imposed.   ( ) 02:09, 23 June 2010 (UTC)
Banned User:Mac aka User:Nudecline made  on his talk page, a few days after a new user appeared to make  to PIGS (economics), just as Nudecline seemed to be winding down editing activity on the latest account. 
What's also interesting is that the banned user has been active on the Spanish language site and so has ''this'' new editor, making the same edit  The Spanish edit even includes the same "GIPSY" reference as Nudecline's talk page rant -- this in particular seems to more than just coincidence.
Mac/Nukeless/Nopetro/Nudecline has a habit of assuming a new identities. Is it worth a check?   ( ) 14:22, 28 June 2010 (UTC)
Identical move request for Oil well to Fossil-fuel well to that made by   a confirmed sock of Mac.  Both also added their request to the top of the talk page rather than the more usual location -  and .  The Hamiltha account was also created two days after the last confirmed sock was blocked.  They also are editing in the same broad subject area - alternatively powered vehicles and more generally climate change and similar topics, for example both have edited Electric bus ( and ). Taken together I think it's enough to warrant further investigation.  I'll leave it to for someone else to decide whether this needs a checkuser.   ( ) 10:32, 6 August 2010 (UTC)
The account of   was created on 2 July 2010, five days after  , a sockpuppet of Mac was blocked. Since then, he has edited same or similar pages as Nopetro with a similar editing pattern with creating dubious or nonsense redirects; adding nonsense redlink categories and adding fossil fuels related neologisms. By  he asked to move Oil well to fossil-fuel well.  The  was made by Nopetro only less than three month earlier and was .   ( ) 06:25, 7 August 2010 (UTC)
I would also ask that a Checkuser be performed on User:Bsea. In particular, I draw your attention to his recent edits on one of Mac's favorites, Solar panel. Note this   of blogs to promote future developments in solar panels, and red links for these companies, plus his poor command of English in his edit summaries plus use of close paraphrasing to circumvent his language problems in the articles -- all hallmarks of Mac. Furthermore, throughout July, User:Bsea was active in creating a number of interwiki links to Spanish WP articles. We know that Mac was/is active in the Spanish language Wikipedia. One can  that Bsea's work in fact goes back as far as Sept. 2008. It had been dormant for an entire year, until  after our recent blocking of   and  , on June 26. The reactivation of this account and the work cited above is evidence enough for a CU, I believe.   ( ) 17:45, 8 August 2010 (UTC)
User:Bsea.
Hay, I   m not a SoockPappet and I can prove it.
To end, in Comment by Other user the only one commenting was User:Swan in Montreal and an IP that could be him to or some one else.--  ( ) 03:10, 14 August 2010 (UTC).
The reason of my little contribution to English WP is my medium level of English written, getting better every day, I don   t now what going to append when I will begin to edit in French WP?.
Being positive, I learn a lot of wikipedia system and written English (need more).--  ( ) 03:11, 14 August 2010 (UTC)
I fix the links so they point now to the right place--  ( ) 16:18, 14 August 2010 (UTC)
User:Nudecline was proved to be Mac, and Mac is suspected to be Spanish (see Comment by Other). See this comment in the  , about the  . This proves that Nudecline are Spanish. 
Now see my user page in , you will see an Argentinean flag. Which I put it before of being suspect of  and . Nobody lay with his nationality. Maybe a little bit with the level in Babel box, but never with nationality.
If so, this would seem to be a more sophisticated attempt to deceive the community. Mac/Nopetro/Nudecline revealed himself to be a Spaniard over the years, while ''never'' presenting himself as a Muslim, to my knowledge. User:Hamiltha's self-identification as a Muslim Wikipedian and the appearance of his User page are new wrinkles, to me, and I had been following him for months. Mac was never particularly clever at disguising who he was -- so if he is User:Hamiltha, this might make him all the more dangerous, as it would represent a real step-up in his ability  to game the system. I agree the edit histories look worrisomely similar. We're still not done undoing the damage done to our category structure; I hope he is not back, again. I am going to add a tag to his user page that he is a suspected sock. He deserves to know, does he not?   ( ) 19:51, 6 August 2010 (UTC)
Can users requesting checks please provide diffs showing the similarity between accused accounts and the suspected sockmaster? As it stands, all I have is your word, and in honesty that's not good enough for a check. -    10:47, 11 August 2010 (UTC)
I've suspected for some time that indef banned user Mac has been back editing from a several different Madrid-based IPs. However, I lacked a "smoking gun." I think I now have one.  to one of Mac's favourites adds the redlinked  . No such category exists, because it was deleted . Mac had created this category. (Admin Vegaswikian says so in his AfD rationale and it would be a simple matter for an admin to verify from the deleted history of the category). It's patently obvious (to me) that this anon IP ''is'' Mac, who is based in Spain; if not, this this IP dreaming up a non-existent   is one heck of a coincidence.   ( ) 22:12, 2 October 2010 (UTC)
Multiply banned user Mac appears to back in force, now operating as Diamondland. All his trademarks are in evidence:
I am not any clon of anybody and less of tedious Nopetro and so on. I do not sell to any one. I have edited a lot of articles, some of them about computers, mobile phones and so on. I try to do the best for Wikipedia and the NPOV.     --  ( ) 07:37, 28 January 2011 (UTC)