The '''Goose Lake Valley''' is located in south-central Oregon and northeastern California, United States.  It is a high valley at the northwestern corner of North America   s basin and range province.  Much of the valley floor is covered by Goose Lake, a large endorheic lake that straddles the Oregon-California border.  The Goose Lake Valley was used by Native Americans for thousands of years before white explorers arrived in the 19th century.  The pioneer wagon route known as the Applegate Trail crossed the Goose Lake Valley on its way to southern Oregon.  At the south end of Goose Lake, the ''Lassen Cutoff'' separated from the Applegate Trail and headed south toward the Sacramento Valley.  Today, Lakeview, Oregon is the largest town in the valley.  Livestock ranching and lumber mills are the valley   s main commercial activity.  The Goose Lake Valley offers a number of recreational opportunities including hang-gliding, hunting, fishing, and bird watching.
The Goose Lake Valley is located in Lake County in south-central Oregon and Modoc County in northeastern California.  It is approximately  long and  wide., ''Northeastern Counties Ground Water Investigation Bulletin 118'', California Department of Water Resources, 27 February 2004.  Three sides of the valley are bordered by mountains that rise several thousand feet above the valley floor.  On the east side, the Warner Mountains run the entire length of the valley, while the Fremont Mountains border the valley   s north and west sides.  At the northern end of the valley between the two mountain ranges is a low pass connecting the Goose Lake Valley with the Crooked Creek Valley, a small basin and range valley that leads to the south shore of Abert Lake.  South and southwest of the Goose Lake Valley is the Modoc Plateau.  Crane Mountain, in the Warner Range, is the highest point overlooking the valley.  The summit of Crane Mountain is  above sea level.Biddle, H. J., , ''The American Journal of Science'', Tuttle, Morehouse and Taylor, New Haven, Connecticut, 1888, pp. 478-480.United States Geological Survey topographic map, ACME mapper, ''www.acme.com'', 29 March 2009., Summit Post, ''www.summitpost.org'', 9 January 2010.
The valley floor averages about  above sea level.  It is dominated by Goose Lake, a large mildly-alkali lake.  The surface elevation of the lake is  above sea level at normal water levels.  The lake normally has no outlet; however, when the water level is extremely high, the south end of the lake can overflow into the Pit River.  During severe and extended draught periods, the lake has gone completely dry., ''www.pitrivealliance.net'', Pit River Watershed Alliance, Alturas, California, 27 December 2009., Lat-Long Services, ''www.lat-long.com'', 2 January 2010.
There are a number of streams that flow into the valley from the Fremont and Warner Mountains. The Fremont Mountains provide most of the fresh water delivered to Goose Lake.  These northern and western slopes of the Goose Lake basin are drained by Thomas Creek, Muddy Creek, Cottonwood Creek, and Drews Creek.  All flow into Goose Lake.  At the southern end of the basin, Willow Creek and Lassen Creek flow from the Warner Mountains into Goose Lake., ''Oregon: A Geologic History'', Oregon Department of Geology and Mineral Industries, Portland, Oregon, 23 December 2009., ''Oregon Native Fish Status Report'' (Vol. II), Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife, Salem, Oregon, 2005.
The area around the Goose Lake Valley was formed by faulted blocking.  There are numerous bounding faults on the west and east side of the valley.  The valley itself is an alluvial basin.  Its underlying strata were formed by Pliocene and Pleistocene lava flows covered by Holocene sedimentary deposits.  It is bounded by Pliocene and Tertiary basalt that form the Fremont and Warner Mountains, and on the south and southwest by Pliocene basalt of the Modoc Plateau.
In the Goose Lake area, volcanic rock from the Pliocene is up to  thick.  This is topped with additional layers of Pleistocene basalt up to  thick.  The upper levels of strata are sedimentary deposits from the Holocene, which are  thick in some areas.  The upper alluvial layers consist of partially stratified sand and silt mixed with layers of gravel.  These deposits are permeable and provide the valley with groundwater.  Calcium bicarbonate occurs in the groundwater throughout the basin.
The entire valley was once covered by a single vast pluvial lake that may have been  deep during the Pleistocene Epoch.  However, during the Holocene Epoch water level gradually receded leaving a large endorheic lake.  Today, the lake is known as Goose Lake and is only  deep at its deepest point.
The climate in the Goose Lake Valley is typical of the high desert country of south-central Oregon.  It has warm summers and very cold winters.  The valley gets an average  of rain per year.  It also gets an average of  of snow.  The snowpack from the surrounding mountains feeds the streams that drain into the valley., ''www.lakecountyor.org'', Lake County Government, Lakeview, Oregon, 17 August 2009., ''www.weatherbase.com'', Canty and Associates, Great Falls, Virginia, 3 January 2010.
Spring is short which limits the growing season to approximately 100 days.  In the summer, days are generally warm and dry, but nights can be cool.  High temperatures during the summer normally range from 75 to 90 degrees.  Fall days tend to be clear and crisp with cold nights.  Winters in the valley are quite cold with daily temperatures averaging below freezing from December through February.  Daily low temperatures can reach 20 degrees below 0 during the winter months., Lake County Chamber of Commerce, Lakeview, Oregon, 3 January 2010.
The Goose Lake Valley provides a number of unique animal habitats.  These include lake, marsh, riparian, grasslands, sage steppe, dry forest, and mountain rimrock.  They range in elevation from  above sea level along the shore of Goose Lake to over  at the summit of Crane Mountain.  Marsh grasses are common along the lake shore.  Riparian habitats support stands of quaking aspen, alder, and willow.  Big sagebrush, bitterbrush, bunchgrass, and fescue are typical ground cover in the steppe and grassland areas.  Western juniper, ponderosa pine, lodgepole pine, and white fir dominate the dry forest areas.  Wildflowers found in the Goose Lake Valley area include Common Yarrow, Camas, Larkspur, Elephant-head flower, Blazing Star, and Crane Orchids., Southern Oregon Basin and Range Site Management Agencies, Lakeview District, Bureau of Land Management and National Park Service Rivers and Trails Program, Lakeview, Oregon, 2010., ''www.OregonsOutback.com'', Lakeview, Oregon, 16 January 2010.
The Goose Lake Valley is on the western flyway from Mexico to bird breeding grounds in the Arctic.  During the spring, Canada geese, Snow geese, Ross' geese, and Whistling swans stops in the valley to feed and rest before continuing north.  Numerous shorebirds also migrate though the valley.  These include Black-necked Stilts, American Avocets, Spotted Sandpipers, Wilson's Phalaropes, Red-necked Phalaropes, Black Terns, Eared Grebes, Horned Grebes, and Cinnamon Teal.  In the fall, these birds pass through the valley on their way south.  In addition, a number of bird species nest in the areas around Goose Lake.  Shorebirds such as American Avocets, Willets, Killdeer, Western Grebe, and Long-billed Curlew nest near the lake.  The wetlands north of the lake provide breeding areas for Canada Geese and Sandhill Cranes as well as Mallard and other duck species.  The north shore wetlands are also an important breeding area for Clark's Grebes, White-faced Ibis, and Great Egret.  Tundra Swans and American White Pelicans use the area as well.  The lake supported a winter populations of over 10,000 Canada Geese.  Barrow's Goldeneye and Common Goldeneye also winter in the area.Most, Stephen, , ''The Oregon History Project'', Oregon Historical Society, Portland, Oregon, 2003.Haig, Susan, , ''Intermountain West Regional Shorebird Plan'', United States Fish and Wildlife Service, United States Department of Interior, Washington, D.C., 13 December 2009, p. 36.
Most of the original marsh land around Goose Lake is now private property used for agriculture.  This has an impact on the lake environment.  Cattle grazing near the edge of the lake has damaged to the dry alkali crust creating muddy areas around the freshwater streams that flow into the lake.  During periods of drought, these muddy areas can almost encircle the lake, destroying islands that birds normally used as breeding habitat.  Ranch hay product also impacts the bird population.  During the breeding season, hay harvesting can damage breeding habitat, destroy nests, and kill young chicks.  The last large bulrush marsh in the Goose Lake Valley is just north of the lake.  To preserve the area, United States Fish and Wildlife Service has been trying to purchase this property.
Several varieties of trout inhabit streams in the Goose Lake Valley watershed.  These species include Rainbow Trout, Brook Trout, and the endangered Bull Trout.  In addition, Goose Lake Redband Trout are found only in Goose Lake and its tributary.  There are thirteen Oregon streams and six California streams with redband populations.  Because the lake can dry up during periods of drought, the stream populations are extremely important to the species survival.  In the stream environment, the redbands normally reach twelve to fourteen inches (356&nbsp;mm)  in length during their five year life span.  However, the redbands that live in Goose Lake can grow to .  The State of California has listed the Goose Lake Redband Trout as one of the state   s eleven Heritage Trout species.
Native Americans used the Goose Lake Valley for thousands of years before the first white explorers arrived.  The Klamath Indians called the valley   s large lake ''Newapkshi''.  Today, the lake is known as Goose Lake.McArthur, Lewis A. and Lewis L. McArthur, "Goose Lake", ''Oregon Geographic Names'' (Seventh Edition), Oregon Historical Society Press, Portland, Oregon, 2003, p. 413.Bach, Melva M., , ''History of the Fremont National Forest'', Fremont National Forest, United States Forest Service, United States Department of Agriculture, Lakeview, Oregon, 1981, pp. 12-13.
It is not clear who was the first European explorer to enter the Goose Lake Valley.  A map of the Oregon Country prepared by United States Topographical Engineers in 1832 shows Pit Lake with a hot springs north of the lake.  Given the lakes location on the map, it is clearly Goose Lake and the hot springs are Hunter's Hot Springs.  The first explorer to record his travel through the valley was John Work, who headed a Hudson   s Bay Company trapping expedition in 1832.  In a journal entry dated 21 October 1832, Work referred to the valley   s large lake as Pit Lake.  Work   s journal indicates a familiarity with the area so his 1832 expedition may not have been his first visit to the valley.
In 1864, Lieutenant Colonel C. S. Drew of the 1st Oregon Cavalry passed through the valley while on a long-range reconnaissance patrol.  Several geographic features along his route now bear his name including Drew Creek, Drews Gap, Drews Valley, and Drews Reservoir.  Drews Creek flows into the Goose Lake Valley from the west.
In 1865, the United States Congress authorized the construction of the Oregon Central Military Wagon Road from Eugene, Oregon to Fort Boise in Idaho.  Congress allowed the construction company to claim three sections of land for every mile of road built.  As a result, road surveyors laid out a route designed to pass through as much well watered land as possible.  The route of the military road came west over Drews Gap and followed Drews Creek into the Goose Lake Valley.  It passed through the valley north of Goose Lake before crossing the Warner Mountains to the east.  In reality, the Oregon Central Military Wagon Road was a venture designed to acquire public lands at little or no cost to the road company   s investors.  The construction company was able to secure thousands of acres of valuable grazing land in the Goose Lake Valley.  Legal disputes kept the ownership of these lands in question for decades, preventing settlers from claiming land grants for farms and ranches.  Ownership was finally decided by the United States Supreme Court in a case known as the ''United States versus the California and Oregon Land Company''.  Eventually, the land passed into the hands of the ''Oregon Valley Land Company'', which subdivided it into lots and parcels.  The property was sold in a nationally advertised auction held in Lakeview, Oregon in 1909.
In 1867, General George Crook began a campaign to end Indian raids in south-central Oregon.  Fort Warner, located  northeast of the Goose Lake Valley, became Crook   s headquarters.  Crook   s troops regularly passed through the Goose Lake Valley in pursuit of Indian raiders.  In 1869, the local Piute Indians signed a treaty and Army operations in the area were discontinued.  The Army abandoned Fort Warner in 1874.
The first sawmill in the Goose Lake Valley was built in 1872.  It was located in California, six miles (10&nbsp;km) southeast of Goose Lake.  The mill was powered by a water wheel and supplied lumber to homesteads throughout the valley.  A second saw mill was established in 1874, near Davis Creek, California.  Since that time, lumber production has been an important part of the valley   s economy.
Doctor Bernard Daly played a very important role in the early economic development of the Goose Lake Valley.  In 1897, he organized the Bank of Lakeview.  When Lakeview   s downtown area was destroyed by fire in May 1900, Daly financed the city's reconstruction.  He helped bring the Nevada-California-Oregon Railroad to Lakeview in 1912.  Daly also served as County Judge from 1902 until his death in 1920.  When he died, Daly gave his fortune to the people of Lake County in the form of the Bernard Daly Educational Fund.  Over the years, the Daily Fund has provided college scholarships to over two thousand Lake County students.
Lumber mills are also an important part of the valley   s economy.  The Sustained Yield Forest Management Act of 1944 helped protect the local forest products industry.  The sustained yield unit, in place since the late 1940s, requires a significant portion of the timber harvested from Fremont National Forest lands to be sold to mills located within seven mile (11&nbsp;km) of Lakeview.
  These public lands in and around the Goose Lake Valley offer numerous recreational opportunities including hang-gliding, hunting, fishing, hiking, bird watching, wildlife viewing, boating, and camping., Goose Lake State Recreation Area, Oregon Parks and Recreation Department, Salem, Oregon, April 2009., ''www.OregonsOutback.com'', Lakeview, Oregon, 16 January 2010.
Goose Lake State Recreation Area is managed by the Oregon Parks and Recreation Department.  It is located on the east shore of Goose Lake on the Oregon side of the Oregon-California border.  The campground has paved parking, public restrooms, picnic table, fire rings, and 48 spaces for trailers or recreation vehicles.  There is also an open, grassy area for tent camping.  Boating and bird watching are popular park activities.  A homesteader   s orchard, inside the campground   s boundary, draws wildlife to the area.  The campground does not require reservations.
The largest town in the Goose Lake Valley is Lakeview.  There are two main highways that pass through the valley, both pass through Lakeview.  U.S. Route 395 runs north-south through the valley while Oregon Route 140 crosses the valley east-west.  Klamath Falls, Oregon is  west of Lakeview on Route 140.  Winnemucca, Nevada is on Route 140,  east of Lakeview.  Bend, Oregon is  northwest of Lakeview via Route 395, Oregon Route 31, and U.S. Route 97.  Burns, Oregon is  northeast of Lakeview on Route 395 while Alturas, California is  south of Lakeview on the same highway.