Warren received a Bachelors of Science from Oklahoma State University and a Masters of Regional and City Planning from the University of Oklahoma in 1974. While attending OU, Warren served as work-study intern for the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development in the Oklahoma Department of Economic and Community Affairs.
After graduating, Warren became the Planning Diector for the Oklahoma Indian Affairs Commission and later became the Program Director for the Ozark Foothills Regional Planning Commission. From 1982 to 1985, she worked as an administrative assistant for women's issues for Governor of Oklahoma George Nigh. She was later promoted by Governor Nigh to serve as his Senior Executive Assistant from 1985 to 1987. In that position, Warren was responsible for coordination and development of state policy for all intergovernmental activities, economic development, exports, reverse investments, international trade, overseas trade missions and public/private partnerships.
Following the election of Henry Bellmon as Governor in 1986, Warren joined the Oklahoma Employment Security Commission as its Director of Information and supervisor of the Employment Service Program. She remained in that position until 1994.
In 1994, Warren was appointed Assistant Secretary of State by Oklahoma Secretary of State Glo Henley. As Assistant Secretary, Warren was the chief administrative officer for the Office of the Secretary of State, responsible for all administrative, policy, business, budgetary, personnel and legislative operations within the Office. When Frank Keating was elected Governor, he appointed Tom Cole as his Secretary of State. Cole kept Warren on as his Assistant Secretary.
On January 1, 1997, following the resignation of Tom Brennan, Governor of Oklahoma Frank Keating appointed Warren to serve as his second Secretary of Administration. At the same time, Governor Keating appointed her to serve concurrently as his Director of the Oklahoma Department of Central Services.
As Secretary, she oversaw 30 boards and commissions that examine, license and regulate many professional occupations, including medical, architects, engineers, banking and horse racing. As Director, Warren was directly responsible for central purchasing, management of state office building space, the State Motor Pool, the State's self-insurance program, contracts State construction projects, and other central support services.
When Governor Brad Henry was elected in 2004, the positions of Secretary of Administration and Secretary of Human Resources were abolished and combinded into one single Secretary of Human Resources and Administration. Henry appointed Oscar B. Jackson Jr. to serve as the Secretary and appointed Warren to serve as his Deputy Secretary. Henry continued to have Warren to serve as Director of the Central Services Department.
Warren remained in those positions until 2004, when she retired from State service.
Warren resides in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.