The College was founded in 1496 on the site of a Benedictine nunnery by John Alcock, then Bishop of Ely. It has been traditionally believed that the nunnery was turned into a college because the nunnery had gained a reputation for licentiousness.
The College's full name is '''"The College of the Blessed Virgin Mary, Saint John the Evangelist and the glorious Virgin Saint Radegund, near Cambridge"'''. Its common name comes from the name of its Chapel, Jesus Chapel. Founded at the beginning of the 12th century, the Chapel is the oldest university building in Cambridge still in use. 
When founded in 1496, the College consisted of buildings taken over from the Nunnery of St Mary and St Radegund: namely the Chapel, and the Cloister attached to it; the nuns    refectory, which became the college hall; and the former lodging of the prioress, which became the Master   s Lodge. This set of buildings remains the core of the College to this day, and this accounts for its distinctly monastic and non-collegiate character, which sets it apart from other Cambridge colleges. A library was soon added, and the Chapel was considerably modified and reduced in scale by Alcock.
The 500th anniversary of the College   s foundation in 1996 saw the completion of the new Quincentenary Library, designed by Eldred Evans and David Shalev, which was shortly followed by a new accommodation building.
The College is also known for its grounds, which are unlike those of Cambridge   s other old colleges, being much more spacious. Set back from Jesus Lane, all the courts are open on at least one side (with the exception of the Cloister). The main entrance to the College is a walled passage, called the    Chimney    (derived from the French word ''chemin'').
Jesus College is one of the few colleges to allow anyone to walk on the lawns of its courts, with the exception of First Court, Cloister Court and those that are burial sites for deceased nuns from the original nunnery. However, in common with other Cambridge colleges, this privilege is only extended during the summer term. Jesus gets far fewer tourists than most other colleges due to being slightly away from the centre.
Professor Robert Mair, Professor of Geotechnical Engineering in the University, has been Master of Jesus since March 2001. He is to be succeeded by Professor Ian White for the start of the 2011 academic year.
The cockerel is a symbol of Jesus College, after the surname of its founder, Alcock. Jesus College has an endowment of approximately   110 million, making it roughly Cambridge   s sixth wealthiest college.
The following Latin grace is recited before formal dinners at Jesus College (Oratio Ante Cibum):
Oculi omnium in te aspiciunt et in te sperant, Deus. Tu das illis escam tempore opportuno. Aperis tu manus, et imples omne animal benedictione tua. 
Benedic nobis, Domine, et omnibus tuis donis, quae ex larga liberalitate tua sumpturi sumus, per Jesum Christum Dominum nostrum. Deus est caritas. Qui manet in caritate manet in Deo et Deus in illo. Sit Deus in nobis, et nos maneamus in illo. 
Translated into English, the Oratio Ante Cibum reads as follows:
The eyes of all look towards you and trust in you, O God. You give them food in due season. You open your hands and fill every living thing with your blessing. Bless us, O Lord, and all your gifts, which through your great generosity we are about to receive, through Jesus Christ our Lord. God is love. He who abides in love abides in God and God in him. May God be in us and may we abide in him. 
The following Oratio Post Cibum is sometimes read after dinner:
Deus pacis et dilectionis semper maneat nobiscum; tu autem, Domine, miserere nostrum. Agimus tibi gratias pro omnibus tuis beneficiis, qui vivis et regnas, Deus, per omnia saecula saeculorum. Deus conservet Ecclesiam, Reginam, regnum, senatum, et pacem. 
Translated into English, the Orato Post Cibum reads as follows:
May the God of peace and love always abide with us; have mercy upon us, O Lord. We thank you for all your mercies, who live and reign, God, for ever and ever. May God preserve the Church, the Queen, the realm, Parliament and peace. 
However after a normal formal dinner in Hall the following short responsory is usually used:
The Presiding Fellow: Laus Deo (Praise be to God) 
The College: Deo Gracias (Thanks be to God)
The Chapel was founded in 1157 and took until 1245 to complete. The original structure was cruciform in shape, and the nave had both north and south aisles. A high, pitched roof was surmounted by a belfry and steeple; this collapsed in 1277.  The Chapel was also used as the parish church of St Radegund.  Twice the Chapel was ravaged by fire, 1313 and 1376.  
When the College took over the precincts, the parish was renamed after the College as Jesus parish, with the churchyard still being used for burials. This however, was short lived, as by the middle of the 16th century Jesus parish was absorbed into that of All Saints.  
The Chapel was much modified, with the western two thirds of the nave being converted into college rooms.
The College maintains two choirs. Mark Williams, former assistant organist at St Paul's Cathedral has been the Director of Music since September 2009, following the departure of Daniel Hyde to Magdalen College, Oxford, himself replacing Dr Bill Ives.
The misericords were created by Pugin between 1849 and 1853, and used fragments of the misericords dating from 1500, which had been preserved in the Master's Lodge as templates, from then on.
Image:Bale1.JPG|John Bale, controversial historian, playwright and Bishop of Ossory.
Image:Richard Bancroft from NPG.jpg|Richard Bancroft, Archbishop of Canterbury, chief overseer of the production of the King James Bible.
Image:Fulke Greville 1st Baron Brooke.jpg|Fulke Greville, 1st Baron Brooke, Elizabethan poet, dramatist and statesman.
Image:John Flamsteed.jpg|John Flamsteed, the English astronomer and first Astronomer Royal.
Image:ThomasHerring.jpg|Thomas Herring, Archbishop of Canterbury, noted Whig and Hanoverian supporter.
Image:Laurence Sterne by Sir Joshua Reynolds.jpg|Laurence Sterne, Irish novelist and Anglican clergyman.
Image:Boat Race Steve Fairbairn bust.jpg|Steve Fairbairn, Australian rower and influential rowing coach.
Image: Alistair Cooke, head-and-shoulders portrait, facing front, gesturing with left hand, during interview, March 18, 1974.jpg|Alistair Cooke, British/Australian journalist.
Image:Geoff Hoon Headshot.jpg|Geoff Hoon, former Defence Secretary, Transport Secretary, Leader of the House of Commons and Labour Party Chief Whip.
Image:Andrew Mitchell, October 2009 1 cropped.jpg|Andrew Mitchell, Conservative MP, Secretary of State for International Development and Privy Counsellor.
Image:Nick Hornby 01.jpg|Nick Hornby, English novelist, author of ''About a Boy''.
The following persons have served as Master of Jesus College, Cambridge: