Rick is represented by HotHouse Music.
Rick   s work in film began with composing the score for the cult film "Withnail and I", directed by Bruce Robinson in 1987. This was followed by Bruce Robinson's second film "How To Get Ahead In Advertising" - both films were produced by George Harrison   s company Handmade Films. 
Rick   s TV credits include the BAFTA award winning "Jonathan Creek" (series and specials), all four seasons of the hugely successful ITV drama "Ultimate Force" for Bentley Productions, the BAFTA award winning "Between The Lines" and "Cracker" for which Rick received a BAFTA nomination.
As well as music for Film, TV dramas and documentaries, Rick has also written music for many advertising campaigns including Nissan, Kellogs, American Express, Burger King, American Airlines, Ford and Guinness.
In addition to conducting his own work, Rick has conducted many film scores including "Tomb Raider", "Charlie and the Chocolate Factory (film)" (2005) "Hellboy II", "Notorious B.I.G.", the Oscar nominated "Milk (film)" (2008), "The Boys Are Back (film)" (2009) and "Alice in Wonderland (2010 film)".
His string arrangements can be heard on tracks from many artists including The Lightening Seeds, Blur (band), Del Amitri and more recently in 2008/09 Musical Direction for the Rough Trade Artistes Belle and Sebastian and Codeine Velvet Club (2009).
Press: "...with B&S mainstay Mick Cooke's superb orchestrations conducted by Rick Wentworth, God Help The Girl has real class...'' MOJO ****"
Rick's formative work involved assisting the late English composer Sir Michael Tippet bring his opera "The Ice Break" to its premier performance at the Royal Opera House.
Rick has a long and productive association with former Pink Floyd founding member Roger Waters, who asked him to co-produce, orchestrate and conduct the music for his opera, "Ca Ira". The opera was recorded in USA and Europe featuring Bryn Terfel, Paul Groves and Ying Huang. It reached No.1 in the American classical chart, and received Platinum sales in Poland. 
Rick conducted the world premiere of the overture from "Ca Ira" in 2002, played by the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra at the Royal Albert Hall. He also arranged and conducted a collection of Roger Waters's legendary tracks, fronted by Waters and his band. Rick has since conducted the world premier performance of the Opera in Rome followed by performances in Poland, Kiev and more recently at the Manaus Opera House in the Brazilian Rainforest of the Amazon.
Rick also orchestrated and conducted the modern opera "Guilietta e Romeo" in 2007 for European Composer Riccardo Cocciante, which had its premiere at the famous Arena in Verona and has subsequently toured throughout Italy.
Other successful collaborations include writing and producing songs with George Benson, Patti Austin, Grace Jones and Paul McCartney, who commissioned him to orchestrate and conduct a personal animated film entitled "The Light From Within" (yet to be released). Following this, McCartney asked Rick to orchestrate arrangements for his prestigious, televised appearance at the presentation of the Nobel Peace Prize.
Rick recently collaborated with writer David Levin and wrote six songs for his latest musical production "People", which premiered at the Edinburgh Festival in 2009.
Rick has served on the panel of judges for the British Academy of Film and Television Awards (BAFTA) and the Royal Television Society Awards (RTS), and is a current serving Board member of the Akram Khan Dance Company.