This is a '''list of fictional characters''' in the British supernatural drama-comedy television series ''Being Human''. The series stars Lenora Crichlow, Russell Tovey, Aidan Turner, and Sinead Keenan as four twenty-something characters sharing a house in Barry (previously Bristol in series 1   2), trying to live a normal social life, despite being a ghost, a werewolf, a vampire, and another werewolf respectively.
Annie's ability to be seen and heard by normal people depends on her state of mind, although supernatural creatures such as werewolves, vampires, zombies, and other ghosts can always see her. Annie appears in the clothes she was wearing when she died, which change subtly depending on her mood. She is capable of teleporting herself short distances. For promotional purposes, Annie's condition as a ghost is highlighted in the show's publicity photos with the addition of a glowing aura and a degree of transparency: as seen in the show itself, she has no such additions, appearing just as corporeal as the other characters around her.) When first introduced, Annie was a notably insecure ghost, unwilling to leave the house. Overjoyed to be living with people who could actually see her, she tended to mother Mitchell and George (notably infuriating George by continually making more cups of tea than any of them could drink). The reason for her remaining on earth as a ghost was initially unclear, and she spent a lot of her time alternating between finding occupations for her time and emotions or explanations for any "unfinished business" which might be causing her to stay. 
Initially, the cause of Annie's death was supposedly that she "fell awkwardly" down the stairs. It was later revealed that she had been blocking out her memories of the fact that Owen had been abusive towards her, and that he himself had killed her after finding thong underwear in her possession. Confronting her and accusing her of infidelity, as an excuse for tormenting her, he had pushed her down the stairs to her death and had flushed the thong down the toilet. (It would stick in the plumbing, eventually causing the rattling in the pipes which led to Annie's regaining of her memories). When Annie discovers her cause of death, she becomes a poltergeist, which allows her to move objects without touching them and turn machines on. At first, it seems that she can't control these newly found abilities, which only activate in times of extreme emotional distress (along with her teleportation). 
In Series 1 Episode 5, the Door to Death appears for Annie once she has resolved the issue that was keeping her on earth     her murder. But before she can pass through the Door, Mitchell is stabbed, and she decides to stay to help him. Because of this, she missed her chance to leave and has to stay on earth in her undead state. She can now hear dead people, teleport further distances, and has greater powers of telekinesis, which she describes as "a whole new skill set."
In Series 2, Annie has found strength and a greater degree of happiness by both dealing with Owen and helping to save her friends. She now begins to develop a greater degree of physical presence, and is able to be seen by more people, to the point where she is able to get a job and develop a couple of tentative romantic relationships. However, before much longer Annie is confronted once more with the Door to Death. This time it is accompanied by voices which communicate from inside the Door and through radio and TV sets, who tell her they need her there. These turn out to be the Gatekeepers, malign entities from the world of the dead who set a trap to force her to cross over. Although she escapes (aided by George), she pays the price of losing the presence she has won, and can no longer be seen or heard by anybody but vampires, werewolves, ghosts or other supernatural beings. 
Despite her disappointments, Annie demonstrates a superior strength of will when dealing with a stage psychic who had lost his gift. Unable to hear ghosts following a stage accident, he can nonetheless hear Annie, speculating that it was her strength of will that allowed him to hear her, with his gift being reawakened by contact with her. Annie was even able to see and say goodbye to her mother during her time with the psychic, folding a paper rose for her mother as she had used to do as a girl after seeing the method explained on a ''Blue Peter'' feature.
In the final episode of series 2, Annie is sent to the other side by Kemp, who goes so far as to kill a psychic that had been working with them in order to create a Door for her to pass through. Annie punishes Kemp later by returning unexpectedly through another Door and dragging Kemp back through with her. She subsequently manifested on the TV in the group's new house, saying that her current situation was 'complicated', and explaining it as involving a horrifying system of moving continually from waiting room to waiting rooms via a system of calling numbers and signing forms, with her roommates disappearing and cruel laughter being heard from behind closed doors. The series ended with Mitchell, George and Nina promising to find some way to free her.
Trailing series 3, Annie appeared in a series of videos on the BBC website, sending messages from the other side. In the final one, viewers saw that she was being sent to hell, with the gatekeepers making a special room for her and burning the key. However, she is subsequently permitted to leave with Mitchell when he enters Purgatory to recover her. Lia     Mitchell's spiritual guide- informs her that the complications were caused by her entering the afterlife through the 'wrong door', although noting that she will still have to come back through the right one eventually. Upon returning from Purgatory, Annie is reunited with George and Nina in the quartet's new home in Barry Island, Wales. 
Overwhelmed with gratitude to Mitchell for having rescuing her, Annie begins to fall in love with him and appoints herself as his guardian angel. Although her first attempts at helping him end in disaster, she eventually manages to get him a job. On a celebratory walk on the seafront, Mitchell tells her she must stop defining herself by what she does for other people, but Annie opposes this, expressing that it was he, George and Nina that she came back for and that if it wasn't for them she might as well be back in Purgatory. After learning that Mitchell's journey into Purgatory to rescue her had resulted in the creation of at least five zombie-like beings     dead bodies who nevertheless continued walking and talking     Annie attempted to help Sasha, the last surviving 'zombie', adapt to her current state. She providing Sasha with a makeover to conceal the worst of her decay, and when this failed, remained with Sasha as her body finally collapses. After this, Mitchell's resistance to Annie's love weakens, and he attempts to tell her the truth about his recent actions (including the Box Tunnel Massacre). Annie stops him before he can confess, assuring him that     regardless of the terrible things he'd done in his past     all she cares about was the man he was now. The two subsequently share a kiss and embark on a full partnership. 
However, attempts by Annie and Mitchell to develop a sex life are unsuccessful. Annie attempts to bypass the problem by suggesting that Mitchell has a one-night-stand while Annie 'shares' the experience with the woman. This plan backfires when Mitchell's vampire instincts take over and he attempts to drain the woman's blood, although he stops himself from completing the action. After sending the woman away, he admits to Annie that he's actually content to have a non-physical relationship with her (as sex has always been about violence with him rather than love) and that he regards their relationship as something 'pure' and apart from that. Things took a turn for the worst when Annie finally learned that Mitchell had been involved in the Box Tunnel 20 Massacre. Devastated, she convinced Mitchell to let himself be arrested despite the wider dangers if his true nature is discovered.
In the third series final, Annie learns of Mitchell's "wolf-shaped bullet" and that it was the price of her return. After discovering Nina injured in the hospital and receiving a message from the other side, she returns to purgatory in the hopes of sacrificing herself to repel the prophecy, but learns from Lia that there was never any prophecy at all. Lia intends to keep Annie in purgatory in order to deprive Mitchell of her     Lia's true revenge on Mitchell. Annie also witnesses the fight Herrick had stirred up between George and Mitchell, and Lia informs her that Mitchell had fulfilled the nonexistent prophecy himself. Annie concludes that Nina must still be alive as she has not passed over, and convinces Lia that her revenge is unjust. Lia allows Annie to depart, and Annie arrives back in the hospital to find Nina alive and still carrying the baby. 
Back at the house, Annie, George and Nina find a blood-soaked Mitchell on their doorstep. Mitchell persuades George to kill him and bids farewell to Annie with the words "You were the love of my long life". She replies that he is the love of hers, but before George can stake Mitchell, Wyndall appears and announces that the vampires are taking control of the world. He implies that Annie is a lot stronger than she imagines. But when he says that Mitchell will be used to kill for him, George stakes Mitchell in the heart. Annie, George and Nina watch as their vampire friend disintegrates, then stand together as they warn Wyndall that he has a fight on his hands.
George became a werewolf while on holiday in Scotland. He was about to go out for a walk when an American tourist, not knowing his way around, invited himself along after George reluctantly let him. They both got lost as night fell and were attacked by a werewolf     later revealed to be a man named Tully, who later came looking for him in search of companionship     who killed the tourist and scratched George, who survived when the rescue services found him. After becoming a werewolf, George left his family, his job and his fiancee, afraid of hurting them. He works alongside Mitchell as a porter in the local hospital, unable to hold down a more permanent job due to his monthly transformations, which are extremely painful.
George resents being a werewolf to the extent that he is essentially in denial about his condition, often referring to it as 'that thing that happens to me once a month'. For the whole of Series 1, he attempted to view his wolf side as an entirely different entity     when referring to his wolf self, he never used 'I' or 'me', only an impersonal 'it'. This ends after the last episode of the first season, when he takes responsibility for his actions as a wolf after accidentally scratching his love interest Nina during a transformation whilst trying to protect her from the vampire Herrick.
George attempted to find new ways of coping with his 'condition' in Series Two while trying to take action to lead a normal life. This included such measures as caging himself and taking tranquilisers before transforming     but this apparently only made the wolf angrier, resulting in uncontrollable swearing and a more brutal mentality in his human form, as though the wolf was trying to 'get out' in revenge for being 'chained'. Matters became even worse when he accompanied Sam, his new girlfriend, to her daughter Molly's Parents' Evening, only to nearly transform at the school because he was unaware that the clocks had gone back; although he managed to maintain control of himself long enough to get back to the flat and be locked in his cage by Annie, Molly's subsequent terror after seeing him mid-transformation prompted George to look into a cure for his condition once again, only to change his mind once again when Annie reminds him that he will be unable to see her as a human. He reunites with Nina, and they leave the chamber after finding a message from Tully written at the bottom of one of the walls: 'George, all the werewolves die.' He and Nina watch Annie being forced through the door and they, and Mitchell, later move to Wales because they are unable to stay in the house after losing Annie.
Having relocated to Barry Island, George and Nina have started work at a new hospital, using the basement room of their new house for one of them to remain during the full moon. However, despite George's belief that he or Nina would kill the other if they transformed next to each other, the two of them apparently had sex while in wolf form. When Nina discovered the permanently-teenage vampire Adam as his elderly father was admitted to the hospital shortly before his death, she and George briefly contemplated taking over responsibility for Adam after his parents' deaths- George speculating that they pretend that Adam was his brother until he and Nina were old enough for them to introduce him as their son-, but Adam departs to make his own way, wanting to explore his own independence without being a burden on them like he was on his parents. As a result of their sexual intercourse while in wolf form, George and Nina are now expecting a baby. Following Herrick's resurrection, despite his knowledge of what Herrick was in the past, George refuses to allow Mitchell to stake Herrick as he wants to be the kind of father who can legitimately teach his child about redemption and forgiveness, feeling that the now-amnesic Herrick deserves the same chance as they have given Mitchell. 
When Annie found a death notice for George's father in the paper, George attended the funeral and encountered what he believed was his father's ghost, only to subsequently learn that his father had actually faked his death after a homeless man burnt to death in his shed after his wife had an affair with George's old P.E. teacher. George and Nina were able to convince him to assert himself in his relationship with his wife, the two resuming their relationship with a trip to Cornwall (Although they apparently believe that George has H.I.V. rather than that he is a werewolf).
With the discovery that Mitchell was responsible for the Box Tunnel Twenty, he returned to the house to ask George to kill him, wanting to ensure that he couldn't kill anyone else and that George was freed from the 'taint' of helping him escape the consequences of his past sins. Understandably George is reluctant to kill his best mate but when vampire, Edgar Wyndham, states out his intent to use Mitchell as an 'attack dog', George carries out Mitchell's request and kills him, telling Mitchell that he is "doing this because he loves him."
Born in 1893 and Irish by birth, Mitchell fought as a young soldier in World War I, when he was originally recruited as a vampire by William Herrick. He encountered Herrick after a battle, stumbled upon him and several other vampires who were picking through piles of bodies for anyone living to feed on. Mitchell agreed to feed Herrick and become a vampire in exchange for Herrick leaving the rest of his men alone. He rejoined his regiment, hoping that no one had realised that he's changed, but became so hungry that he steals poison from the medical supplies, kills one of his friends and drains his blood before deserting the army and running away. At some later point he rejoined Herrick and the vampire community, accepting his new vampire nature.  
In his early years as a vampire (and before his conscience was reawakened), Mitchell was quite a hero within the vampire community, who still circulate stories of his exploits amongst themselves. These seem to be a cause of great guilt for Mitchell who has asked Herrick to stop the retelling of the stories as he would prefer to be forgotten.Being Human, script for Series 1 Episode 5 At several points, he has faced a conflict of emotions as he debates whether to 'convert' people dying around him to prevent their deaths. In the 1960s, Herrick gave Mitchell the opportunity to kill a young girl that they had lured into their car. Mitchell showed guilt and anger at the easiness of the kill and let her go. He told Herrick that she had escaped, prompting the suspicious Herrick to say that he would keep a closer eye on Mitchell.BBC Being Human: Prequels Archives Blog http://www.bbc.co.uk/blogs/beinghuman/prequels/ Mitchell has attempted several times to abstain from drinking blood (one attempt was a New Year resolution for 2000, with the aid of a fellow vampire called Carl). At this time, Mitchell showed an extreme addiction to blood, as well as heightened aggression, lack of control and extreme panic due to blood withdrawal.
In episode 3 of series 2 Mitchell has become the new "king" of the vampire group in Bristol, hiding evidence of their feedings, recreating their human front and intending to wean them off blood, although his activities are hampered by such problems as Ivan     his oldest apparent 'recruit'     being unable to completely forsake blood after so long, forcing him to allow Ivan to feed in secret while maintaining his public front. After the deaths of his vampire group by an explosion at the funeral parlour, subsequently receiving confirmation that they have been betrayed by the coroner despite a deal he had made, Mitchell realises that he has wasted his time trying to hide his blood lust and goes on a frenzy with Daisy, the now-widow of Ivan. Paying a last visit to George and Annie, he briefly seems to return to normal when warning George to stay away from cities in future before returning to his more arrogant, blood-crazed ways. A confrontation with a priest while searching for Lucy reminds him that George saw him as a good man when he was injured by Herrick, and reveals Lucy's connection to the organisation that seeks to 'cure' George and Annie. Finding the organisation's headquarters, Mitchell confronts Lucy, countering her claims that he and his kind are evil with both the theological argument that God made them just as he made mankind and by pointing out that she killed despite having a choice, but he nevertheless refuses to kill her or Kemp. He later shows evident grief when Lucy is killed by Kemp.
When Mitchell enters Purgatory to rescue Annie     following a terminally ill patient at the hospital where George and Nina now work through the Door after his demise -, he learns that the time and date of his death has been confirmed, and he will be killed by a werewolf at some unspecified- but apparently not-too-distant- future date, although he later comments to Annie that he doesn't believe a word of what he heard. Although haunted by both the 'prophecy' of his death and the continued police hunt for the person responsible for the 'Box Tunnel Twenty' massacre, Mitchell rejected an offer to depart Britain to live with the vampire 'Old Ones', commenting during a talk with permanently teenage vampire Adam that his friends help him remain clean as their goodness inspires him by forcing him to think about the disappointment they would feel if he succumbed to his thirst. After a confrontation with vampire 'fan' Graham, Mitchell tried to tell Annie the truth about the tunnel massacre, but Annie simply told him that whatever he had to tell her didn't matter, assuring him that all she wanted was the man he was now and that what he'd done in the past didn't matter compared to what he'd done for her and George, the two subsequently kissing. Although Annie tries to find ways for their relationship to become physical at first, Mitchell admits that he actually prefers their current bond, as sex has always been about violence rather than love with him, and he prefers for his relationship with Annie to be 'pure' and apart from that.
Despite some tension with werewolf vampire-hunter MacNair due to Mitchell's concerns regarding the 'prophecy' of his death- although he claims to Annie that he doesn't believe in fate-, Mitchell and MacNair reached a certain understanding when they worked together to save George and Nina from a group of vampires, although MacNair still feels that Mitchell's sins will catch up to him eventually. When Herrick returns to life, Mitchell initially attempts to stake him- particularly after Cara stakes herself before she can tell Mitchell how she and Daisy brought Herrick back-, but is convinced by George to let Herrick live on the grounds that he deserves the same chances everyone has given Mitchell. When Annie learns about Mitchell's role in the massacre, she tearfully convinced him to allow himself to be arrested, Mitchell going along with it to prove his love for her even as he tries to escape being processed due to the risks if his true nature is exposed.
Although Herrick released Mitchell- revealing in the process that his resurrection was aided by the fact that he was torn apart rather than just being staked-, Mitchell finally staked Herrick when he concluded that he had seen and done enough in his life. With the news that another man had been framed for the Box Tunnel Twenty he returned to the house to ask George to kill him, recognising that whoever had set up that frame would want a favour later and wanting to free his friends of the taint he had brought to their lives. He is then killed by George, after The Old Ones' attempt to use Mitchell to do their dirty work.(worked spelled out by old one Wyndham) George's last words to Mitchell are: "I'm doing this because I love you"
During her first transformation at their new home, Nina and George apparently have sex while in wolf form, despite George's belief that one of them would kill the other if they transformed in close proximity to each other. She later assists George in helping the permanently teenage vampire Adam, the two briefly contemplating taking over responsibility for Adam after his parents' deaths from old age before Adam departs to make his own way, wanting to explore his own independence without being a burden on them like he was on his parents. After learning that she was pregnant as a result of her and George's intercourse while in wolf form, Nina admits that her mother abused her when she was a child, contemplating terminating the pregnancy both because she fears the consequences of two werewolves creating a child and because she is afraid of repeating her mother's treatment of her. However, after the 'zombie' Sasha admitted that her only regret was missing so many moments in life because she was more focused on the present than the future, Nina decided to keep the baby. Although they have not yet been able to determine what the baby will look like when born, or if it will 'inherit' the werewolf 'gene', Nina has apparently kept the baby despite the stress of her first pregnant transformation, although it is unclear how this will work as her condition progresses. Following a confrontation between Mitchell and Nina over Herrick's fate, along with Herrick's subsequent discovery of a 'diary' of Mitchell's recent murders, Mitchell has begun to suspect that Nina is the werewolf that is 'prophesied' to kill him.
When George and Nina arranged an ultrasound to examine their baby, the nurse carrying out the operation noted that Nina appeared to be sixteen weeks along rather than the eight she believed, but George speculated that this was just the result of werewolves gestating faster than humans, much like conventional wolves. However, Nina was subsequently stabbed by the now-restored Herrick after Mitchell was arrested by the police, Herrick wanting to make George suffer like he did when George killed him, expressing regret at attacking and stabbing Nina after she was the only person in the house to show him kindness. Fortunately, Annie was able to convince Lia to help her save Nina and the baby after convincing her that revenge couldn't solve anything.
Herrick appeared in a flashback in Series Two during a visit he and Mitchell made to London in 1969, during which he revealed that there is a similar system in London to the one which exists in Bristol, but he doesn't get along with the head vampire in London     the vampire's identity was never named     because he killed the vampire's mother under unrevealed circumstances. In the Series Two finale, Herrick was resurrected by Daisy and Cara after they slit their wrists over his grave. 
Herrick returned in the fifth episode of Series Three, apparently traumatised by what he experienced while dead, as he is seen in a hospital in a straightjacket, showing terror when Mitchell attacks him and confused when he realises that he cannot see his reflection in a mirror. Despite his apparent personality changes, such as his attempt to console George over his fears about becoming a father, his expressed disdain for Annie's goodness, coupled with him directing Nina to a scrapbook of Mitchell's past murders, suggests that some part of him remains underneath his amnesia. Mitchell has agreed to spare Herrick on George's request, but is also determined to discover the secret of Herrick's resurrection so that he can use it to escape his apparently prophesied demise. Mitchell's attempts to restore Herrick's memory met with failure; although Mitchell speculated that human blood would restore Herrick's memory, he is naturally reluctant to go that far himself, while Herrick displayed an apparent discomfort at the idea of drinking from police detective Nancy Reed when she came to question Mitchell based on an anonymous tip about the Box Tunnel 20, although he was clearly tempted to do so despite his amnesia. Herrick was partially restored to himself after killing the werewolf MacNair (who he had previously encountered shortly after he became infected with lycanthropy) and made a full return to awareness and memory when he drank Nancy after she led the police team to arrest Mitchell. He subsequently slaughtered the rest of the police team in the house, and then captured Nina on her return alone to the house. Despite expressing "a dilemma" over whether to kill Nina in order to pay George back for killing him, or to let her live due to her kindness to him, Herrick chose to stab her (commenting that if he didn't "people would think I've gone soft...").  He dies at the end of series 3 (The wolf-shaped bullet) by getting staked by Mitchell while he is distracted by a sunrise.
Detective '''Nancy Reed''' (Erin Richards) is a young detective- nicknamed 'Nancy Drew' by her colleagues, much to her frustration- involved in the investigation of the Box Tunnel 20 massacre. She responded to an anonymous tip (from Nina) to talk with Mitchell about the massacre, but left empty-handed. After Annie followed Nancy back to the station and saw a photograph of Lia as one of the victims, she convinced Mitchell to tell Nancy about Daisy, but Mitchell was still only able to provide limited information due to her vampire status. While Nancy was cleaning up, she was confronted by Herrick, who showed her the newspaper clipping 'diary' of Mitchell's past exploits, but Mitchell took it from her before she could leave. During her subsequent investigation, she managed to acquire a fingerprint from Mitchell which she took to the police pathologist Cooper. Cooper positively identified it as being identical to those found in the Box Tunnel 20 carriage, but at the same time revealed himself as a vampire working within the police force to protect Mitchell and other vampires. Cooper knocked Nancy out, but was then staked by Annie. Nancy subsequently led the police raid which arrested Mitchell, only to be killed by an enraged and bloodthirsty Herrick when he succumbed to his vampiric instincts.