Topics covered include band features, show and album reviews, and several departments and columns including: Media Magic, a weekly column that focuses on the music in the latest movie or video game; Rising Talent, which features a band or artist under 18-years-old; Book Club, a monthly column that reviews musically-inclined books and publications; Lyrical Analysis, a weekly department that analyzes the lyrics of popular and unknown tracks from a fresh perspective; Industry Insider, a bi-weekly column which takes readers behind the scenes of the music industry;  and the Gearbox, a semi-weekly column that spotlights the latest instruments, hardware and equipment.
OCMM written articles, audio recordings and video features are all created for their readers in Orange County, targeting their needs and wants in producing an intriguing, compelling and engaging publication.
Through the process of operating such a publication, OC Music Magazine found a niche that has proved successful, elevating local artists to new levels and creating a tight scene of recognition and appreciation.
In 2009, OC Music Magazine published its first issue. Founded by Orange County writer and musician David N. Sachs, the mission is to recreate Orange County   s once illustrious music scene into something tangible and positive.
Sachs has been the visionary behind this unique publication long before its inception, yearning to bring great music back into Orange County. His passion for helping bands and musicians grow led him to the idea of creating a publication that could combine the efforts of homegrown musicians, venues, studios and other musically inclined businesses and non-profits.
Since early 2009, OC Music Magazine has experienced tremendous expansion. The first year saw bouts of gratitude and appreciation for the magazine   s unifying mission, and its readership continues to grow. OC Music Magazine now reaches over 250,000 online readers, musicians and industry pros in Orange County.
From its first cover feature of Roman Alexander and the Robbery to legendary interviews with Paul Williams, Saosin, Richie Stites, and Lit, OC Music Magazine is a young publication that has proved its ambition and mettle.
OC Music Magazine has recently partnered with Event Complete, an events company canvassing Orange County from San Juan Capistrano to Ladera Ranch to Irvine and beyond. Headliners at their events include Sugar Ray, Berlin, Lit and the English Beat. Their events draw from 25,000 to XX,000 attendees and OC Music Magazine is their official media partner and publication. It is said to be the largest fundraising and family event in Orange County.
The magazine has hosted several showcases throughout Orange County including MileTwo (Cypress, CA), Surf City Saloon (Huntington Beach, CA) and The Yost Theater (Santa Ana, CA).
Every Wednesday OC Music Magazine publishes new material here.
Each article is stored here for future use and reference.
Upcoming shows are listed here, freely updated by registered users.
A comprehensive list of Orange County music venues. Includes name, address, booking contact, etc.
Partner companies including California Sound Studios, Wright Records, OC Music Awards, and more.
A user-dominated collection of threads addressing musicians, bands, shows and events.
Past OC Music Magazine shows and events are posted here.
Music deals including downloads, instruments, etc.
A letter from the editor, commonly updated.