The '''Tropicana Casino and Resort Atlantic City''' is a casino and hotel located on Brighton Avenue and the Boardwalk in Atlantic City, New Jersey. It is owned by Tropicana Entertainment. The Tropicana is one of the largest hotels in New Jersey with 2,129 rooms. Tropicana has over 3,000 slot machines and 135 table games. The Tropicana also features The Quarter, a mall inside the casino.
The Quarter at Tropicana is a dining, shopping and entertainment complex in Atlantic City.  The Quarter features nine restaurants, 20 shops, 10 bars and lounges, a spa and the city's only movie theater     the IMAX Theater.  Opened in November 2004, The Quarter also features a hotel tower, parking garage and meeting space.
Tropicana has three floors of gaming with slots, tables, a poker room, and an Asian Gaming Pit. The casino features more than 3,000 slots, including progressive machines and video poker.  Tropicana's table games include more than 135 Poker, Blackjack, Craps, and Roulette games. Tropicana also hosts daily Poker Tournaments.
The Diamond Club is the casino comp card for Tropicana Atlantic City. It has 3 levels: Diamond, V.I.P. Member and Trillions Club. The details of the Trillions Club are only given to members who qualify.  In August 2009, Tropicana debuted a new players    card, the IN Card.  The IN Card is a players    card for the younger guests featuring benefits based on nightlife rewards.  Both cards are free to obtain by visiting the Diamond Club at Tropicana Casino & Resort.
The Tropicana features six owned and operated restaurants. They are FIN - A Seafood Experience, Il Verdi, Golden Dynasty, Seaside Cafe, Fiesta Buffet and the Noodle Bar. 
In addition to Tropicana's restaurants The Quarter features nine restaurants including: A Dam Good Sports Bar, Carmine's, Cuba Libre Restaurant & Rum Bar, P.F. Chang's China Bistro, Red Square, Ri-Ra Irish Pub & Restaurant, The Comedy Stop Cafe and Cabaret, The Palm Restaurant and Zeytinia. The Marketplace, located on the Boardwalk side of Tropicana, features Hooters, Corky's B-B-Q & Ribs, James Salt Water Taffy, A Dam Good Deli, Starbucks, Create-A-Cone and Boardwalk Favorites.  Stewarts Rootbeer is also located at Tropicana in the Bus Center.
Tropicana features a 2,000 seat showroom which hosts regular headliner acts and revue shows.  The Comedy Stop Cafe & Cabaret is located in The Quarter and has comedians nightly and Kozak The Magician with daily shows.  The IMAX Theater in The Quarter also has movies and IMAX 3D shows.
The Tropicana has more than 13 nightclubs.  Tropicana owns and operates three lounges - Rumba Lounge, Tango's Lounge and Alto Vino Wine Bar at Top of The Trop. 
In addition to the Tropicana lounges, The Quarter and Marketplace are also home to 32 Degrees Luxe Lounge, Firewaters, Missile Bar, Planet Rose, and Providence nightclubs.
The Tropicana Salon is features hairstyling for men and women, makeup, manicures and pedicures. Tropicana also features a Health Club with work-out equipment, saunas and jacuzzis.  There is also and indoor pool open year round, and an outdoor pool and beach cabana service open seasonally with entertainment, a bar, and light fare served poolside.
The Tropicana was the concept of Ramada Inns in the 1980s. It incorporates the steel frame of the former Ambassador Hotel. After paying $20 million for the old Ambassador Hotel the company released plans to renovate the property and convert it into a 546 room hotel and  casino with amenities including a 1,200 seat dinner theater, 1,000 seat ballroom and other public facilities.
Executives at Ramada were forced to alter their plans when their design was denied approval by the New Jersey Casino Control Commission and Governor Brendan Byrne, both of whom had become tired of casino operators doing "patch and paint" jobs instead of building totally new properties, a main reason for the legalization of casinos in Atlantic City. Ramada was ordered to demolish the old building and start from the ground up, and the company threatened to appeal the decision in court. An agreement was finally reached between Ramada and the New Jersey Casino Control Commission to only use the steel framework of the Ambassador while changing the exterior appearance of the hotel. The ultimate result of these design changes was a two-year delay in the resorts opening as well as millions of dollars in cost overruns that pushed the final price tag of the resort to almost $400 million.
In order to take advantage of its recent purchase of the original Tropicana Resort & Casino on the Las Vegas Strip, Ramada officials decided to call their new property the Tropicana Atlantic City in order to capitalize on the recognizable name. The Tropicana Atlantic City officially opened on November 23, 1981 with 521 guest rooms and casino space. Shortly after opening a unique indoor amusement area called '''Tivoli Pier''' was built and within a year the name of the resort was changed to '''TropWorld Casino and Entertainment Resort'''.
In 1989, Ramada hotels spun off their gaming properties into the new Aztar Corporation. Aztar focused much of its capital investment projects on the Atlantic City Tropicana. In 1995, Aztar commenced construction of a new 604 room hotel tower as well as renovations to the existing rooms and casino space. Tivoli Pier was closed to make way for a new poker, keno and horse racing simulcast area, and the property reverted back to the old Tropicana name.
The company followed this expansion with another project completed in 2004 that added the 502 room Havana Tower, a new 2,400 space parking garage,  of meeting and convention space, and a new retail and restaurant venue. This project is called The Quarter at Tropicana and is designed in an old Havana theme meant to evoke images of that city. The goal of this project was to turn the Tropicana into an integrated casino resort reminiscent of the megaresorts built in Las Vegas during the 1990s. Aztar also timed this expansion to take advantage of the new interest in the Atlantic City casino market caused by the opening of the Borgata Resort in 2003.
In May 2005 Aztar Corporation agreed to be acquired by the Columbia Sussex Corporation for $2.75 billion. The New Jersey Casino Control Commission granted Columbia Sussex an Interim Authorization to operate the resort on November 3, 2006. The acquisition concluded in January 2007 with the Aztar properties being merged into Columbia Sussex's gaming subsidiary, which was renamed Tropicana Entertainment LLC. In the first four months after the acquisition, Columbia Sussex reduced the number of employees at the Tropicana by 15 percent.
 Lawyers were expected to appeal.
The bankruptcy sale of the Tropicana Casino and Resort to a group of creditors led by Carl Icahn was approved by a bankruptcy court on June 12, 2009. Other owners now include Black Diamond Capital Management and Schultze Asset Management. The acquisition exchanged $200 million of the property's mortgage for equity. On August 26, 2009, the New Jersey Casino Control Commission approved Tropicana Entertainment Inc. as the property's new owner. The Commission stressed that the new owner is not the same company as the former owner, Tropicana Entertainment LLC. The decision enabled the property to operate under the same corporate umbrella as other Tropicana properties in Nevada, Mississippi, Louisiana and Indiana. Tropicana Entertainment Inc. was granted a temporary casino license by the Commission on March 3, 2010. The sale closed on March 8, 2010.
A major controversy involving expansion occurred in 1995 when the Tropicana (then known as TropWorld), the Casino Reinvestment Development Authority and the city attempted to acquire adjacent land owned by Joseph Milano at 1 South Brighton Avenue for a surface parking lot using eminent domain. A lawsuit was filed by Milano and his family in New Jersey Appeals Court (Milano v. Adamar of New Jersey d/b/a TropWorld Casino and Entertainment Resort, Casino Reinvestment Development Authority, City of Atlantic City, et at.) to stop the use of eminent domain, a New Jersey appeals court agreed with the Milano family and issued a restraining order preventing TropWorld and the CRDA from proceeding. As of 2009, Joseph Milano and members of his family still live in the building built in 1935 by his father.
The previous owners of the Tropicana, Columbia Sussex Corporation, had announced plans to construct an additional 1,000 hotel rooms in a new tower to be designed as a "hotel-within-a-hotel", with a boutique feeling. This expansion would have maintained Tropicana's status as New Jersey's largest hotel with over 3,000 total rooms. Most of this project was scrapped after Columbia Sussex was ousted as owner when its casino license was not renewed.