The game also contains content exclusive to the PlayStation 3 version.
The game starts with Woody riding Bullseye to save the orphans on the train, before the train crashes. Buzz flies in to help. Years later when Andy is 17, Woody comes up with a plan for him to play with the toys one last time. Woody, Buzz and Jessie find Andy's phone in the basement after Sarge and 4 of Bucket of Soldiers help. Meanwhile, Rex is playing the Buzz Lightyear video game, which the player gets invited. Hamm continues the story in Bonnie's room. Lotso sets up 4 fun games for Woody, Buzz or Jessie to play including horse racing to pop ballons, block breaking and finding Emperor Zurg parts. Like in the movie Bonnie plays with her toys and Woody. She pretends Dolly is an evil witch filling Bonnie's room with coffee which causes the house to go into space. Woody finds a spaceship to help save the day. In the end, and in reality, the toys are freed from Sunnyside and are saved from getting burned after they go to the dump.
The story mode also known as the ''"Adventure Book"'' was narrated by Rex and the story, which is '''almost exactly like the movie's plot''', begins with Woody and Jessie riding Bullseye to save the orphans on the train, before the train crashes. Buzz flies in to help them. Such a playtime with Andy was always so exciting for now, until years later when Andy is 17, it's when Woody told Sarge and the Army Men to find Andy's cell phone. Andy was about to leave for college and he had not played with them for years, so the Army Men had to get his cell phone, call it, and get his attention. The Army Men's part of the mission was "complete success", because Andy came to get his cell phone, but he actually held Rex instead! He took the phone, closed the toy box and left the room. A little while later, Andy's mom told him to sort through everything in his room before he could leave for college. He decided to take Woody with him and put the rest of them in a garbage bag, although they did not know that Andy was going to bring the bag up to the attic. Before he could, his mom put them out on the curb by mistake, until Buzz used Rex's pointy tail to get out of the garbage bag and hide into the garage. Then, Buzz saw a box going to Sunnyside Daycare and decided to find them all so they could hide in the box to get donated. They were all together thanks to Buzz. They were about to go to Sunnyside where there's lots of children eager to play with them. Since Woody was going to college with Andy, Woody was still up in the bedroom while they were down in the garage. When Woody saw what a big mistake Andy's mom made, he rushed down to tell them! Woody finally made it to the garage and tried to tell them that Andy did not mean to throw them away but there was not time, so Andy's mom closed the trunk and drove to Sunnyside. When they got there, a magenta teddy bear named "Lotso" who smelled like strawberries welcomed them and he showed them around. Woody tried to convince everyone to go back to Andy, but they wanted to stay at Sunnyside and get played with again and again. 
Meanwhile at Sunnyside, Lotso put them in the Caterpillar Room, where the children in the Caterpillar Room were so young, that they did not know how to play with them. Buzz had to distract the children before the rest of the toys get hurt. Thanks to Buzz, they were all safe. After Buzz saved them, he found out that Lotso and his friends were having a great time with the older children in the Butterfly Room. Jessie and Rex helped Buzz to get out of the Caterpillar Room so he could ask Lotso to transfer them to the Butterfly Room. While Woody was trying to leave Sunnyside and go back to Andy, he spotted an open window ... meaning that Woody found a way out. As Woody was leaving the Sunnyside yard, he got stuck in a tree: that's when Bonnie found him and brought him home. Later, Buzz secretly followed Lotso so he can talk to him about moving them to the Butterfly Room. Something about Lotso seemed suspicious so, Buzz decided to find out what was going on. And since Lotso smelled like strawberries, he just followed the fruity scent, where it led him to the inside of a vending machine. Things did not go exactly like Buzz had hoped, because they had captured him and took him to the library. He soon figured out that Lotso put them with the little kids on purpose, and when Buzz would not cooperate, Lotso had him switched to "Demo Mode"! It was horrible that Buzz thought he was a real Space Ranger again and had forgotten that they were his friends! Buzz started working for Lotso, and he even locked them up for being "minions of the evil Emperor Zurg". Woody did not know they were in trouble at Sunnyside, but he was looking for a way to get back to Andy's from Bonnie's house. Bonnie's toys told Woody where the computer was so that he could look for a map. He had to find a way out of the bedroom, so he decided to look for some batteries and turn on the radio to distract Bonnie's mom. When Woody found the computer, he figured out that Andy's house was only a few blocks away. Just when Woody was about to leave, Chuckles told him the truth about Sunnyside and how horrible Lotso was. Chuckles said Lotso was probably keeping them as prisoners, and that the only way to save them was to disable the security cameras. Woody came back to Sunnyside, hiding in Bonnie's backpack, where he quickly came up with an escape plan to rescue them: climbing into the ceiling and making his way to the control room, where the controls were for the security cameras. Slinky went with Woody to help make it to the control room, where Woody turned off the security cameras. Jessie saw the camera go off and escaped from her prison cell, along with her friends. She made sure Buzz would not be a problem, then she went to find the keys to open each of their cells. Once they were all free, they tried to fix Buzz, but they accidentally switched Buzz to "Spanish Mode"! There was a good side in this: he was a much better dancer. They snuck across the yard to escape through the garbage chute, but they ended up in a landfill. On the way, a television set hit Buzz, restoring his memory.
Meanwhile, at the dump, most of them ended up on the conveyor belt that is heading directly to a trash shredder. Rex thought they were going to be shredded for sure, but Slinky figured out that a belt on the ceiling was a magnet. Buzz started looking for pieces of metal to save them, for now. Right after that, they fell onto another belt that heads toward the incinerator! Luckily for them, the Squeeze Toy Aliens had gone to another part of the dump where they used a claw they found. So, as they about to be incinerated, these "Squeeze Toy Aliens" saved them all from a fiery destruction. After that, they were all in the garbage truck on their way home, but Buzz fell out and had to jump from car to car to keep up with them. Luckily, he made it to the garbage truck and they all got home together. Back in Andy's room, everyone was getting ready to go to the attic, just when Woody got a brilliant idea of writing Bonnie's address on their box! So, on his way to college Andy brought them here. Andy was sad to say goodbye, but he knew Bonnie would take very good care of them. And he was right: "Places, everybody! Bonnie's back from daycare" announced Jessie. Rex replied, "Oh boy! Playtime".
An exclusive version of the game for Xbox 360, Wii, and PS3 was sold at Walmart that includes four additional Theme Packs for Toy Box Mode.  The Theme Packs include Sports, Knights, Cutesy, and Military.  Players can use the Theme Packs to decorate buildings and dress townspeople and aliens in different ways after spending 500 coins on each pack in the Al's Toy Barn area of the game.  The Walmart exclusive version also features a reflective foil background on the front of the case, rather than the standard black.
The Nintendo DS version was developed by n-Space. The player can play as either Woody or Buzz. There is no Toy Box Mode. There are mini-games such as stopping a speeding train, battling enemies in space, racing downhill in an out-of-control wagon and many more.
The PlayStation 2  and PlayStation Portable versions 
The PlayStation 3 version of the game features exclusive content such as the ability to play as Emperor Zurg in addition to Buzz, Woody and Jessie, complete with his own full set of unique missions. Players can drive around in Zurg's custom vehicle as well as blast at enemies using his trigun, his main objective is to eliminate Buzz Lightyear though players are free to do whatever else they'd like. In addition, the game also features compatibility with the PlayStation Move motion controller, and there are also downloadable mini-games designed specifically for the Move that can be downloaded for free from the PlayStation Store in Fall 2010. Also, Toy Box has more missions and there are additional cameo appearances and more characters.