Kenny Rogers stars as Brady Hawkes, the titular gambler, who embarks on a journey to meet Jeremiah (Ronnie Scribner), the young son he never knew after Jeremiah sends him a letter. Along the way, Brady meets Billy Montana (Bruce Boxleitner) and the two become friends. Billy (while trying to help Brady in his quest) fancies himself as a professional poker player on his own. Although Billy makes mistakes along the way (some of these include: trying to find a way to cheat or do some smooth talking), Brady makes sure that he stays on good behavior during a train ride to Yuma,CA. The duo help Jennie Reed (Lee Purcell), a prostitute who has trouble with a train baron. At the end, Brady's son's stepfather (Clu Gulager) is confronted.
Kenny Rogers again stars as Brady Hawkes in '''''Kenny Rogers as The Gambler: The Adventure Continues''''' which premiered on November 28 and 29, 1983. The show was even an bigger ratings success than the first and was nominated for two Emmy Awards (sound editing and sound mixing of a limited series).
Billy Montana, Brady, and his son Jeremiah are traveling to a gambling event in San Francisco when they encounter the vicious McCourt gang. The McCourt gang force the train to stop and they take Jeremiah hostage and demand a $1 million ransom. Brady and Billy are determined to get Jeremiah back as well as the $1 million ransom which belonged to the train boss. Brady and Billy find help in their mission and meet a female bounty hunter played by Linda Evans as Kate Muldoon. Kate is the fastest female gun in the west. They form a posse together in a race to save Jeremiah.
In this installment, Brady Hawkes and Billy Montana help protect some Sioux Indians from the government and some cattle thieves.
It's 1906 and professional gambling will be outlawed in just three weeks.  Therefore, Burgundy Jones(McEntire) has just that long to get Brady Hawkes safely to San Francisco for the last poker tournament, with a very special mystery player.
The film features Rogers' character running across a galaxy of old TV western characters played by the original actors, including Gene Barry as Bat Masterson, Hugh O'Brian as Wyatt Earp, Jack Kelly as Bart Maverick, Clint Walker as Cheyenne Bodie, David Carradine as ''Kung Fu'''s Caine, Chuck Connors as The Rifleman, Brian Keith as The Westerner, James Drury and Doug McClure from ''The Virginian'', Paul Brinegar from ''Rawhide'', and Reba Mcentire
The characters are attending a poker game said to be in honor of Paladin from ''Have Gun - Will Travel''.  As each veteran video hero appears, a few bars from his original series' theme momentarily plays in the background, reminiscent of a doorbell.  Everyone in the film, including President Theodore Roosevelt (Claude Akins), seems openly thrilled to encounter Brady Hawkes.  
About 16 years later Reba McEntire and Christopher Rich would star together in her hit television series, ''Reba''.
Brady Hawks' son, Jeremiah gets involved with outlaws Butch Cassidy and The Sundance Kid. Brady tries to save him before he winds up in jail or dead.
On March 15, 2011 Kenny Rogers told Jimmy Fallon on his TV show, Late Night with Jimmy Fallon, that he was asked if he would want to be in another Gambler movie.  He began by saying that he had a bad knee and thought it would be hard for him but continued and said that the first scene in the movie would be a shootout.  Supposedly he would get shot in the shoulder and knee so as to cover his physical disabilities.
A video slot machine based on ''The Gambler'' can be found in most Las Vegas casinos. It was manufactured by International Game Technology.