The fourth '''USS ''Warren''''' was a second-class sloop-of-war in the United States Navy.
While off Milos on 25 October, Kearny learned of recent pirate attacks on the American ships ''Cherub'' and ''Rob Roy''. That same day, ''Warren'' chased a 10-gun pirate brig ashore at the island of Kimolos; but the brigands escaped to the nearby hills. ''Warren's'' men cut away the masts of the erstwhile pirate ship and stripped them of their sails, leaving the rigging submerged in the waters offshore.
Three days later, ''Warren'' came across ''Cherub'' and took possession of her. That evening, the brig  arrived and assumed protective guard over ''Cherub'' while ''Warren'' returned to the pirate-hunt.  The next day, between Tinos and Mykonos, ''Warren'' fell in with the Austrian brig ''Silence'' "robbed of everything." The American sloop-of-war towed ''Silence'' to Syros, where she left her in care of ''Lexington''.
Cruising around the island of Mykonos, ''Warren'' captured a large tratta "capable of rowing 40 oars," before she put in to Mykonos harbor on 1 November. The following day, Kearny and his men recovered sails and some property taken from ''Cherub'' and two cases of opium taken from the brig ''Rob Roy'', as well as the sails and rigging from ''Silence''. The local inhabitants turned over four men accused of being pirates while a landing party of ''Warren'' men picked up a fifth man from the mountains. Kearny and his men also took possession of a boat belonging to pirates living at Mykonos and later burned it. 
Returning to Syros on the 7th, Kearny restored the goods to ''Cherub'' and the sails and rigging from the Austrian ship. ''Cherub'', escorted by ''Lexington'', set sail for Smyrna. That evening, ''Warren'' put to sea, bound for the reputed pirate lair of the island of Andros. 
A boat expedition, led by Lieutenant William L. Hudson, departed the ship to circle Andros Island. While Hudson's party was thus engaged, a brig with a convoy of some 20 to 30 boats opened fire on them in the darkness. Although shot went through the sails of ''Warren''s boats and through the clothing of some of her sailors, no one was hurt. After this action     which probably occurred because he and his expedition had been mistaken for pirates     Hudson continued on, undaunted. Near the south end of the town of Andros, ''Warren''s men brought out one "piratical craft" and burned another in a small bay nearby. At the head of that bay, the American sailors blew up a house believed to have been owned by a pirate and raised and took possession of a boat which had been sunk by pirates to avoid detection by the Americans. ''Rob Roy''s master later identified the boat as the craft in which pirates had attacked his vessel. 
Kearny, in ''Warren'', remained in the vicinity of Andros and Gioura until 14 November. The people of Andros again cooperated and produced a pirate boat which contained a 12-pounder carronade and some tools from ''Cherub''.
Four days later, ''Warren'' made port at Milos and tarried there into late November. On the 27th of that month, the American brig ''Sarah'' and ''Esther'' and six other vessels arrived. Three days later, that convoy sailed for Smyrna under ''Warren's'' protection. They arrived at their destination, without incident, on 6 December. 
For the next two years, ''Warren'' remained in the western Mediterranean guarding American commerce. 
She returned to the United States in the summer of 1830, arriving at Norfolk, Virginia, on 30 August. Decommissioned for repairs, on 10 September, ''Warren'' was recommissioned on 2 September 1831, Master Commandant Benjamin Cooper in command, for service on the Brazil Station. After two years in the South Atlantic, the sloop-of-war headed northward and reached Philadelphia, Pennsylvania on 31 October 1833.
During the war with Mexico, ''Warren'' acted as a guardship at Monterey, California and eventually moved to San Francisco, for duty as a stores and receiving ship. On 13 November 1846, the former sloop-of-war's launch, in charge of Acting Master William H. Montgomery, departed the ship with $900.00 to pay bills accrued by the Navy for supplies, bound for Sutter's Fort, up the Sacramento River. By the end of the month, when no word came from the launch's crew, ''Warren's'' commanding officer felt "great anxiety" and sent out a hired boat with some men from his ship to hunt for the missing craft and its crew. On 18 December, the search party     having combed the river and inlets as far as Fort Sacramento     returned and reported finding no sign of the launch or of the crew.
Eventually, the fate of ''Warren's'' launch came to light. The officers had been murdered     their throats cut     and their bodies thrown overboard. The men divided the money and split up, some returning overland across the North American continent to the east; others remained in California to pan for "washing gold." Records do not indicate whether or not the guilty men were ever found and brought to trial. However, they do show that orders were issued that valid discharges were to be shown by all naval personnel returning overland to prove that they were not deserters. 
The log of the whaleship ''Niantic'' records that the "US Sloop of War ''Warren''" rendered immediate assistance July 9, 1849 in San Francisco harbor, when two of ''Niantic's'' crew assaulted her captain with a knife.
Thereafter, ''Warren'' was solely a stores ship. She was sold at Panama on 1 January 1863. Her eventual fate is unrecorded, although records indicate that the erstwhile sloop-of-war was used as a coal hulk by the Pacific Mail Steamship Company as late as 1874.