Leonard is a member of the Youth Business Leader (YBL)--the first major initiative of the Youth Network (YN) Committee, which is chaired by Chairman (National Youth Council of Singapore) and Senior Parliamentary Secretary for Community Development Youth and Sports and Transport Mr Teo Ser Luck. 
In 2008, Leonard was nominated by Bloomberg BusinessWeek as    Asia   s Top 25 Best Young Entrepreneur    for his strong entrepreneurial vision, creativity and ability to overcome challenges with innovative solutions.
Leonard's ability to create a successful and profitable enterprise that is socially responsible also garnered him the    The Entrepreneur of the Year Award 2009http://www.straitstimes.com/SME%2BSpotlight/SME%2BHighlights/Story/STIStory_449984.html    and    Entrepreneur of the Year Award for eCommerce 2009   .   
His recognition as a successful young entrepreneur in Singapore continued in the following year. Leonard was awarded the Singapore Youth Award (SYA) 2010 for entrepreneurship Category in July 2010. This highest national youth accolade in Singapore marked imperative milestones for Leonard, in recognition of his remarkable achievements and prospective future.
Not long since 2011 began, Leonard created another history by securing an Exclusive Partnership with Baidu--the largest search engine company in China with a market share of over 75%.
Leonard Tan Khang Hwee was born into a Chinese family in Singapore. His family was not well-to-do during his younger days and he learnt to earn his pocket money through buying and selling of erasers when he was in Primary school. His first experience in setting up a business entity came about when he was studying for his Bachelor of Business in the National University of Singapore. He set up a tuition agency with his school mate when he saw an unmet demand of university students who wanted to earn an extra keep by giving tuition. They later shut it down after they graduated from school to pursue their individual careers.
Leonard then went on to the Illinois Institute of Technology in United States for his Masters degree in eCommerce and started his second business     an online bookstore.http://www.straitstimes.com/SME%2BSpotlight/SME%2BHighlights/Story/STIStory_451797.html After graduation, he took up a job doing door-to-door sales for Standard Chartered Bank. Thereafter, he joined Yahoo as a Sales Account Managerhttp://www.asiaone.com/Business/SME%2BCentral/eBiz%2BHub/Story/A1Story20080404-58077.html to re-launch a product and do sales for the Small and Medium Enterprise (SME) markets.
On 17 January 2006, Leonard Tan Khang Hwee incorporated PurpleClick Media Pte Ltd with the support of the top management of Yahoo as a 2-man team. Authorized resellers of both Yahoo and Google, PurpleClick is now a company with 22 staff and a compounded annual growth rate of 57 percent.
Leonard ran PurpleClick as Managing Director until 2010 when he became CEO to focus on overall expansion plans.