Born in Hitchin, Poulter took up the game aged 4 when his single-handicap father, Terry, gave him a cut-down 3-wood. His older brother Danny is also a professional golfer.
Unable to get a place as a pro at a private club, Poulter became the assistant pro and golf shop manager at the Chesfield Downs Golf Club. There he was forced by his boss to pay a full green fee every time he wanted to play in a competition. His handicap hence stayed at four, because he did not play in competitions.
Poulter turned professional in 1996 aged 19, gaining his first win at the 1999 Open de Cote d'Ivoire on the European Tour's second tier Challenge Tour; he won promotion to the European Tour itself via the qualifying school later that year. In his first season, he claimed the Italian Open title and was the Sir Henry Cotton Rookie of the Year for 2000. Further wins followed in each of the next four seasons, most prestigiously the season ending "tour championship" the Volvo Masters in 2004. He was in the top ten on the Order of Merit in 2003, 2004, 2006 and 2009. In 2010, he finished 4th on the Order of Merit, his highest placing so far.
After narrowly missing a place in the 2002 European Ryder Cup team, Poulter was a member of the victorious squad in 2004, where he officially scored the winning points for his team. This entitled him to take up membership of the PGA Tour in 2005, and he has divided his time between the two tours since then.
At the 2008 Masters Tournament, Poulter made a hole-in-one at the 16th hole at Augusta National in the first round. At the 2008 Open Championship, Poulter had the clubhouse lead on the last round before being beaten by defending champion Padraig Harrington. In the 2008 Ryder Cup, Poulter was the highest points scorer on either side as he scored 4 of Europe's 11.5 points. Europe lost the Ryder Cup 16.5-11.5.
In the 2009 Players Championship, Poulter finished in sole possession of second place at eight under-par, four shots behind the winner, Henrik Stenson. In November 2009, Poulter won the Barclays Singapore Open at the Sentosa Club.
Poulter moved into the top-10 of the Official World Golf Rankings in January 2010 with a second place finish at the Abu Dhabi Golf Championship. In February 2010, he won his first tournament on U.S. soil, beating fellow Englishman Paul Casey 4&2 in the final of the WGC-Accenture Match Play Championship in Arizona. The win moved him to 5th in the world rankings. In November 2010, he won his second title of the year with a one-stroke victory in the UBS Hong Kong Open.
On 23 February 2011, in Marana, Arizona, Poulter became the first defending champion in nine years to be eliminated in the first round of the WGC-Accenture Match Play Championship. He did however enjoy greater success in the European Tour's own match play event, the Volvo World Match Play Championship where he won the title beating Ryder Cup team mate Luke Donald 2&1 in the final. He had previously beaten the world number one Lee Westwood, Francesco Molinari and Nicolas Colsaerts to get to the final. This was Poulter's second tournament win in a match play event and eleventh European Tour victory. As a result of his win Poulter moved up from  22nd to 14th in the Official World Golf Rankings.
Poulter is well known for his eccentric dress sense, inspired by his mother who managed the Letchworth branch of UK women's fashion chain Dorothy Perkins. His most famous pieces include trousers featuring the famous Claret Jug, worn at both the 2005 and 2006 Open Championships. Commentating for the BBC, Seve Ballesteros jibed that this was "the closest  would ever get to it".  He will also often match his sunglasses to his shirt and hat colour, in addition to wearing brightly coloured and patterned trousers.
Poulter is well known for being an avid fan of the London-based football club Arsenal FC. He has on several occasions appeared with the team's crest on his shoes, and he even controversially wore the team's shirt during an event, gaining widespread ire for flying in the face of golfing tradition. (immediately after the event the rule was changed to stop future players wearing football jerseys).
In addition to his golfing career, Poulter launched Ian Poulter Design (IJP) in the summer of 2007.
At the Mercedes-Benz Championship in September 2007, Poulter smashed a tee marker in a show of frustration and was fined. Also, in 2006 Poulter paid a   5,000 fine after verbally abusing a marshal at the Irish Open.
In the March issue of Golf World (UK) Poulter was quoted saying ''"Don't get me wrong, I really respect every professional golfer, but I know I haven't played to my full potential and when that happens, it will be just me and Tiger."''
In April 2010, Poulter was strongly rebuked for using an anti-Semitic slur in one of his Twitter posts.  He has since apologised.
Prior to the USA vs England World Cup Match Poulter tweeted "sorry to disagree but you guys havent got a chance against england, its like england vs usa in basketball, sorry but its the truth." 
In October 2010, Poulter tweeted videos of him with the Ryder Cup trophy at his Florida home, including a video of him and his children eating cereal out of the trophy sparking controversy.
At the 2011 Masters, Poulter predicted that Tiger Woods would "miss out on a top five finish," (in reference to Woods finding it difficult to return to form). In fact, Woods finished tied for 4th.
Poulter is married to Katie; the couple have three children, and live in Orlando, Florida. The couple also have a home in Milton Keynes, Buckinghamshire.
Poulter is an avid car collector, and along with his 2008 purchase of a Ford GT, he has a Bentley Continental GT, a Ferrari California, and has owned a Ferrari, Nissan Skyline and an Aston Martin DB9.
He lost to Jimmy Fallon playing Tiger Woods Wii game on Late Night with Jimmy Fallon.
As of February 2011 Poulter has 1.12 million followers on Twitter which is the second most on the PGA Tour to Stewart Cink with 1.2 million followers.
Poulter currently has an endorsement with the following companies: Footjoy, Mutual of Omaha, Titleist, Cobra, EA Sports, Mastercard, Oakley, Power Balance, Fathead, Audemars Piguet, Marquis Jet.
DNP = did not play
CUT = missed the half way cut
WD = withdrew
Yellow background for top-10.
DNP = Did not play
QF, R16, R32, R64 = Round in which player lost in match play
NT = No Tournament
Green background for wins. Yellow background for top-10.
Note that the HSBC Champions did not become a WGC event until 2009.