Univ has the highest proportion of old members offering financial support to the college out of any in either Oxford or Cambridge (28% in 2007, the highest rate in the UK). As of 2009 the college had an estimated financial endowment of   110m.
Univ was founded by William of Durham in 1249 (although there exist unproven claims it was founded by King Alfred in 872), and until the 16th century was only open to Fellows studying theology. As Univ grew in size and wealth, its medieval buildings were replaced with the current Main Quadrangle in the 17th Century. Although the foundation stone was placed on 17 April 1634 the disruption of the English Civil War meant it was not completed until sometime in 1676. Radcliffe Quad followed more rapidly by 1719, and the Library was built in 1861. Univ began to accept female undergraduate students in 1979.
Former Master Lord Butler of Brockwell was appointed head of an inquiry into the 2003 Iraq War in February 2004. Previous Masters include John Albery, Kingman Brewster, Lord Goodman, Lord Redcliffe-Maud, Arthur Lehman Goodhart, and William Beveridge. In August 2008 Lord Butler was succeeded by Sir Ivor Crewe.
A specially constructed building in the College, the Shelley Memorial, houses a statue by Edward Onslow Ford of the poet Percy Bysshe Shelley     a former member of the college, who was expelled for writing ''The Necessity of Atheism''     depicted lying dead on the Italian seashore. Rumour has it that the sunken area around the statue was once filled with water and live goldfish as a student prank. Another apparently common student prank involving the statue has been to paint his genitalia bright colours; for this reason, the statue's appendage is somewhat smaller than it used to be.
Two twentieth-century Prime Ministers have been associated with Univ.: Clement Attlee was an undergraduate here, and Harold Wilson a Fellow. Other political leaders include US President Bill Clinton, and Bob Hawke, Prime Minister of Australia. Outside politics, recent Old Members of Univ include William Beveridge, the social reformer and author of the Beveridge Report, Professor Stephen Hawking, C. S. Lewis, author of the Narnia books, the Poet Laureate Andrew Motion, the novelist and Nobel Prize winner Sir V. S. Naipaul, the actors Michael York and Warren Mitchell, the broadcaster Paul Gambaccini, and     perhaps the most exotic of them all     Prince Felix Yusupov, the assassin of Rasputin.
Although not member of University College the scientists Robert Boyle (sometime described as the "first modern chemist") and his assistant (Robert Hooke, architect, biologist, discoverer of cells) lived in Deep Hall (then owned by Christ Church and now the site of the Shelley Memorial). The former made a contribution to the completion of University College's current Hall in the mid-17th Century.
Samuel Johnson (author of ''A Dictionary of the English Language'' and a member of Pembroke College) was a frequent visitor to the Senior Common Room at University College during the 18th Century).
University has the longest grace of any Oxford (and perhaps Cambridge) College. It is read before every Formal Hall, which is held Tuesday, Thursday, and Sunday at Univ. The reading is performed by a Scholar of the College, the same person doing it for a whole week, and whoever is sitting at the head of High Table (typically the Master or the most senior Fellow at the table if the Master is not dining). The Scholar does not need to know it by heart, although it is not unusual for people to do so.
The Univ Alternative Prospectus is written and produced by current students for prospective applicants. The publication was recently awarded a Higher Education Liaison Officers    Association (HELOA) Innovation and Best Practice Award. The Univ Alternative Prospectus offers student written advice and guidance to potential Oxford applicants. The award recognises the engagement of the college community, unique newspaper format, forward-thinking use of social media and the collaborative working between staff and students.
The ''University College Record'' is the annual magazine sent to alumni of University College each autumn. The magazine provides College news, including clubs and societies such as the University College Players and the Devas Club. News about and obituaries of former students are included at the end of each issue.
Previous editors include Peter Bayley, A. D. M. Cox and Leslie Mitchell. The current editor is Dr Robin Darwall-Smith.
Many Oxford and Cambridge Colleges are informally 'paired' with one another. University College is paired with Trinity Hall, Cambridge.