Lothian Buses is a major bus operator in Edinburgh and the surrounding area. The following is a list of routes operated by the company.
Routes correct at 3 April 2011.
In the city centre, all services call at Princes Street (Waverley Steps) or OMNI (Leith Street), most call at both.
Traditionally, Edinburgh Corporation, Lothian Regional Transport (LRT) and Lothian Buses had a livery of madder (a dark red) and cream (white), with matching madder leatherette seating. Some coach-seated Leyland Olympian / Alexander RH-types and Volvo Olympian / Alexander Royales had been painted in the same scheme, but with red in place of the madder. These vehicles are not branded for, but were typically found only on, routes 15/15A.
While Lothian had traditionally maintained a uniform livery for all buses, deliveries of low floor vehicles has seen a new standard livery introduced. Low floor vehicles have also seen route branding come to be increasingly used by Lothian. Route branding highlights the route of certain services making the buses easier to be spotted throughout Edinburgh and the Lothians. Since May 2010 the Harlequin livery used to identify low floor buses has started to be phased out, as the company is now a full low floor operation, with a return to the traditional madder and white livery although the style has been altered slightly to suit the lines of modern buses.  Each type of bus owned directly by Lothian Buses has had at least one of their type painted in the new livery.
New branding was created to go with the reintroduction of the madder and white livery to Edinburgh. The buses used on their route 36 have/are being repainted to show their Eco qualities.
Buses for routes 37, 47 and X47 between Edinburgh and Penicuik were branded as "''Penicuik City Link''", with blue uppers and roofline, and the positions of the red and madder on the skirting transposed.  One of the "''Penicuik City Link''" buses (bus 801) has recently been repainted into madder and white, with no roof colour.  However, the other vehicles in "''Penicuik City Link''" colours are now to be repainted into the new madder and white livery with a turquoise mint coloured roof and the name "Pen-Y-Cog".  This is to celebrate the history of the area as "Pen-Y-Cog" is the original name for Penicuik.  The word Pen-Y-Cog is Old Brythonic meaning "Hill of the Cuckoo" and Penicuik's name is derived from this.
Four double decker routes using the low-floor scheme are, or have been, based on a playing card theme, with the symbol of the suit incorporating the route number;
Two single-deck routes also received branding based on the playing card theme, "''The Best Deal''" for route 29 (Volvos 136-150, red) and "''Leader of the Pack''" for route 49 (Volvos 151-160 and 170, blue).  151-160 have now been repainted into a new branding for route 49, "''The Queen of Scots''" with 136-138 and 170 now repainted into standard madder and white.  As yet, the future of branding for route 29 is unknown.
Lothian had operated city tours using white liveried coaches. Later, Atlanteans were employed in this same livery, with blinds for City Tour. These wore an updated version of the white livery with blue detailing after a short period. An Edinburgh Classic Tour was set up in 1989 using open top Atlanteans, and later Olympians, which competed with Guide Friday, in response to Guide Friday introducing a competing service between the city centre and the Airport. The buses wore a blue and white livery, each carrying a name e.g.''Scottish Star'', ''Lothian Star'' and ''Highland Star''. Lothian also operated open top tours in Oxford (in conjunction with local operator Tappins) and Cambridge under the Classic Tour identity.
In July 2000 Lothian became one of the first City Sightseeing franchisees, re-branding and upgrading the Classic Tour. Lothian purchased the first purpose built low-floor open top buses, in a tartan scheme with City Sightseeing fleetnames. The Classic tour was rebranded into the City Sightseeing red scheme by May 2001. In May 2002 City Sightseeing acquired its biggest rival Guide Friday, leading to the absorption of the Guide Friday Edinburgh fleet into the main fleet, leaving Lothian as the only tour operator in the city.
A special bus service has previously been run from George Street into Edinburgh Castle via The Mound. This service used at least two of the Dash-bodied Darts, in a dedicated overall livery.
Lothian operates several open top double deck tour bus services, through its Edinburgh Bus Tours subsidiary under four distinct brands: City Sightseeing, Edinburgh Tours, Mac Tours and The Majestic Tour. The City Sightseeing tour is operated by Lothian as a franchise of the City Sightseeing brand.
All tour buses operate from the east side of Waverley Bridge, opposite Waverley station (Edinburgh's main railway station). Tours can be boarded and alighted throughout the day from there and other selected locations on a hop on hop off basis.
City Sightseeing, Edinburgh Tours and Mac Tours visit the Old Town, New Town, Calton Hill, Holyrood Palace and Edinburgh Castle, albeit on slightly differing routes. The Majestic Tour operates a long loop from Holyrood and New Town, via the Botanic Gardens, to the coast at Ocean Terminal, the site of the former Royal Yacht Britannia.
The Mac Tours operation uses AEC Routemaster buses in a dark red and cream livery, with See Edinburgh By Vintage Bus branding. Edinburgh Tours and The Majestic Tour operate converted former main Lothian fleet Leyland Olympians. The Edinburgh Tour buses wear a light green and cream version of Guide Friday livery with some Guide Friday fleetnames, while The Majestic Tour wears a blue and yellow livery with some red stripes. City Sightseeing operates a mixture of converted former main fleet Olympians, 4 purpose built Plaxton President-bodied Dennis Tridents and, more recently, converted former main fleet Dennis Tridents. These wear the allover City Sightseeing red graffiti scheme, with localised branding.the edinburgh tour has new livery and new buses former lothian main fleet dennis 512 onwards
As well as the central area attractions, several other popular tourist attractions in the suburbs of Edinburgh and beyond are accessible by Lothian bus:
Route 69 is a normal bus service, and wears the same harlequin livery as the Lothian low-floor fleet, although the 'Mac Tours' fleetname is used.
Route 61 is an express service operated for the Standard Life insurance company, who have offices in the city. These wear an allover yellow livery, with Standard Life branding.
The Mac Tours bus livery was also applied to three 1990 Mercedes Benz 709D minibuses (27-29) acquired from Western and which were also re-trimmed with original-pattern London Routemaster moquette.  These buses have now been sold.
Lothian operates standard, express and shuttle services to Edinburgh Airport located to the west of the city.
Lothian double deck service 35 and night bus service N22 terminate at the airport.
Although Route 35 does not call at Princes Street, it intersects with many other services of the standard bus network at these places:
The company operates a dedicated limited stop service, route 100, to the Airport from Waverley Bridge along Corstorphine Road. This service uses a dedicated fleet, special fares and its own website. An orange winged 'A' logo adorns the web site and the interior/exterior of the vehicles. Airlink 100 tickets can be bought from the driver, from an airport kiosk, or online (must be printed).
The Airlink 100 service calls at these stops only:
The Airlink fleet currently comprises Volvo B9TL double-deckers with Wright Eclipse Gemini 2 bodywork new in March 2010. The new vehicles included "E-Leather" upholstery (a type of manmade composition leather made from recycled waste leather offcuts), electric sockets for charging mobile phones, laptops etc., CCTV which enables passengers on the top deck to watch their luggage on the lower deck, LED lights and free wi-fi. The vehicles are priced at over   200,000 each, meaning that they cost   30,000 more than standard vehicles, and wear a unique two-tone blue and red livery.
Company practice has been to replace Airlink vehicles every four years.  Until March 2010 the route was operated with Polish built Scania OmniCity double deckers fitted with coach seating, luggage space, and some train carriage like seat and table arrangements. Theses buses wore a special livery of white and light/dark blue, with orange detailing, introduced in 1998 with the conversion to low floor Dennis Tridents. The service was previously operated by Olympians in an earlier ''Airline'' blue livery. This was itself introduced in 1995; prior to this the route had been operated by the same vehicles, but in the black and white livery used by the coach fleet.
Edinburgh has a network of existing and proposed Park and Ride sites. Lothian Buses X48 Limited Stop now only operates at Peak Times. At off-peak times, service 48 will operate stopping at all stops. Lothian buses call at some of these sites:
Standard fares and Ridacards apply on these services.
Lothian currently operates a zero-fare shuttle bus service for Edinburgh University during semester time, linking the southern King's Buildings campus with the Central Campus. This service picks up and sets down within King's Buildings and on George Square, with an additional set down in Buccleuch Street.
The service is only available to students and staff. In 2006/7 this service was provided using main fleet buses of the Volvo Olympian Royale bodied type, in standard livery, with the green display blind 'Special Service'.
King's Buildings is also an alternate Monday to Saturday terminus of route 41, alternated with Craighouse every second journey.
As of 2007 Mac Tours has operated a bus for  providing departues from Waverley Bridge for their various tours and cruises of the Firth of Forth. The bus used is Alexander Royale bodied Volvo Olympian 433 (P433 KSX) and not, as shown on the Forth Tours website, a Northern Counties bodied Olympian. It carries a special yellow and blue overall livery with the destination blind panelled over.
Bus 433 has a previous nautical connection, having previously been used on the now discontinued limited stop express service X50 to the Royal Yacht at Ocean Terminal, wearing a similar dedicated all over livery.