Picsearch also develops and provides a Online Video Platform under the brand name Screen9 which is used for video communities, vlogging (video blog), video reviews on e-commerce sites, corporate video presentations, news videos and virtual showings on real estate portals . Picsearch video streaming service includes flash player, upload, transcoding, hosting and streaming. Some features of the service are flexible quality (bitrate, resolution, codec), user interaction (action buttons, ad support, rating etc) and branding possibilities (logotype, off-site embedding, player branding, mobile support etc).  
Picsearch was developed and founded 1999-2000 at Linkoping University by two engineering students Nils Andersson and Robert Risberg who were working on their Master of Science in Applied Physics and Electrical Engineering. Their goal was to improve relevancy, create a larger index, and to introduce family-friendly and spam filtered results. The company was launched in 2000, and the first public version of the image search engine was available in September 2001, around the same time that Google launched its services. Ditto.com was the first public image search engine.
The Picsearch service is slightly more expensive than Google and Yahoo, but according to many of its licensing partners, provides a higher relevance and better family-friendliness.
Picsearch is notable for providing one of the largest searchable indexes, providing over 2 billion images.  This compares with Google (2.2 billion images) and Yahoo (1.6 billion images).
Family-friendliness implies that all sexual nudity, pornography and violence is removed by an automatic filter. Picsearch also offers an image removal service for those wanting their images removed.
Picsearch services include localization features to tailor the search service to regional markets. 
Picsearch currently supports the following languages: Latin alphabet, Chinese characters, Cyrillic alphabet, Arabic alphabet, Indic scripts (Brahmic family), Hangul, Greek alphabet and Hebrew Alphabet.
On the 22nd of March 2007, Picsearch implemented a new environmental policy making them the first carbon neutral search engine in the world. The Picsearch initiative was followed by promises from Yahoo in April and Google in June to go carbon neutral by the end of 2007. 
The policy consists of four steps: 
In July 2007 the Swedish National Criminal Police started working with Picsearch to incorporate a special filter, which will block the visibility of 4000 websites with commercial child pornography. Introducing the filter on Picsearch and other search services, the police authorities are trying to make it more difficult for users to find child pornography. The initiative has sparked some discussion in Sweden and Japan as to whether or not the police authorities are extending their powers, whether the filter threatens freedom of speech, and whether the real reason for introducing the filter is to establish a precedent for denying access to other information as well.
Picsearch has developed all of its search service in-house, including spidering of the Web, indexing of image, video, and audio files, and an efficient way of distributing the results to users from all parts of the world. Picsearch   s algorithms are patented in Sweden and patent-pending in the EU and the United States.