The Government of Oregon has taken a variety of actions in order to encourage solar energy use and manufacturing within the state.
The state has a net metering program that allows for large installations of up to 2 MW of on-site electrical generation. A report released in 2009 by the Network for New Energy Choices and Vote Solar gave the state's net metering system an "A" grade, a rating only 9 other states received.
 The RPS was revised in 2009 to include a separate 20 MW solar photovoltaic requirement by 2020.
Passed in the 2007 legislative session, House Bill 2620, requires that public entities such as state and local governments spend 1.5% of the construction budget for new or renovated buildings on on-site solar technologies.
The Residential Energy Tax Credit (RETC) program aims to encourage residents to invest in energy efficient appliances or residential-scale power producing systems such as roof-mounted solar or small wind setups by offering a tax credit that covers a certain percentage of the cost of eligible equipment.
The Business Energy Tax Credit (BETC) program aims to encourage private businesses to invest in renewable energy in Oregon by offering a tax credit that covers up to 50% of eligible renewable projects such as power stations or manufacturing factories with a maximum limit of $20 million per project.
The State Energy Loan Program aims to encourage investment in energy efficiency and renewable energy production by offering long-term, fixed-rate loans to all types of organizations and individuals with a maximum cap at $20 million per loan. From the time it was first authorized by voters in 1980, the program has made over 700 loans worth a total of $335 million.
The Oregon Legislative Assembly is currently working on establishing a feed-in tariff for solar power. It is modeled on the feed-in tariffs in Germany and the pilot program for it is expected to be operating by July 1, 2010.
On May 28, 2010, the Oregon Public Utility Commission approved the trial feed-in tariff rules.
Many solar manufacturing companies have chosen to operate in Oregon because of its cheap hydroelectric power which is important for manufacturing and because of its close proximity to California's large market. The inexpensive hydroelectric power has also contributed to the high-tech manufacturing companies located in the state's Silicon Forest as well as several data centers such as Google's Project 02.
Oregon was one of the only three states (along with Michigan and Ohio) to manufacture more than 100 MW of solar panels during 2009. SolarWorld's plant in Hillsboro, Oregon is the largest solar cell manufacturing factory in North America and is planned to produce 500 MW of panels annually by 2012.
Solar companies with operations in Oregon include SolarWorld, Sanyo, PV Powered, Oregon Crystal, Grape Solar, Solaicx, and Peak Sun Silicon.
In 2002 Oregon became the first state to install solar panels on its state capitol building.
In 2008, the Oregon Department of Transportation announced the completion of a 104&nbsp;kW solar panel project along the interchange of Interstate 5 and Interstate 205 near Tualatin, Oregon.
The 3 megawatt project in West Linn, Oregon would be the largest solar highway in the world, slightly passing the 2.8 megawatt record holder in Germany.
Portland, Oregon is one of the 25 cities in the United States Department of Energy's Solar America Cities program. The program's goal is to "rapidly increase the use and integration of solar energy in communities across the country."
Solar energy is the state's most abundant energy resource and estimates have placed the state's potential electricity production from solar power at 68,000,000 MWhs annually, an amount larger than the state's total electricity consumption of 46,457,000 MWh in 2005.