Rick (Owen Wilson) and Fred (Jason Sudeikis) are best friends as are their wives, Maggie (Jenna Fischer) and Grace (Christina Applegate). They are both unhappy with their sex lives and missing the old days when they were single. Realizing this, their wives decide to give them a "Hall Pass": A week off from marriage, in which they can have sex with other women. They are skeptical at first, but ultimately accept the offers and try to pick up women with their friends Gary (Stephen Merchant), Flats (J.B. Smoove) and Hog Head (Larry Joe Campbell). Maggie and Grace spend Rick's and Fred's "Hall Pass Week" at Maggie's parents' house in Cape Cod, where Grace flirts with athlete Gerry (Tyler Hoechlin). She says that, if their husbands have Hall Passes, so should they.
With their wives and children away, Fred and Rick check in at a motel and prepare for their Hall Pass Week. On Day One, they decide to eat before going to a local bar and get too tired to spend the night there, preferring to stay at the hotel.
On Day Two, they eat Pot Brownies and decide to play golf, but get too high and wreak havoc on the golf course.
On Day Three, Rick and Fred go to Hooters with their friends, but fail to impress the women there. They decide to get drunk in order to become more loose, but go too far and wind up getting into a fight with other customers. They spend Day Four at the hotel, suffering from a hangover.
On Day Five, Rick goes to a local coffee shop, where Rick flirts with an attractive waitress called Leigh (Nicky Whelan), much to the annoyance of her co-worker Brent, who insults Rick. When Rick answers him back, Leigh is impressed and tells Rick that they might see each other at the local gym they both attend. They later meet there, and Leigh invites Rick for a beer after they work out. Rick decides to sit in the hot tub instead, but falls asleep and stays there for several hours, ending up with his muscles too weak to use and forced to accept the help of two naked men to leave, much to his dismay. Meanwhile, Grace and Gerry get closer, while Maggie finds herself attracted to Gerry's coach.
On Day Six, Rick and Fred go to a bar called Enter the Dragon with their friend Coakley (Richard Jenkins), where Rick meets his children's babysitter Paige (Alexandra Daddario), who has just turned 21 and is with her aunt. Paige is attracted to Rick, but he shoots her down to dance with Leigh. Brent, the party's DJ, is angry at this. After the party is over, Rick goes to party at Coakley's while Fred takes a girl to his motel room. However, she feels sick and, after a minor incident in the bathroom, is sent back home by Fred before they can have sex. Later this evening Paige's aunt shows up at the room and mistakes Fred for Rick, eventually seducing him. Fred fakes oral sex on Paige's aunt, until they are interrupted by Rick.
Meanwhile, Maggie is seduced by Gerry's coach, but rebuffs him. Grace, on the other hand, has sex with Gerry, but tells him it'll be just that one time. On her way back home, she feels guilty about cheating on Fred and has a car accident.
At Coakley's house, Rick meets Leigh, who offers him a one-time fling. He initially wants to do it, but ultimately rebuffs her, unable to cheat on Maggie. As he is leaving after hearing of Grace's accident, he is approached by Brent, who is angry at Rick because he thinks he has had sex with Leigh. She calms him, and Rick makes his way to the hotel, where he finds Paige, who thinks he was having sex with her aunt. They enter the room and find Fred having sex with her. After finding out the truth, Paige's aunt kicks Fred in the face.
Upon hearing about Grace's accident, Fred tries to go to the hospital, but finds Brent vandalizing what Brent thought was Rick's car. Upon seeing Paige's aunt - his mother - at the hotel, Brent thinks Rick has had sex with her and tries to kill him, but runs out of bullets and is tackled by Paige and his mother. Rick and Fred enter Fred's car and make their way to the hospital, with Brent and the police chasing them. At the hospital, Brent is arrested for attacking them and Fred finds out Grace only broke her nose.
Rick goes back home and finds Maggie. He tells her he did not use the Hall Pass and that he has lost his virginity to her. She is the only woman he has ever been with. Moved by his declaration, Maggie tells him she did not use her Hall Pass either and they reconcile and have sex for the first time in months.
Fred and Grace also reconcile and decide to hide their cheating from one another. However, Fred ultimately confesses that he used his Hall Pass with Paige's aunt when Grace asks him to take her to see Kathy Griffin.
The project began as a spec script written by Pete Jones, which the Farrelly brothers purchased in September 2005, paying a "high six-figure." Conundrum Entertainment, the Farrelly brothers production partnership with Bradley Thomas, produced the film, along with Charlie Wessler.  Owen Wilson was the first of the two leads to commit to the project; Sudeikis was the Farrelly brothers choice for the other lead role, but as of January 2010 it was still uncertain whether his commitment to his work on ''Saturday Night Live'' permitted his participation.
Principal photography began in February 2010 in Atlanta, with Christina Applegate, Alyssa Milano, Larry Campbell and Vanessa Angel as late additions to the cast.  Although filmed in Georgia, the film's setting, like most Farrelly brothers films, is New England;  Georgia was chosen due to incentives introduced by the Georgia Entertainment Industry Investment Act of 2008; according to the Film, Music and Digital Entertainment Division of the Georgia Department of Economic Development, ''Hall Pass'' was part of Hollywood's nearly one billion outlay in the state during 2010; Marc Fischer, an executive producer of ''Hall Pass'', called Atlanta both more economical and easier to shoot in than Boston.  Fischer, also an executive producer for the Farrelly brothers' Three Stooges film, had by May 2010 already begun pre-production work in Georgia for that film.
Amanda Bynes was originally set to star in the film, but was replaced by Alexandra Daddario shortly after filming began.
This is the third time that Jason Sudeikis and Christina Applegate had a starring role with each other; the first being ''The Rocker'' and the second being ''Going the Distance''.
Metacritic gives the film a score of 47% based on reviews from 33 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews".
Critic Roger Ebert gave the film two and a half out of four stars saying, "A problem with ''Hall Pass'', I think, is that both Owen Wilson and Jason Sudeikis are affable, and the movie wants us to like them." Richard Roeper gave the film a B-, stating that there are some points where it gets a little graphic, but it's all for a good laugh. The UltraCulture film blog said that its biggest problem wasn't its attitude to women (although that was brought into question), but its "disguising of an inherently conservative movie as some kind of anything-goes frat house sex romp."