In dynamical systems theory, the '''baker's map''' is a chaotic map from the unit square into itself. It is named after a kneading operation that bakers apply to dough: the dough is cut in half, and the two halves are stacked on one-another, and compressed. (The word '''baker''' is used to denote the profession and not a name, so it should not be capitalized.)
The baker's map can be understood as the bilateral shift operator of a bi-infinite two-state lattice model. The baker's map is topologically conjugate to the horseshoe map. In physics, a chain of coupled baker's maps can be used to model deterministic  diffusion. The Poincare recurrence time of the baker's map is short compared to Hamiltonian maps. 
As with many deterministic dynamical systems, the baker's map is studied by its action on the space of functions defined on the unit square.  The baker's map defines an operator on the space of functions, known as the transfer operator of the map. The baker's map is an exactly solvable model of deterministic chaos, in that the eigenfunctions and eigenvalues of the transfer operator  can be explicitly determined.
There are two alternative definitions of the baker's map which are in common use. One definition folds over or rotates one of the sliced halves before joining it (similar to the horseshoe map) and the other does not.
The folded baker's map acts on the unit square as
When the upper section is not folded over, the map may be written as 
The folded baker's map is a two-dimensional analog of the tent map
2x  & \text{for } 0 \le x 
2(1-x) & \text{for } \frac{1}{2} \le x 
The baker's map preserves the two-dimensional Lebesgue measure.
The map is strong mixing and it is topologically mixing. 
The transfer operator U maps functions of the unit square to other functions on the unit square; it is given by 
The transfer operator is unitary on the Hilbert space of square-integrable functions on the unit square. The spectrum is continuous, and because the operator is unitary the eigenvalues lie on the unit circle. The transfer operator is not unitary on the space \mathcal{P}_x\otimes L^2_y of functions polynomial in the first coordinate and square-integrable in the second. On this space, it has a discrete, non-unitary, decaying spectrum.
The baker's map can be understood as the two-sided shift operator on the symbolic dynamics of a one-dimensional lattice. Consider, for example, the bi-infinite string 
In this representation, the shift operator has the form