Because of its striking appearance and thin profile, it was initially marketed as an exclusive fashion phone, but within a year its price was lowered and it was wildly successful selling over 50 million units by July 2006, making it the most popular clamshell phone at the time. Over the RAZR's four-year run, Motorola sold more than 110 million units, boosting its position to second place in the handheld market behind Nokia. ''PC World'' put the RAZR at #12 in ''The 50 Greatest Gadgets of the Past 50 Years''.
The RAZR series was marketed until July 2007, when the succeeding Motorola RAZR2 series was released. Marketed as a more sleek and more stable design of the RAZR, the RAZR2 included more features, improved telephone audio quality, and a touch sensitive external screen.  The new models were the V8, the V9, and the V9m. However, the RAZR2 sales were only half of the original in the same period. 
Motorola relied too long upon the RAZR and its derivatives, being slow to develop new products in the growing market for feature-rich touchscreen and 3G phones, so the RAZR's appeal declined while offerings from rivals such as the LG Chocolate, BlackBerry, and iPhone captured consumer attention, and Motorola eventually dropped behind Samsung and LG in market share for mobile phones. Motorola's strategy of grabbing market share by selling tens of millions of RAZRs led to them slashing prices, cutting into margins which resulted in heavy losses in the cellular division.
The team behind the RAZR V3 phone put together a number of design choices that set the device apart from the competition. The phone had the thinnest profile at the time on a clamshell set, sported an electroluminescent keypad made out of a single metal wafer and used an industry standard mini USB port for data, battery charger and headphones, all in an aluminum body with an external glass screen.
Complaints were made about dust accumulating between the V3's plastic screen and LCD glass, possibly through an external side button.  Access to the dust requires peeling off the plastic cover, usually followed by a replacement cover.
A black version was produced for distribution in the 77th Academy Awards gift bags,
The first pink version was released in October 2005, and as of June 2006, was available in the USA from T-Mobile (as RAZR V3 Magenta, after the T-Mobile   and its parent, Deutsche Telekom's   corporate color, but called RAZR V3 Pink in other countries, including other T-Mobile networks), Verizon, Cingular Wireless, Suncom Wireless, Cellular One from Dobson Cellular Systems (each in a different shade). It was available in Canada from Bell, Rogers Wireless and Telus, and in the United Kingdom from T-Mobile and the Carphone Warehouse. $25 of sales from the Rogers pink V3 went to Rethink Breast Cancer.  It was also available in all Movistar-serviced countries and Claro (Telcel).
As of 30 October 2006 through T-Mobile in the United States, Motorola offered a version with laser-etched tattoo-inspired designs created by Ami James of the TLC reality television show, Miami Ink. The phones  are standard V3r's,but aesthetically different because of the tattoo design on the phone.
External: 96  80 pixel STN 65,536 colors
512MB (1GB with the latest firmware)
The successor to the RAZR is the RAZR V3i. It addresses some of the faults of the original RAZR V3 including a better (1.23 megapixel) camera with 8x digital zoom, an improved external and internal display also support for microSD cards of up to 1GB. V3i is functionally very close to Motorola V635 model. The V3i comes in two versions: one with iTunes and one with Motorola's Digital Audio Player (DAP). The iTunes version of the phone has a 50 or 100 song limit restriction ("cap") depending on where the phone model was made.
On 1 June 2006, Motorola and Dolce & Gabbana once again released their limited edition gold phone. This model includes a D&G cell phone holder, a signature leather pouch, Bluetooth headphone, and FM earphones. It is available from all major Motorola retailers and select D&G boutiques.
The V3i is available in the following colors:
The Motorola RAZR V3i was released to most worldwide markets in the Q4 of 2005   2006. In the U.S. the phone was released through Cingular Wireless on 6 September 2006, with a new activation price of $299, while T-Mobile released the Dolce & Gabbana V3i exclusively in the United States.
The V3r and V3t are models sold by T-Mobile, AT&T (formerly Cingular), and Canadian cellular services such as Rogers Wireless. These models are virtually identical to the V3 and V3i, except they use Motorola's Digital Audio Player instead of iTunes for music playback. T-Mobile's V3r offers a Voice Notes feature which permits forwarding your audio recordings to voicemail as the only storage method. However, a publicly available SEEM edit permits users to enable the hidden Voice Records feature. Voice Records allows you to save voice recordings locally to phone memory. Currently, Voice Records is limited to less than two minutes of audio recording and stores the resulting records as .avr format files on the a partition within phone memory. In contrast, currently available SEEM edits can expand the maximum size of video recordings.
T-Mobile V3t phone memory is 10.0MB total, including all system files. This space is divided unevenly into a and c partitions. Memory on partition a is larger than 2MB and contains system files, including some of the branding images for the phone carrier. Partition a also contains the avr structure for the hidden Voice Records feature. Partition c is larger than 5.5MB and stores user data, including images, sounds, videos, text notes, calendar entries, phone book entries, Java applets and web cache. V3r and V3t phones sold by T-Mobile come equipped with Java-based software that supports T-Mobile's "MyFaves" rate plan. Publicly available third party tools can remove this Java software and other system or locked files to free memory for other uses.
Canada's Rogers Wireless also carries them for a reduced price compared to the original Razrs.
The V3im is the iTunes version of the RAZR V3i available in the UK market with a 100 song cap.
Another version of this phone was released in the Republic of Korea (South Korea) on 1 June 2005. This version has the similar physical appearance as the original V3 but instead of GSM, it is a CDMA phone for SK Telecom. It is the first CDMA version of the RAZR without the expandable memory, Bluetooth and SIM card, since Motorola Korea's system was able to produce its own model before worldwide GSM format release. It has a 1.3 megapixel camera, video recording, 80MB of internal memory and a variety of UI features, such as mobile blog, Yoga graphic book, Diet diary and lottery number generator for Wellness theme. It also comes in colors other than those mentioned above. Black, pink, and lime models are seen around Korea. In 8 February 2006 Motorola Korea released its own slide-phone model for the RAZR named Z model name MS600.  Unlike most other versions, the MS500 version is packaged with a charging dock and has three metal terminals on the back side immediately under the battery cover.
Also, as the add-on to the MS600, MS500 Lime RAZR has been in circulation in South Korea since October 2006 along with the Motorola KRZR Black and Motorola KRZR Fire (Red).
On 21 November 2005, a CDMA2000 version of the RAZR, known as the RAZR V3c, became available to Alltel and SaskTel users.  Verizon Wireless followed suit on 7 December 2005. Unlike models for Alltel and other carriers, Verizon's V3c features a proprietary user interface and disables, in software, Bluetooth file transfer capabilities (called OBEX). (Although OBEX is supported in Verizon's V3c firmware version .02, and version .04 if flash-upgraded directly from .02, skipping any install of .03.)  In January 2006, Canadian Telus, Bell Mobility and Aliant Mobility, Venezuelan carriers Movistar and Movilnet, and Brazilian Vivo began carrying the V3c. In April 2006 Cricket Communications began selling the V3c.  The handset was also made available for Metro PCS.  The RAZR V3c supports CDMA 2000 1xRTT and 1xEV-DO third generation wireless technologies. This is the technology Verizon Wireless uses to provide their V CAST multimedia service. The coverage of this feature, however, may not be available everywhere. US Cellular and Alaska Communications Systems, Alaska's CDMA provider, also carry the V3c. It also has approximately 41.2 MB of internal memory, although only about 36 MB are available for use. The V3c does not support expansion with a memory card.
The original version of the V3c was charcoal gray, and a light pink version called Satin Pink (different from the GSM Magenta/Pink and the AT&T Cotton Candy versions) was released by Verizon Wireless in January 2006. Telus Mobility, Bell, Aliant, and Vivo also carry pink versions of the V3c.
V3m is a CDMA version of the RAZR. As an upgrade to the V3c, it features a microSD card slot for up to 2 GB of memory expansion, a longer lasting battery, and 40MB of internal memory. The V3m came in silver, pink and red although the original release as well as models that used to be available on the Sprint CDMA network featured the gunmetal gray color of the V3c.  For a limited time Alltel and US Cellular offered a Fire Red color.  This model is not available in the UK as they use GSM, not CDMA, although the V3x is on sale there.
Due to many Sprint customers complaining about less than expected battery life, Motorola offered free high-capacity batteries to Sprint customers who contact Motorola's customer service line with battery life issues.
Verizon Wireless disabled certain features on the V3m including the ability to transfer data files to and from the phone via Bluetooth (a specific protocol called OBEX). Verizon has also blocked the transfer of most data over USB, such as ringtones. These phones also run Binary Runtime Environment for Wireless (BREW), which signs each application to the phones Electronic Serial Number, or ESN, thus preventing the use of free applications. The equivalent models offered by competitors (such as the V3t by T-Mobile) still retain these features.
The V3m on Verizon will play .WMA formatted music files placed in the my_music directory of the removable memory chip, but although the telephone with accept a 2 GB memory chip, only a portion ( ~ 600 Mbytes) can be accessed by the music player.  Stereo headphone playback can be achieved with a miniature USB to 3.5&nbsp;mm phone jack adapter containing the appropriate interface circuitry; adapters designed for hands-free handset operation may not work.
Verizon also installs their own user interface instead of the default Motorola interface that they used to use in the past. This has led to many Verizon Wireless users to resort to using their own artificial means of reverting their phones back to an original Motorola condition, or to that of a Verizon phone that has some of the disabled features enabled. A newer Verizon version of the phone has been upgraded and features limitless video capture, easier laid out menu system and the ability to customize the external screen. The phone is still unable to sync to a computer via USB cable for anything other than charging, unless a software such as Bitpim is used to access files.
Partnering with Motorola, US Cellular and Sprint released a special Product Red RAZR and Bluetooth H500 headset to help support Global Fund programs which positively impact the lives of women and children affected by HIV/AIDS in Africa. Also in the UK there is a Product Red V3i, SLVR, and Bluetooth H3 headset.
The RAZR VE20 is the newest CDMA model of RAZR. It takes the features of the RAZR   V9m and makes it more affordable for consumers. Its rounded clamshell body is almost as thin as the RAZR V3m. it features a QVGA main display, outer display with virtual touch keys, 2 megapixel camera, stereo Bluetooth, and a microSD memory card slot up to 8Gb.
Announced in March 2005
In Japan, a 3G(W-CDMA) NTT DoCoMo version of the V3x was released in late August 2006. This version has IrDA.
Announced in July 2006, the V3xx is a 3G Category 5/6 (3.6 Mbit/s) HSDPA and EDGE supported handset. It is extremely similar in appearance to the compact V3i design, but incorporates an improved feature set with a 1.3 megapixel camera in place of the 1.23 megapixel, 50 MB of internal memory, support for microSD and Bluetooth A2DP. Like the V3x, it is also equipped with a secondary screen and a higher resolution 240x320 pixel (QVGA) main screen.
Unlike with the V3 and V3i (both of which were quad band GSM and thus worked equally well on any GSM network in the world) the V3xx comes in different variants depending on the local frequency bands used for GSM and UMTS/HSDPA. The North American V3xx is Tri band (850&nbsp;MHz/1800&nbsp;MHz/1900&nbsp;MHz) GSM and dual band  (850&nbsp;MHz/1900&nbsp;MHz) UMTS/HSDPA, whereas the version sold in Europe and Asia is tri band (900&nbsp;MHz/1800&nbsp;MHz/1900&nbsp;MHz) GSM and single band (2.1&nbsp;GHz) UMTS/HSDPA. This is likely due to the need to fit the internal components of the V3xx into a small casing; as of early 2007 global phones that support quad-band GSM and tri-band UMTS/HSDPA are considerably bulkier than the V3xx.
NTT DoCoMo version of the V3xx. This version does not have GSM, HSDPA. But it has IrDA.
The RAZR maxx was a new 3G HSDPA and EDGE handset predated by the RAZR V3x. Initially known as the "maxx V6," it was released in Europe by the end of 2006. Additionally Motorola had released pictures on its website of the Verizon version. The original version has a 2.0 Megapixel camera with LED flash, a large  screen with 240x320 QVGA display (like the V3xx) and 50 megabytes of internal storage.
This phone was available in Australia from Telstra on their 850&nbsp;MHz Next G network.
The Verizon Wireless version became available on 24 April 2007.
The Verizon Wireless version, the RAZR maxx Ve, did not have the second camera on the inside of the phone. Instead, there was a shutter button for focusing and picture taking. The Ve featured Verizon's menu system, but is said to support OBEX profiles, unlike Verizon's current RAZR V3m.
Like previous Model MS500, Motorola Korea Announce its Korean version of WCDMA RAZR HSDPA, it will upgrade its screen to 2.2&nbsp;inch TFT QVGA, 1.3 megapixel camera with bluetooth and external memory. model will feature different color pattern compare to previous MS500, expecting to hit Korean market by late Feb.2009.
The RAZR has been said to be the ''"iPod"'' of mobile phones. Being the slimmest phone during its release in 2004, it easily stood out amongst other phone models. It has also been one of the most popular mobile phones since its first release, until being surpassed by the iPhone 3G in November 2008, having been spotted in the hands of celebrities and businessmen alike, it is frequently seen in movies and TV shows and is still being used as of January 2009 by the former Dutch Prime minister Jan Peter Balkenende.
It is also a token piece in the popular modernized board game, Monopoly Here & Now.
 The RAZR has since been used in several television shows and featured in several movies. One notable occasion was the season three finale of the TV series ''Lost'', in which a character used a RAZR. Contestants on the NBC adventure reality show "Treasure Hunters" were given RAZRs for communication with the host and each other throughout the season. The Product Red edition of the RAZR was launched by Oprah and Bono for charity.
The popularity of RAZR in the United States was never replicated worldwide. While at first successful as a fashion phone abroad, its newer and cheaper models never became iconic.