Vincenzo Thoma was born in Rome, Italy. Charmed by Montreal's multicultural character, he decided to make it his home. He moved in 1994 and instantly became popular not only for his powerful and versatile voice but also for his unique style of songwriting. 
His numerous musical influences give way to a unique style combining pop with a touch of classical music and his Latin fire to create a whole new sound. 
Many popular artists have benefited from Thoma's unique brand of songwriting, including Lara Fabian ("J'ai Zappe" on her platinum selling album '''''Pure''''') Roch Voisine ("Comme" on the album ''Chaque feu''), Chimene Badi, Francesca Gagnon and Rene Dupere (of Cirque du Soleil), Mia Martini, Gigi Finizio, Patrick Fiori, Filippa Giordano (who won second place  at the Sanremo Festival in 1999 with "Un giorno in piu'", music written by Vincenzo Thoma and Stefano Galante) and many more. 
In 1987, Vincenzo sang songs for the films ''Faceless'' and ''Les Nouveaux Tricheurs'' which were written by Romano Musumarra.In 1992 he was the voice of Aladdin singing in the Italian A Whole New World the adaptation of Walt Disney's movie ''Aladdin''. In 1993 he was part of the cast of the musical ''Beati Voi'' with actor comedian Enrico Montesano as a soloist and toured all the major Italian cities.
In 1999 the album ''Sognero''' was released in Canada, Recorded between Montreal and Rome. There are ten songs composed, arranged and produced by Vincenzo Thoma and  Stefano Galante and three remakes; two are classic songs such as "Nessun Dorma" and "'O Sole Mio" and the famous "Volare", all deconstructed and re-arranged.
His last CD ''Romantico'' is a project co-produced with Rick Allison and Stefano Galante. 
Vincenzo was able to obtain the approvals for Italian lyrics he wrote on thirteen Anglophone songs. 
Vincenzo Thoma recorded a unique album of huge classic hits in Italian, a language in which these songs have never been recorded before. Artists like Phil Collins, Sting, Billy Joel, George Michael for the first single off the album : Io non ballero - Careless Whisper, Elton John and Diane Warren all gave the OK for him to use his lyrics.