Born into a family of six children in Cleveland, Ohio, Maureen was raised in Illinois and graduated from Lake Forest College magna cum laude with a bachelor's degree in chemistry and biology. She began her medical studies at Northwestern in 1983 and received a commission in the United States Air Force.  
After seven years of active duty military service, including three years in England with the 48th fighter wing, Maureen completed the Forensic Neuropsychiatry Fellowship at Tulane University. She works as a psychological consultant and formulates opinions on competence to stand trial, evaluates allegations of emotional harm and consults on mental health issues in the workplace.
Dr. Hackett has been a consultant in dozens of cases, many concerning a defendant's mental standing in trials. Notably, she was the only one of six mental health experts who testified in State V. McLaughlin that the gunman in the Rocori High School shooting was not guilty by reason of insanity. John Jason McLaughlin was found to be sane and was sentenced to life in prison.
In addition to her private practice in Minneapolis, Maureen has worked as an adjunct associate professor at the University of Minnesota and taught the Psychiatry and the Law Clinic at William Mitchell College of Law. She is currently chair of the ethics committee for the Minnesota Psychiatric Society and a citizen advisor to the Nine Mile Creek Watershed District.
Her husband, Roman, moved to the United States from Ukraine in 1990, and in 1994 started a software firm in Minnetonka that now employs 90 people.
Maureen Hackett announced in November 2009 that she planned to challenge Erik Paulsen in Minnesota's Third Congressional District
On her website, she states that she "believes in the American dream because she has lived it. She   s running for Congress today because that dream needs to be defended and revived so future generations have the same opportunities and more."
She has received the endorsement of the IBEW, the DFL Veterans Caucus, Stonewall DFL among others.