Similarly to Earthrace, another boat designed by LOMOcean Design, Turanor PlanetSolar is planning to set a round-the-world record that will promote the use of sustainable energy. Instead of using Bio Diesel like Earthrace, Turanor PlanetSolar plans to exclusively use solar power. In doing so, Turanor PlanetSolar will become the first ever boat to circumnavigate the world using solar power alone. In order to fulfill this challenge, the boat is covered in over 500 square meters of solar panels rated 93 kW,  which in turn connect to one of the two electric motors in each hull. Although its hull is capable of hosting 200 persons, the shape of the boat means that it will be able to reach speeds of up to fourteen knots. The boat's hull has been model tested in wind tunnels and has been tank tested to determine the hydrodynamics and aerodynamics of the hull. This 31 meter long boat has been designed to be used as a luxury yacht after the record attempt is finished.
On 27 September 2010 Turanor PlanetSolar started on a journey around the world in Monaco. With this expedition, the iniatiors of the project would like to focus the public awareness on the importance of renewable energies for environmental protection. The crew of six will circumnavigate the globe solely with the aid of solar power. Captain of the expedition is Frenchman Patrick Marchesseau. Other participants are Christian Ochsenbein (Bern, Switzerland) and Jens Langwasser (Kiel, Germany); as well as project initiator Raphael Domjan (Yverdon-les Bain, Switzerland). On the first leg across the Atlantic Ocean technician Daniel Stahl (Kiel, Germany) and first mate Mikaela von Koskull (Finland) were part of the crew. On 27 November 2010 the solar boat reached Miami. A significant stopover was Cancun, during the United Nations World Climate Conference.
At the centerline of the world tour, the French Canadian Captain Erwann Le Rouzic took over in New Caledonia mid may 2011, for the further circumnavigation sharing the master's responsibility with Captain Patrick Marchesseau. 
End of May 2011, the world's largest solar boat docked at Brisbane, where in an official ceremony the "PlanetSolar Relay for Hope" was launched, a global relay children and young people can take part in and present their visions and hopes for a solar energy driven world through essays, videos, music, drawing and models.
On the first solar boat expedition around the globe, the TURANOR PlanetSolar has already reached two records: fastest crossing of the Atlantic Ocean by solar boat and longest distance ever covered by a solar electric vehicle. 
The current routing around the globe (subject to favourable weather and nautical conditions) foresees stopovers in several port cities to inform the public about the importance of sustainable and renewable energies.
The boat is registered in Switzerland and was financed by a German entrepreneur. Construction cost was    &nbsp;12.5 million. The name ''Turanor'', derived from J.R.R. Tolkien's novel The Lord of the Rings, translates to "The Power of the Sun".