She was born in Bosanska Gradiska, Bosnia and Herzegovina, one of the 6 former Yugoslavian countries but lived in Zagreb, Croatia since 2 months after her birth. At the age of 19 moved to Denmark and started getting interested in online poker and has been in the industry ever since. Being a poker blogger and a presenter, she met many people in the filming industry which resulted with her interest in making documentaries about Sarajevo, a city she is very fond of. After living in Malta for work purposes, she moved to Edinburgh, Scotland.
After years of living abroad and collecting information about poker, Pasalic started a poker boom in her country by educating mainstream public about poker.
Pasalic is a passionate cook and has been a part of several cooking shows in Croatia. In February 2009 she won a cooking competition held in Zagreb taking part in a show called ''Vecera za 5''.
In 2011, she moved to London, England where she currently resides.
After working as a Country Manager for a poker company, Pasalic made her blogging debut at a tournament in Monte Carlo, following the action in English. Later that year, she blogged from Malta Poker Tour and WSOP. After noticing that a poker community is forming in the ex-Yugoslavia region, she resigned her job and started working as a freelance blogger clashing her own forum with a Serbo-Bosnian community website Pokernika.com making her the first ever Croatian poker journalist.
She invested all of her savings into traveling to follow the EPT, WSOP and local events to bring news, interviews and updates straight from the poker tables to her readers and efforts resulted in thousands of readers.
She has also done poker columns for ''Playboy'' and reports for Poker Europa magazine under an alias Carrie Mason.
Pasalic is an active blogger on a UK poker website called On The Rail.
In 2011, she will appear on the new WPT Magazine Cover. She also moderates forums  with over 200,000 members.
In July 2009 Unibet Poker offered her to present the Croatian video blogs for their website. Videos she presented and co-produced with Marko Butrakovic got over 40,000 views and kicked off a poker boom in Croatia resulting with Pasalic being one of the first poker faces of the local community. Her story of a poker personality and a player motivated many young people to follow her steps. Besides poker media, Tatjana was also featured on the cover of KLIK and FHM magazine and voted one of the sexiest poker players in the world.
After covering events in Warsaw and Budapest, Pasalic has announced her future presenting engagement with Unibet in all of their tournaments throughout 2010. In March 2010 she joined Kara Scott, PartyPoker Team Pro, as a presenter during the Women's World Open IV and the fourth season of Party Poker 'Big Game' that airs on UK TV.
In May 2010, Tatjana joined the WPT Europe team as a vblog host and a part of the social media team in charge of the live coverage. With the start of the summer, she got involved in the East European poker show organized by FullTilt called '' taking on the role as a presenter and a producer.
Some of her best interviews are done with the FullTilt Team Pro players including Phil Ivey   and Tom Dwan   and have become very popular amongst the poker community in a very short period of time.
She was also signed on to continue cooperation with Unibet Open for the 2011 season as their front face.  She is a regular character on THE MICROS  since April 2011, and joined them as a cameo in February 2011. She joined CalvinAyre.com as a poker reporter in June 2011 .
Being behind the scenes at some of the biggest poker events in the world, Pasalic had time to learn from the masters of poker. Even though she has been in the industry for several years, she has only just started playing - her debut was in Prague, September 2009 when she played as a first sponsored lady from her region and cashed by reaching 46th place out of 440. After playing online for a few months, she sat down with 23 finest female poker players of the world and played Women's World Open IV in London, March 2009. After making it through heat 3, Pasalic finished 6th, making this event her first televised final table.
In May 2011, Pasalic joined Team Bodog . She will be representing them as a sponsored poker pro at the 2011 World Series of Poker in Las Vegas, Nevada.