Bangalore Metropolitan Transport Corporation(BMTC) rus the city bus services in Bangalore City of South India. It operates different types of route within the city as well to some portion of the outskirts. The following are a list of various routes that Bangalore Metropolitan Transport Corporation (or BMTC) operates.
These buses have the normal numbers but criss cross  the city.  
Feeder routes have a FDR prefix in their roue number. These some routes are operated for connecting nearby locations. Some FDR routes running as on today are as follows. 
Mofussil services are operated on routes which are beyond BMTC jurisdiction. All mofussil service buses are numbered with a MBS ('''M'''ofussil '''B'''us '''S'''ervice) prefix. These buses were earlier painted in dark blue livery with the entire route mentioned in both English and Kannada on on the sides of the buses. Most of these buses are now repainted to the blue and white livery. The following are a list of Mofussil services:
Following are the trunk routes of BMTC. These are preifxed by a "T". 
The following are the direction based routes of BMTC. This is a new concept started on BMTC routes and is being followed consistently as of now
These buses are in green colour having a prominent Big 10 logo displayed across the bus. These were introduced in Feb 2009 and have "G" prefix in their number.
This route is a merger of 2 Green routes so a to run across the city. B-2 is the only blue route running at present between Electronic City and Peenya 2nd stage via Shivajinagar bus stand.
Big Circle buses were introduced  to traverse on the outer ring road of Bangalore. 4 routes are being run at present from 4 points on ring road to cover a semicircle. These buses have a BigCircle Logo displayed prominently and numbers prefixed with "C".
K service or Chikka Circle (meaning Small Circle) has been introduced traverse the inner ring road of Bangalore. There are 3 routes being operated as of now
These Services operate from various points in Bangalore to the International airport. Volvo AC buses are the only class running on this route. Regular Volvo pass holders can travel in these buses up to Hebbal