Bush was born in Pasadena, California. She is the only child of Maureen, a photography studio manager, and Charles William Bush, an advertising and celebrity photographer. Bush is of Italian descent. She graduated from Westridge School for Girls in 2000 in Pasadena, California. Bush attended the University of Southern California for three years, where she was a member of the Kappa Kappa Gamma sorority, where she served as Social Chair. ftyudtyudtuydtyudtydtyudtyudtuydtuydt
In 2000, she was the Tournament of Roses Parade Queen. Bush left USC to play Brooke Davis on ''One Tree Hill'' (2003).
Bush made her first big screen appearance in the comedy feature film ''Van Wilder''. Following, she made appearances in several television shows, such as ''Nip/Tuck'', ''Sabrina, the Teenage Witch'', and ''Punk'd''. She was cast as Kate Brewster in '' '', but was replaced by Claire Danes because the director thought she was too young for the role.
In 2003, she got the role of Brooke Davis in the CW television series ''One Tree Hill''. Her character, Brooke Davis, evolved from a trouble-making vixen to a fiercely loyal friend. After Bush gained mainstream fame, she became a spokesperson for high-profile brands. She posed on the cover of several mainstream magazines such as ''Entertainment Weekly'', ''Lucky'', ''Maxim'', ''Glamour'' and ''InStyle'' and has had several endorsement deals, one of her latest endorsements is for Op's fall campaign OPen Campus. Bush and her ''One Tree Hill'' co-stars were endorsers for MasterCard, Kmart, Chevy Cobalt  and Cingular wireless.
In July 2006, Bush starred in the 20th Century Fox feature film ''John Tucker Must Die'' alongside Jesse Metcalfe and Brittany Snow. The film was a commercial success grossing over 60 million worldwide. She also starred in Buena Vista Pictures' thriller film, ''Stay Alive'' alongside Frankie Muniz and Adam Goldberg. The film opened at #3 in the U.S.  box office, Box Office Mojo and is considered a box office success due to its production budget of 9 million dollars.
In 2007, Bush starred in the remake of the 1986 classic horror film, ''The Hitcher'' as Grace Andrews. The film was critically panned among most reviewers.
Bush also starred in Francois Velle's ''The Narrows'' with Kevin Zegers, Eddie Cahill and Vincent D'Onofrio. She played the beautiful, intelligent and self-assured Kathy Popovich. The film is based on Tim McLoughlin's novel ''Heart of the Old Country'' and it premiered at the Toronto International Film Festival in September 2008. Bush also stars in the feature film ''Table for Three''.
On April 16, 2005, Bush married actor Chad Michael Murray, her ''One Tree Hill'' co-star. They dated for almost two years before they were married in Santa Monica. They announced their separation on September 26, 2005 after five months of marriage when Bush filed court papers to have their marriage annulled citing fraud. In December 2006, Bush and Murray's divorce was finalized.
On October 27, 2008, amid rumors of Bush dating fellow ''One Tree Hill'' co-star James Lafferty, Murray seemed to have confirmed the romance. "Sophia and I are both professional and mature enough to get through it ... and now it's just easy. We're just friends. And she's got James, and James and I are friends."
On May 25, 2010,  Bush confirmed that she has been dating fellow ''One Tree Hill'' co-star Austin Nichols on and off for the past four years. It was also revealed that Nichols took a job on ''One Tree Hill'' to be with Bush.
On January 8, 2011, Bush's nine-year-old second cousin, Christina-Taylor Green, was fatally shot in the assassination attempt on Rep. Gabrielle Giffords in Tucson, Arizona. Green was the youngest victim of the massacre, which claimed the lives of six and injured 14. The Westboro Baptist Church threatened to picket Green's funeral because she was a practicing Roman Catholic; the Arizona legislature ultimately forced the church to hold the protest three-hundred yards away.
Bush has been actively involved in political issues. She supported Barack Obama as President. In February 2008, she made several appearances in Texas in support of the Obama campaign in the Texas Presidential primary election. She was joined in Dallas, Fort Worth, and Waco by fellow actor Adam Rodriguez. Touring mostly college campuses, they urged young voters to get involved politically. In April 2009, along with stars including Sarah Chalke, Jason Lewis, Alicia Silverstone, Jane Lynch and Lance Bass, Bush appeared in a video on Funny or Die called "A Gaythering Storm", which parodied a NOM video objecting to same-sex marriage.
Bush recently set up a fundraiser intended to help people living in the area of the Gulf of Mexico affected by the environmental disaster of the Deepwater Horizon oil spill, occurred April 20, 2010. The artist has personally visited Louisiana and testified in interviews the horror she felt when she visited those places. The fundraiser is currently underway on the Internet through crowdsourcing website Crowdrise.com. The actress, to support the fundraiser, said that next November she's going to run a half marathon, despite having asthma and a year-old knee injury.
Bush is considered a sex symbol. In April 2007, she ranked #90 in the British popular men's magazine ''FHM'', in their countdown of 100 Sexiest Women of 2007. Subsequently, she ranked #89 in the US edition of the same magazine. In May 2007, Bush ranked high at #24 in the ''Maxim'' Hot 100 List of 2007. She has also appeared on the cover of the November 2006 edition of ''Maxim'' with ''One Tree Hill'' co-stars Hilarie Burton and Danneel Harris. In previous years, Bush has ranked #3 on Femme Fatales: The 50 Sexiest Women of 2004 and named #15 on MuchMusic's 20 Hottest Women of 2004.
Bush has been featured in ''People's'' "Beautiful at Every Age"  and "Most Beautiful" for several years.
Wikipedia policy is one fansite per article. Please do NOT add more, as they WILL be deleted. More information can be found at http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WP:EL.