As a favor to his old war buddy Nate Meineke, Piney sells a number of AK-47 assault rifles to his right-wing militia. He heads out to the woods with Jax to meet Meineke and his son, Russell. After briefly testing the weapons out on targets, the revolutionaries buy the guns and head off. The militia then use the guns to ambush a prison convoy and free one of their members, Frank Cison. A shoot-out ensues and a police officer and two innocent bystanders are killed. While fleeing, Meineke drops his cell phone at the scene. Agent June Stahl later arrives at the scene and finds the phone while investigating. She discovers that the phone's last phone call was to the Teller-Morrow garage.
At the clubhouse the following day, SAMCRO hear the news. Juice returns from Indian Hills with the guns, and Cherry, in his truck. Clay tells Juice off for bringing Cherry to town, as he doesn't want a woman that he recently slept with near his wife. However, Juice tells him that she only wants to see Half-Sack. Gemma sees Clay's angry reaction to Cherry and realizes that he must have slept with her while on the road. She then laments the situation in a conversation with Donna, saying "what happens on a run stays on a run. It does not show up and slap me in the goddamn face!". 
Shortly after, law enforcement raid the club, arrest Clay and take him to the local police station, on charges of aiding and abetting a triple homicide. There, Stahl tells him that she knows that SAMCRO supplied the guns used in the murders and will soon have a warrant to search the club's garage, where weapons are being stored. Back at the clubhouse, Piney admits that he made a mistake in selling the guns, and he only did it because Meineke is a friend. After pressing a reluctant Trammel for information (Trammel's friend and partner was the officer killed in the ambush), Jax learns that the ATF will be back with a search warrant and tells the others that they will have to get rid of the guns from the garage.
Later, Meineke contacts Piney again and sets up a meeting at their survivalist hideout in the woods. The Sons agree that they will have to kill the militia to stop them from informing on SAMCRO if they are apprehended. The meeting is set up for the following day. In the meantime, SAMCRO have a more immediate problem. With a search of their property imminent, the Sons must get the remaining guns to the One-Niners as soon as possible, without the ATF agents noticing. Jax spots a septic truck on the garage forecourt which he knows could provide the perfect cover. They load the septic tank up with the guns and drive it away without the watching ATF agents noticing its contents. When the ATF agents arrive to search the garage, they find nothing. However, the Sons' celebrations are short-lived when they learn that Laroy no longer wants to buy the guns. 
As Gemma is walking down the street in Charming, she notices Cherry approaching in the opposite direction. In a fit of rage, she takes a teenager's skateboard, hits Cherry in the face with it and is subsequently arrested. While being questioned by Hale, Clay notices Gemma being walked through the station and learns from Hale that she was arrested for assault. Clay and Gemma then engage in a heated airing of their dirty laundry as they argue over the issues involving Cherry in front of the ATF agents and sheriffs. Clay is subsequently released and heads to the holding cell to talk to Gemma. They reconcile, but Gemma refuses to post bail, explaining that she needs a night in jail to get herself together as she is struggling with the changes caused by menopause. 
Meanwhile, Half-Sack visits Cherry in the hospital and is reassured that she will not press charges against Gemma. Cherry explains that she is only in town to visit him and did not mean to stir up any trouble for Clay. Half-Sack initially explains that they could not be together because of what happened with Clay in Nevada, but Cherry persists and they share a kiss on her hospital bed. 
The following morning, Jax, Piney and Opie set out to meet Nate in Woodbridge Forrest. Meineke tells them that he and his men are fleeing to Mexico and want to buy more guns from SAMCRO. The Sons sell them bags of grain, supposedly containing the rifles but actually filled with explosives, which they then load into their trucks. Once the deal is done, Piney hugs Nate one last time. As they drive away, Opie detonates the bombs, killing all of the militia.
Clay picks up Gemma from jail and as they prepare to head home, they spot Cherry walking by. Gemma and Cherry settle their differences as Cherry explains that she is only in town to pursue a relationship with Half-Sack and will immediately leave town if that does not work out.