NDI has its roots from Perhimpunan Pelajar Indonesia di Singapura () or the Indonesian Students    Association in Singapore, which is recognized by the Embassy of the Republic of Indonesia in Singapore as the sole representative of Indonesian students in Singapore.
NDI was established with the vision to be a leading student body that contributes to the creation of self-reliant communities in rural Indonesia by researching, developing, and implementing long-term sustainable developmental projects that accurately and effectively improve the lives and livelihood of rural dwellers.
As an inclusive organization that transcends nationalities, NDI or Nusantara Development Initiative is made up of 30 youths across Singapore, Indonesia, Malaysia, China and the Philippines. Consisting of undergraduates, post-graduates students and young professionals studying or working in Singapore; the volunteers are passionate people interested in giving back to the society.
In partnership with the World Toilet Organization () and Acehnese Solidarity for Humanity (ASoH),, ASoH NDI carried out its first project in 2009. Project SaCH (Project Sanitation Campaign and Social Research) aimed to raise the importance of basic sanitation amongst the rural dwellers in Meulaboh, Aceh, one of the worst-hit areas of the 2004 Asian Tsunami, as well as conduct social research to gain insight into the local sanitation practices. Project SaCH was carried out from 23 July to 1 August 2009 in a village called Suak Pandan, and also a primary school nearby called SD Keub.
Mothers and children in the village were introduced to the importance of hygiene by teaching them the basic principle and steps of washing hands and brushing teeth. A total of 175 family hygiene kits provided by UNICEF and stationeries from a group of sponsors were also distributed in Suak Pandan Village and SD Keub., Project SaCH The results of the social research and water quality testing were analyzed by the team and were given to ASoH for follow-up.
NDI   s Project Light is a collaboration of thirty youths comprising undergraduates, post-graduates, and young professionals from different nationalities and backgrounds, studying or working  in Singapore. A full phase of 3-year long project aims to facilitate sustainable development in a rural area and introduce an effective, low cost intervention in the form of solar powered lamps, which have been shown to significantly improve the quality of rural livelihood. In a study conducted in India, literacy rate has increased by 20%, theft cases reduced to 75%, followed by 25 % increase in income of tailors and barbers due to availability of solar powered lamp.Singh, S.N., Singh, A.K. (2009). Solar Power system     An Effective Tool for Sustainable Socio-Economic Development of Indian villages: A Case Study. Ariser. 5 (1), 9-18
Currently, 25 out of 36 million rural households in Indonesia still rely on kerosene, dry cell batteries, and candles due to the absence of a reliable and cheap electrical supply., Indonesia SELF Policy makers have increasingly realized the important role played by alternative energy, which has been shown to aid poverty alleviation without compromising the environment., Use Solar Save Lives Solar powered lamps, in particular, are cheap, safe , Let There Be Light: Solar-Powered LED Lamps Brighten Lives of Poor People and reliable. Equally important, their introduction into a village can be achieved at relatively low costs and without the need for high levels of technical expertise or constant monitoring, making such projects feasible for student organizations.
The benefits of introducing solar powered lamp to a rural area are numerous and have the potential of benefiting neighbouring villages as well. By using solar lamps instead of kerosene lamps, toxic substances like Volatile Organic Compound (VOCs) and carbon being released into the atmosphere are significantly reduced., Solar Intervention, Making the World a Better Place The solar lamps may also help to reduce health problems suffered by people in rural areas due to excessive breathing of particulate laden kerosene fumes. Moreover, this introduction of a new source of light not only improve health and environment but also help to increase productivity by exposing the villagers with the possibility of working and studying at night., Saving "Lives" with Solar-Powered Lights
The first part of a full phase of 3 year long endeavour, Project Light 1 was carried out from 20 to 29 July 2010 in Pulau Air Raja, an offshore island in Kepulauan Riau, Indonesia. Project Light 1 aims to facilitate sustainable development on the island, consisting of over 200 families and a total population of more than 700 people; and introduce an effective, low cost intervention in the form of solar powered lamps. 
Prior to the project, 60% of the population already have access to the island   s central generator set. The generator is, however, underutilized due to its high-cost and restriction, namely it being switched on only from 6pm to 10pm. As a result, most villagers opt for kerosene lamps, candle wicks or other sources of light to carry on their activities after 10pm.  The villagers had to spend their income mostly on fuel due to their dependency on kerosene lamps. The fuel expenditure could have been used in other more productive ways. On top of that, the use of kerosene lamps and oil wicks has been proven to be fire hazards and has lead to respiratory-related illnesses. 
For this section of the project, 40 households with limited or no access to electric generators were shortlisted to directly experience the benefits of solar lamp by loaning them the solar lamp for one evening. This was to allow the villagers to self-evaluate whether the lamp was well-suited for their daily needs. After the testing period, the team conducted a one-to-one feedback session and has received positives responses that the solar lamps are brighter, safer and cleaner than the kerosene lamp.
To maximize the benefits of solar energy in the village, the technical team also installed a new solar panel at the local mosque, Mesjid Al-Hijrah. The panel was meant to power the loud speaker and CD player during prayers. In order to achieve sustainability, the technical team provided training for the local village technicians so that they are able to maintain the panels when the team left. To date, the solar panel has been serving the community well.
The team did not focus solely on infrastructure building, but also on education development. During the team   s stay on the island, the team conducted a hydro-rocket competition for secondary school students in SMP Negeri 6 Batam which involved 62 second and third year students. English classes were also provided for the student body as well.
The introduction of solar powered lamps has received positive feedbacks across the village. Over 90 households have benefited from the solar lamp so far, which is about 50% of the population. It is considered a remarkable achievement given that this was just the first project. With the solar lamps, the kids were able to revise with greater ease. The mothers are also able to attend to house chores without having to carry candles everywhere.
On a more social perspective, a close-knitted relationship between NDI and the villagers was formed throughout the trip. The enthusiastic team-mates would participate in the villagers    daily activities such as playing Domino (favorite past time in the village) with the dads, helping the mothers to prepare dinner and revising the school work with the kids.
Due to the positive feedback generated throughout the project, NDI was featured in various media such as Indoconnex , Berita Harian  and also, NUS Engineering Newsletter  and NUS Alumni magazine . 
NDI also had photo exhibition in all Singapore Universities, namely, National University of Singapore, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore Management University and Singapore Institute of Management. The photo exhibition managed to garner support from the public and generate awareness . 
Alongside media exposure, NDI was also honored to be invited by Dr. Kuntoro Mangkusubroto, Chairman of President   s Delivery Unit for Development Monitoring and Oversight (Unit Kerja Presiden bidang Pengawasan dan Pengendalian Pembangunan, abbreviated UKP4) to deliver a presentation on Project Light to him and his staff in Jakarta, Indonesia. The presentation is an official recognition for Project Light.
In continuation of the previous project, Project Light 2 will focus on local entrepreneurship training in the village. The team will plan, structure and execute an entrepreneurship-training framework to empower local villagers to set up and manage their own solar-powered lamp business. This profit-making enterprise is expected to provide the locals with additional source of income while generating ripple effect of the solar lamp to neighboring villages.
As of now, the team is preparing for the projected main trip in early July. We will be working closely with representatives from the Young Leaders Indonesia Alumni Association (YLIA), a community built by the alumni of YLI program. Before that, a team of 5 members will conduct a recce trip in early June to introduce the entrepreneurial system to the womenfolk in the island, while conducting field research to gather data and information that further solidifies the system. 
Overall, this phase of the project outlines three key objectives:
1. Build upon the success of Project Light 1 and continue to provide an effective, low cost intervention in the form of solar powered lamps, thereby further reducing the reliance on kerosene lamps.
2. Identify and train suitable women in the village to be    solar lamp entrepreneurs   . 
3. Create a leasing system that will target the poorer demographics. Given their lack of savings and unpredictable cash flow, they will be given the option of renting instead of buying the lamps.