The organisation relies on contributions from individual donors,  family foundations, corporate funding and government-sponsored programmes. It collaborates with governments, international aid organisations and in-country NGO partners to implement communication and lighting projects. In 2005, The Times selected the organisation as a beneficiary for its Christmas Charity Appeal.
Lifeline Energy operates in over 14 countries including Kenya, Malawi, Madagascar, Mozambique, Niger, Nigeria, Rwanda, South Africa, Somalia, Sudan, Tanzania, Uganda, Zambia and Indonesia.
The Freeplay Foundation was founded in 1998 by Rory Stear, the co-founder of Freeplay Energy Group. Rory Stear     along with all other directors - resigned from Freeplay Energy Group in 2008. He no longer has any involvement with Freeply Energy. 
Lifeline Energy runs under the direction of Chief Executive Officer, Kristine Pearson.
Accessed January 2009
On April 8, 2010 the Freeplay Foundation changed its name to Lifeline Energy. The name change reflects the organisation   s desire to not only develop and distribute radios and other communication tools, but also a range of other practical, fit-for-purpose products for the poor.
Donors have included Anglo American PLC, the Body Shop, Vodafone Group Foundation, Asda, NASDAQ, the Founders and Supporters of  and the World Bank. Gordon Roddick, co-founder and former chairman of The Body Shop International plc said in an interview with The Times, London    Radio is the perfect way of getting quality education to a wide area incredibly cheaply.   
Accessed May 2009
The Lifeplayer was launched in September 2010. The media player can come pre-loaded to hold 64GB of educational content, can download Internet audio, can record live voice or radio programmes for playback later and can charge mobile phones.
The Lifeplayer is the first of its kind and was designed and engineered specifically for the humanitarian sector. It has been referred to as the    iPod   for development   .
The Lifeplayer is also a five band radio with AM/FM and three short waves radio and advanced speaker quality, for 60 listeners to listen to programmes on support disaster situations, relief efforts, entertainment and on-going development initiatives. It can be used for instructing groups in English, math, science, financial literacy, business training and other subjects where there is a shortage of skilled teachers.
In 2011, Lifeline Energy will launch the Lifeplayer in a project for farmers in Rwanda, in partnership with the multinational giant SC Johnson and a US-based NGO, Radio Lifeline. The initiative will disseminate modern farming techniques, market information and health news to Rwandan pyrethrum farmers via MP3 podcast and a monthly nationwide FM radio programme.
The Lifeplayer was created and developed by Lifeline Energy and Lifeline Technologies Trading Ltd, Lifeline Energy   s new product development and trading arm.
Supporters of the Lifeplayer include James Kimonyo - the Republic of Rwanda's Ambassador to the US - as well as Academy Award winner Tom Hanks.
The Prime radio was launched in August 2010 and replaced the Lifeline radio - the first solar and wind-up radio made exclusively for the humanitarian sector. Prime radios can reach up to 60 listeners and has five bands     AM, FM and three short-wave bandwidths. It also features an LCD screen, a solar panel, a hand crank, and a DC input that can be plugged into either a wall socket or a car battery. The solar panels can charge the radio directly through a cable or can charge wirelessly. The solar panel also can include a USB output socket, enabling mobile phone charging on demand. 
The Prime radio improves on its predecessor, the Lifeline radio. In 2001, the Lifeline radio concept won the first Tech Museum of Innovation Award for Technology Benefiting Humanity for Lifeline Energy, in the education category. During the development the organisation arranged focus groups of orphaned children in South Africa, Kenya and Rwanda. The focus group findings determined that the radio needed to be a bright colour, easy to carry and robust.
Since 2003, more than 200,000 of Lifeline Energy   s radios have been used in a variety of projects - primarily in Africa. 
The organisation strives to replace expensive, polluting and unhealthy alternatives such as kerosene by distributing Lifelights as more than 500 million people in sub-Saharan Africa do not have access to electricity.  It also conducted lighting research to determine lighting needs of very poor households.
Research was conducted in rural and peri-urban slum areas of South Africa to determine how much child and grandmother-headed families spent on candles and kerosene for lighting per month. The research involved looking at the types of tasks and activities that were used for lighting and the consequences people experienced as a result of their not having any access to electricity. Hollywood actor Tom Hanks and the Lemelson Foundation funded the development of the Lifelight.
In 2008, Lifeline Energy launched the Light For Life campaign. The fundraising campaign emphasised the consequences of the lack of modern energy and the need to provide Lifelights to child-headed households in Rwanda.
Since 2003, Academy Award winner Tom Hanks has served as Lifeline Energy's American ambassador. He supports a range of projects including Lifeline radios for distance education in Tanzania.  and the organisation's Child Headed Household Lifeline radio project in Rwanda.   Hanks also is the primary funder behind the research and development of Lifelight.
Hanks participated in an eBay charity auction in which ten Lifeline radios autographed by Hanks were available. In addition to the radio, the highest bidder also received a personal letter and a signed photo from Hanks. During the campaign, Hanks stated that    The Lifeline radio can change the world     one person, one house, one village at a time."
World renowned British humanitarian Terry Waite (CBE) has served as the organisations European Ambassador since 2000. Waite recently stepped down as chairman of Lifeline Energy's UK Board of Trustees after nine years of service, but remains a patron.
Two time Everest conqueror, South African Sibusiso Vilane, is Lifeline Energy's African Ambassador. Vilane fundraised for Lifeline radios by walking 1,113 kilometers to the South Pole, being the first black African to trek there. He stated "I thought if I can get a radio for every kilometre I walk that would be awesome."
Accessed April 2009
Accessed May 2009