The energy policy of the Obama administration, stated on the website of  U.S. President Barack Obama, lists the guiding principles of the administration  regarding energy and the environment. They include creating new clean energy jobs and technologies, making America more energy independent, and reducing carbon emissions.
On April 13, 2010, in honor of the 40th anniversary of Earth Day, the White House website summarized the initiatives that the administration is taking or has undertaken:
Many of the Obama administration's initiatives were undertaken as a result of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009, and many of those investments were specifically in clean energy.  According to a report by  , the recovery act included more than '''$70 billion''' in tax credits and direct spending for programs involving clean energy and transportation.
The White House website states that the recovery act provided more than '''$80 billion''' in clean energy investments:
Clean Edge lists other recent policies of the Obama Administration to support the clean energy sector in the U.S.: 
In his 2011 State of the Union Address, President Obama called for a goal, "By 2035, 80 percent of America's electricity will come from clean energy sources." 
One of President Obama's suggestions for cleaner energy options was the use of nuclear power plants. But after the 2011 Tohoku earthquake and tsunami that hit Japan and its power plants, the '''$54 billion''' in loan guarantees the president has asked Congress to approve seem doubtful. 
As the tragedy and events in Japan continue to unfold, all eyes have invariably turned to the power plants as well as their inherent possibility of major meltdowns.
Concerns have grown over the nuclear plants in California because, similar to Japan, they are also located on fault lines. But Per Peterson, former Chair of the nuclear-engineering department at the University of California, Berkeley has reassured people that the fault lines lack the same danger and potential of disaster as Japan. 
In a speech on March 31, 2010 at Andrews Air Force Base, President Obama outlined a new energy security plan.
The president's plan includes initiatives such as raising fuel efficiency standards. He also announced a decision to double the number of hybrid vehicles in the federal government's fleet, and made a decision to expand domestic offshore oil and gas exploration in Alaska and off the southwest coast of the United States.
Following up on Obama's speech, the White House blog released a statement on how the administration plans to boost domestic energy production, diversify America's energy portfolio, and promote clean energy innovation with three tactics:
The Center for a New American Security(CNAS) wrote recommendations on how to improve upon the energy security plan. In 2009, CNAS and its author, Christine Parthemore "convened a group of scientists, investors,business executives,academics,nonprofit representatives, defense professionals,and federal, state, and local officials to discuss how to implement President Obama   s energy and climate
CNAS recommended three strategies for the administration to help move forward with the energy security plan: