Founded in 1995, OFM is a U.S. office and school furniture manufacturer, distributor, and wholesaler with headquarters in Holly Springs, North Carolina, and operations in Phoenix, Arizona, and Taiwan. OFM contracts with manufacturers in Mexico, Taiwan, and China to design furniture and related products which are sold through a dealer network to businesses, government offices, health care and educational facilities. OFM products are sold through a variety of retailers, mail-order catalogs and online dealers including OfficeFurniture.com, Corporate Express, and National Business Furniture.
After working for years as a furniture manufacturing sales representative, Abel Zalcberg founed his own company in 1995. Using personal savings, he and his wife Barbara set up an office in their home, printed up a catalog and sold chairs from vendors Abel had worked with in the past. The company offered faster delivery times by keeping less inventory in stock.
Today, OFM is a major wholesale operation that specializes in providing affordable furniture to general businesses and government offices, as well as schools and hospitals. The company   s products are also sold through a variety of catalogs and online dealers, including Officefurniture.com, Furnitureonline.com and Officedepot.com. It has around 25 employees.
The Zalcbergs' son, Blake, serves as the company's chief operating officer.
The company's headquarters are a  office and warehouse in Holly Springs, North Carolina. It is currently planning a 15,000- to  expansion to allow faster shipping of low-volume products, such as chairs in non-standard colors.  OFM also contracts with manufacturers in Mexico, Taiwan, and China to design furniture and products.
It recently announced it is installing a solar photovoltaic system on the roof of its main building in Holly Springs. The company recently secured a loan covering 100 percent of the cost of a 250-kilowatt solar-panel system for its rooftop.
The company is financing a new project that will help make its headquarters in North Carolina completely carbon neutral. OFM will be installing a 250-kilowatt solar photovoltaic system on the roof of its main building in Holly Springs, North Carolina, The power generated each month through the solar farm will then be sold to Progress Energy. OFM Inc. is installing 1,042 solar panels on the roof of its  office and warehouse by the end of the year.
OFM manufactures and distributes over 300 office and school furniture products for use in businesses, government, schools and health care facilities.