ISYS OUTDOORS, Anquet Maps and Fugawi offer a series of 1:25,000, 1:50,000 and 1:250,000 scale UK Ordnance Survey maps including a
ISYS OUTDOORS, Memory-Map, Anquet and Tracklogs also offer Ordnance Survey maps on CD ROM, including 1:50,000 and 1:25,000 scale maps.
A Microsoft product, ''Autoroute 2005'', includes coverage of Great Britain though new roads such as the M6 Toll which opened in December 2003 are still shown as under construction. Coverage of Ireland and Northern Ireland is less detailed.
Ordnance Survey topographic maps for UK and Ireland can be used on a GPS mobile phone with ViewRanger.
The Anquet Maps app allows users to view Anquet's UK maps on their iPhone, iPad, or iPod touch. The app also accepts routes generated with Anquet Maps for Mac software. Both applications were developed by Virtual Programming.
Due to cartographers restrictions/copyrights there are only a few companies that have the platform and technology that can securely distribute original maps in digital format via download. However those that do, like Anquet and emapsite, often provide free software that manages the maps but also helps route planning, map printing and programming of GPS/PND devices with those routes and maps you downloaded.
A number of websites offer maps of Great Britain and Ireland.
The Ordnance Survey is an agency of the government of the United Kingdom.
Ordnance Survey Northern Ireland is another UK government agency.
Ordnance Survey Ireland is an agency of the Government of Ireland.
The Streetmap site is compiled and made available by BTex Limited.
Natural England (formerly the Countryside Agency) has a statutory duty to prepare maps of all open country and registered common land in England and the Countryside Council for Wales has the same task in Wales).
MAGIC is a web-based interactive map intended to bring together information on key environmental schemes and designations in one place.  MAGIC partners are DEFRA (Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs), The Countryside Agency, English Heritage, English Nature, The Environment Agency, The Forestry Commission and The ODPM (Office of the Deputy Prime Minister).
This site has scanned images of the Ordnance Survey One Inch Popular (4th) Edition maps. These inter-war maps are similar in style to the later New Popular Edition but pre-date the GB National Grid.
This site has scanned images of the Ordnance Survey One Inch New Popular (6th) Edition maps. These post-war maps include the modern GB National Grid.