The farms encompass both photovoltaic and concentrating solar power technologies.
Changes to federal and other tax laws are necessary to enable community solar farms. U.S. Senator Mark Udall is proposing the SUN Act (Solar Uniting Neighborhoods) to extend the existing 30% tax credit to community solar farms. Senate Bill 3137 has been referred to the Finance committee.
Groups of individuals or homeowner associations would be able to locate utility-scale solar power facilities on a piece of common ground in collaboration with local utilities that would distribute the power and credit owners based on their percentage of investment in the solar farm, extending the tax credits accordingly.
California already has enabling legislation. SolarShares
In the Colorado state House, Rep. Claire Levy, D-Boulder, introduced a bill that requires the Public Utilities Commission to rewrite rules to direct investor-owned utilities to offer rebates for community solar gardens.  The bill was signed June 5, 2010 by Governor Bill Ritter
Colorado: HB10-1342, Community Solar Gardens Act
State Representative Matt Patrick authored the Green Communities Act of 2008, authorizing what is formally known as    neighborhood net-metering   , which allows a group of residents in a neighborhood/town to pool resources to cover the capital cost of a renewable energy installation.
Residents of Falmouth plan to construct a cooperatively run solar garden. Each member receives benefits from the co-op; including tax credits, S-RECs, and the production purchased by NSTAR.for its residents.
Massachusetts and the Federal government each offer incentives to improve solar economics. A traditional investment in photovoltaics without incentives would take 12 or more years to pay back the initial cost. The incentives lower the payback period to 6   10 years.
The electric utilities in St. George built a large photovoltaic facility to exploit 310 days a year with sunlight, and allow residents to purchase it to supplement conventional energy. The program itself has no set-up and no maintenance for the purchaser.
Participation is sold in whole and half units of 1 kilowatt (   kW   ). A 1&nbsp;kW    unit    on the SunSmart grid costs of $6,000. One unit will generate power equal to approximately 15% of the average home   s monthly power (or about 140 kWh per month).  A one-time tax credit of 25% of the purchase price, up to a maximum of $2,000, is available from the state of Utah. Purchasers receive a monthly energy credit for the energy produced that month by the    unit    of panels.
Home-owners and others can already benefit from solar power generation (and the accompanying tax benefits) by installing systems on their properties. Siting and related considerations include:
Panels hosted in a solar garden can address some of these issues, allowing anyone to own their own solar panels.  The Solar Gardens Institute maintains a national directory of community solar projects and organizations.