San Diego County has  of coastline. It has a mild Mediterranean to semi-arid climate. Also in this county are 16 significant naval and military locations of the United States Navy, U.S. Marine Corps and the U.S. Coast Guard, including Naval Base San Diego, Marine Corps Base Camp Pendleton, Marine Corps Air Station Miramar, and Naval Air Station North Island.
San Diego County defines the metropolitan statistical area of ''San Diego-Carlsbad-San Marcos'', and in its metropolitan capacity is also known as ''Greater San Diego''. In addition, San Diego County is part of the San Diego   Tijuana metropolitan area, an area with above five million people and the largest bi-national metropolitan area shared between the United States and Mexico. San Diego County is categorized in the economic region "South Border" along with Imperial County for convenience which is the smallest but most economically diverse region in the state, though the two counties maintain weak relations and have little in common, aside from their border proximity.
San Diego County extends south all the way to the Mexican border, which is also the northern border of the State of Baja California and the northern municipal limits of Tijuana Municipality. San Diego County is bordered by Orange County and Riverside County on its north, by Imperial County on its east, and the Pacific Ocean on its west and southwest.
The area which is now San Diego County has been inhabited for more than 10,000 years by Kumeyaay (also called Diegueno), Luiseno, Cupeno and Cahuilla Indians.
European settlement in what is now San Diego County began with the founding of the Mission San Diego de Alcala, by Spanish pioneers, in 1769. This county was part of Alta California under the Viceroyalty of New Spain until the Mexican revolution. From 1821 through 1848 this area was part of Mexico.
San Diego County became part of the United States as a result of the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo in 1848, ending the U.S.-Mexican War. This treaty designated the new border as terminating at a point on the Pacific Ocean coast which would result in the border passing one Spanish league south of the southernmost portion of San Diego Bay, thus ensuring that the United States received all of this natural harbor.
San Diego County was one of the original counties of California, and it was created at the time of California statehood in 1850. }}  San Diego County was named for San Diego Bay, which had been rechristened in 1602 by Sebastian Vizcaino in honor of the Franciscan St. Didacus of Alcala, known in Spanish as San Diego de Alcala de Henares, and whose name was borne by Vizcaino's flagship.
As originally created in 1850 San Diego County was quite large, and it included all of southmost California that was south and east of Los Angeles County. As such it included major parts of what are now Inyo County and San Bernardino County, and all of Riverside County and Imperial County.
During the later part of the 19th century, there were numerous changes in the boundaries of San Diego County, when various areas were sliced off to form the newer counties mentioned above. The most recent changes were the creation of Riverside County in 1893 and Imperial County in 1907. Imperial County was the last new county to be established in California, and after this division, San Diego no longer extended from the Pacific Ocean to the Colorado River, and it no longer covered the entire border between California and Mexico.
According to the 2000 census, the county has a total area of , of which  (or 92.80%) is land and  (or 7.20%) is water.
The county is bigger in area than the combined states of Rhode Island and Delaware.
San Diego County has a varied topography. On its western side is  of coastline.  Most of San Diego between the coast and the Laguna Mountains consists of hills, mesas, and small canyons. Snow-capped (in winter) mountains rise to the northeast, with the Sonoran Desert to the far east. Cleveland National Forest is spread across the central portion of the county, while the Anza-Borrego Desert State Park occupies most of the northeast.
North San Diego County is known as North County; the exact geographic definitions of "North County" vary, but it includes the northern suburbs and sometimes certain northern neighborhoods of the City of San Diego.
The eastern suburbs are collectively known as East County, though most still lie in the western third of the county. The southern suburbs and southern detached portion of the city of San Diego, extending to the Mexican border, are collectively referred to as South Bay. While the desert region in the north east of the county is known as Borrego.
Largest cities (2010 census population):
San Diego County has 18 federally recognized Indian reservations, more than any other county in the United States. Although they are typical in size to other Indian reservations in California (many of which are termed "Rancherias"), they are relatively tiny by national standards, and all together total 200.2 square miles (518.5&nbsp;km  ) of area.
There are 236 mountain summits and peaks in San Diego County including:
San Ysidro Border Crossing
Otay Mesa Border Crossing
Tecate Border Crossing
AMTRAK (Pacific Surfliner)
Metrolink
The Coaster
San Diego and Arizona Eastern Railway
San Diego and Imperial Valley Railroad
Sprinter (North County)
San Diego Trolley
San Diego Metropolitan Transit System
Sprinter
North County Transit District
Embarcadero (San Diego)
San Diego County contains three public state universities: University of California, San Diego; San Diego State University; and California State University, San Marcos. Major private universities in the county include University of San Diego (USD), Point Loma Nazarene University (PLNU), Alliant International University (AIU), and National University. 
Within the county there are 24 public elementary school districts, 6 high school districts, and 12 unified school districts. There are also 5 community college districts.
There are two separate public library systems in San Diego County: the San Diego Public Library serving the city of San Diego, and the San Diego County Library serving all other areas of the county. In 2010 the county library had 33 branches and two bookmobiles; circulated over 10.7 million books, CDs, DVDs, and other material formats; recorded 5.7 million visits to library branches; and hosted 21,132 free programs and events. The San Diego County Library is one of the 25 busiest libraries in the nation as measured by materials circulated.
San Diego County has historically been a Republican stronghold: 2008 was the first time in decades that a Democratic presidential nominee won a majority of the county's votes (though in 1992 Bill Clinton won a plurality). The city of San Diego itself is more Democratic than the county's average (though fairly moderate for a large city) and has voted for Democrats Clinton, Gore, Kerry, and Obama in the last five presidential elections respectively. The city of San Diego, as well as Coronado and Imperial Beach, is part of the 53rd congressional district which has a Cook Partisan Voting Index (CPVI) of D +12. San Diego's northern and eastern suburbs tend to be very conservative. Northern suburbs including Carlsbad are part of the 50th district with a CPVI of R +5. In the 2004 presidential election, San Diego, Encinitas, National City, Del Mar, and some other areas voted for John Kerry; San Marcos, Escondido, Carlsbad, Oceanside, Coronado, Santee, Poway, El Cajon, and Vista overwhelmingly backed George W. Bush. Chula Vista, La Mesa, Lemon Grove, Solana Beach, and Imperial Beach are considered swing areas of the county     Chula Vista and Imperial Beach narrowly backed Al Gore in 2000 but narrowly voted for Bush in 2004, while Solana Beach switched from Bush in 2000 to Kerry in 2004. La Mesa narrowly voted for Bush both times, and Lemon Grove narrowly went Democratic both times. In 2008, Barack Obama became the first Democrat to win a majority of votes in San Diego County since World War II. Obama captured Chula Vista, Oceanside, and Carlsbad.
One unique feature of the political scene is the use of ''Golden Hall'', a convention facility next to City Hall, as a central elections center.  The County Registrar of Voters rents the hall to distribute election results.  Supporters and political observers are invited to watch the results come in, candidates give their victory and concession speeches and host parties for campaign volunteers and donors at the site, and television stations broadcast from the floor of the convention center. Golden Hall was scheduled to be closed in 2004, but was reused again for the November 2005 special election.  The atmosphere on the evening of election day is often comparable to the voting portion of a political party national convention.
In the House of Representatives, all of California's 50th, 52nd, and 53rd districts and parts of the 49th and 51st districts are in the county. By district, the seats are held by Republican Darrell Issa, Republican Brian Bilbray, Democrat Bob Filner, Republican Duncan D. Hunter, and Democrat Susan Davis.
On Nov. 4, 2008 San Diego County voted 53.8 % for Proposition 8 which amended the California Constitution to ban same-sex marriages, thus restoring Proposition 22 which was overturned by a ruling from the California Supreme Court.  However the city of San Diego, along with Del Mar, Encinitas, and Solana Beach, voted against Proposition 8.
In the State Assembly, parts of the 66th and 73rd districts, and all of the 74th   79th districts are in the county. Districts 76 and 79 are held by Democrats, Lori Saldana and Mary Salas respectively; the others are held by Republicans; by district they are Kevin Jeffries, Mimi Walters, Martin Garrick, George A. Plescia, Joel Anderson, and Shirley Horton.
In the State Senate, all of the 39th district and parts of the 36th, 38th, and 40th districts are in the county and are held by Republicans Dennis Hollingsworth and Mark Wyland, and Democrats Christine Kehoe and Denise Moreno Ducheny.
As of December 2010 the members of the San Diego County Board of Supervisors are:
As of 2009 Census Bureau estimates, there were 3,053,793 people, 1,067,846 households, and 663,449 families residing in the county.  The population density was 670 people per square mile (259/km  ).  There were 1,142,245 housing units at an average density of 248 per square&nbsp;mile (96/km  ).  The racial makeup of the county was 79.4% White American, 5.6% Black or African American, 1% Native American, 10.4% Asian, 0.5% Pacific Islander, 10.3% from other races, and 3.6% from two or more races. 31.3% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. 67.0% spoke only English at home; 21.9% spoke Spanish, 3.1% Tagalog and 1.2% Vietnamese.
In 2000 there were 994,677 households out of which 33.9% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 50.7% were married couples living together, 11.6% had a female householder with no husband present, and 33.3% were non-families. 24.2% of all households were made up of individuals and 7.9% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older.  The average household size was 2.73 and the average family size was 3.29.
In the county the population was spread out with 25.7% under the age of 18, 11.30% from 18 to 24, 32.0% from 25 to 44, 19.8% from 45 to 64, and 11.2% who were 65 years of age or older.  The median age was 33 years. For every 100 females there were 101.2 males.  For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 99.7 males.
The median income for a household in the county was $47,067, and the median income for a family was $53,438. Males had a median income of $36,952 versus $30,356 for females. The per capita income for the county was $22,926.  About 8.9% of families and 12.4% of the population were below the poverty line, including 16.5% of those under age 18 and 6.8% of those age 65 or over.
According to estimates by the San Diego Association of Governments, the median household income of San Diego County in 2005 was $64,273 (not adjusted for inflation).  When adjusted for inflation (1999 dollars; comparable to Census data above), the median household income was $52,192.
Crime statistics for 2005 (Reported by the sheriff's office or police)