The '''KUKA Systems GmbH''', a division of KUKA Corporation based in Augsburg, is an international provider of "flexible automation systems" for Automotive, Aerospace, Energy and Industrial Solutions.
KUKA Systems has approximately 3,500 employees in over 15 countries.
In 1995, the two separately operating companies     KUKA Systems GmbH (known as KUKA Schweissanlagen GmbH until September 2007) and KUKA Roboter GmbH     were formed under the parent company KUKA AG (formerly known IWKA).
KUKA Systems    plants are established among various car manufacturers such as BMW, GM, Chrysler, Ford, Mercedes-Benz etc. and also in other industrial sectors, for companies such as Airbus and Siemens.
The KUKA Systems portfolio includes the full range of factory automation for joining and assembling vehicle frames.
KUKA Systems is a partner in robot-based manufacturing solutions for the aerospace industry. The KUKA   s expertise include the production of outer skin, structural components and drive propulsion components.
KUKA Systems provide engineering services, automated production modules and complete, customized turnkey production lines for photovoltaic, solar-thermal and wind energy industries. Examples of KUKA Systems    key technologies can also be found in Power plant construction and Energy supply systems.
KUKA Systems delivers solutions for joining, assembling and handling applications. The process technologies, that include various kinds of welding, gluing and cutting, are constantly evolving into independent solutions for the manufacturing industry.
The Assembly & manufacturing systems and Testing rigs for the automotive and aerospace industries are built in Bremen.
A modern tool manufacturing company is situated on the traditional site Schwarzenberg, Saxony with a team of highly experienced specialists that is responsible for the forming and cutting of tools made up of a variety of metallic materials in all degrees of complexity.
KUKA Systems offers both standard products and custom solutions in automation technologies for industrial production, in either metallic or nonmetallic materials, incorporating all the production steps, such as laser welding, laser hybrid welding, resistance spot welding, remote welding, arc welding, laser cutting, remote laser welding, bonding, sealing, linking, assembling, handling, drilling, riveting, and so on.
KUKA systems is active and provides robotic tools and manufacturing units to individual and flexible production lines in the automotive sector with its OEMs and feeder plants as well as in the Aerospace, Industrial and Energy divisions.
In the Aerospace sector, KUKA Systems is setting new grounds in the industry of automated assembly of new materials, such as fiber-plastic composites or carbon fiber components in aircrafts. Core technologies like deposit welding or laser welding are found again in the automated welding cells for aeronautics and its components.
For the sectors of energy and renewable / alternative energy, KUKA offers services and products for the automated production of photovoltaic cells and modules in the crystalline and thin-layer technology. In every step of production, KUKA offers flexible and scalable systems for automation modules, e.g. for glass handling, sheets-layup, cross-tie soldering of cell-stringers, taping, trimming and framing & testing of solar modules and solar panels.
KUKA Systems offer friction welding and magnet-arc welding technology to both special-purpose machines with optional levels of automation and for small series or prototypes in contract manufacturing.
The automation products and solutions go over the qualified engineering services and construction, covering areas such as digital factory, virtual commissioning, 3D simulations and RobCad-simulations.