The following is a List of Lists of groups within the Roman Catholic Church in America.  By combining lists of bishops from each of the groupings, one may create a single '''List of the Catholic bishops of the United States''', including the five overseas dependencies of the U.S.  The Catholic Church in the United States comprises 177 Latin-rite dioceses and 17 Eastern Catholic eparchies led by diocesan bishops or eparchs, plus an apostolic exarchate and the Archdiocese for the Military Services, USA. Dioceses led by archbishops are called archdioceses. In most archdioceses and some large dioceses, one or more auxiliary bishops serve in association with the diocesan bishop.  There are thirty-two Latin-rite and two Eastern  Catholic archbishops who serve as metropolitan archbishops of their respective Latin-rite ecclesiastical provinces or Eastern Catholic metropoliae. (One archbishop     that of the Archdiocese for the Military Services     is not a metropolitan.) As of March 2011, five of these metropolitans are cardinals of the  Catholic Church.
All active and retired bishops in the United States and the Territory of the U.S. Virgin Islands     diocesan, coadjutor, and auxiliary     are members of the United States Conference of Catholic Bishops (USCCB).
In addition to the 195 dioceses and one exarchate, there are several dioceses in the nation's other four overseas dependencies. In the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the bishops in the six dioceses (one metropolitan archdiocese and five suffragan dioceses) form their own episcopal conference, the ''Conferencia Episcopal Puertorriquena''.. GCatholic.com website. Retrieved 2011-02-13.
The Metropolitan Province of Anchorage comprises the state of Alaska.
The Metropolitan Province of Atlanta comprises the states of Georgia, North Carolina, and South Carolina.
The Metropolitan Province of Baltimore comprises the majority of the state of Maryland (the counties of Calvert, Charles, Montgomery, Prince George's and Saint Mary's are part of the Province of Washington), and all of the states of Delaware, Virginia, and West Virginia.
The Metropolitan Province of Boston comprises the states of Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, and Vermont.
The Metropolitan Province of Chicago comprises the state of Illinois.
The Metropolitan Province of Cincinnati comprises the state of Ohio.
The Metropolitan Province of Denver comprises the states of Colorado and Wyoming and those parts of Idaho and Montana that are within Yellowstone National Park (all of which is part of the Diocese of Cheyenne).
The Metropolitan Province of Detroit comprises the state of Michigan.
The Metropolitan Province of Dubuque comprises the state of Iowa.
The Metropolitan Province of Galveston-Houston comprises the eastern counties of the state of Texas.
The Metropolitan Province of Hartford comprises the states of Connecticut and Rhode Island, and also Fishers Island, NY.
The Metropolitan Province of Indianapolis comprises the state of Indiana.
The Metropolitan Province of Kansas City comprises the state of Kansas.
The Metropolitan Province of Los Angeles comprises the southern counties of the state of California.
The Metropolitan Province of Louisville comprises the states of Kentucky and Tennessee.
The Metropolitan Province of Miami comprises the state of Florida.
The Metropolitan Province of Milwaukee comprises the state of Wisconsin.
The Metropolitan Province of Mobile comprises the states of Alabama and Mississippi.
The Metropolitan Province of New Orleans comprises the state of Louisiana.
The Metropolitan Province of New York comprises the state of New York, '''except''' Fishers Island (in Suffolk County), which is part of the Diocese of Norwich (in the Province of Hartford).
The Metropolitan Province of Newark comprises the state of New Jersey.
The Metropolitan Province of Oklahoma City comprises the states of Arkansas and Oklahoma.
The Metropolitan Province of Omaha comprises the state of Nebraska.
The Metropolitan Province of Philadelphia comprises the state of Pennsylvania.
The Metropolitan Province of Portland comprises the states of Idaho, Montana and Oregon, '''except''' those parts of Idaho and Montana that are within Yellowstone National Park (all of which is part of the Diocese of Cheyenne, in the Province of Denver).
The Metropolitan Province of Saint Louis comprises the state of Missouri.
The Metropolitan Province of Saint Paul and Minneapolis comprises the states of Minnesota, North Dakota and South Dakota.
The Metropolitan Province of San Antonio comprises the western counties of the state of Texas.
The Metropolitan Province of San Francisco comprises the northern counties of the state of California and all of the states of Hawaii, Nevada and Utah.
The Metropolitan Province of Santa Fe comprises the states of Arizona and New Mexico.
The Metropolitan Province of Seattle comprises the state of Washington.
The Metropolitan Province of Washington, D.C., comprises the District of Columbia, the Maryland counties of Calvert, Charles, Montgomery, Prince George's and Saint Mary's, and      as its only suffragan     a United States overseas dependency, the Territory of the Virgin Islands.
In 1939, Pope Pius XII canonically erected a military ordinariate for members of the Armed Forces of the United States serving domestically and abroad and their dependents. In 1985, Pope John Paul II elevated the ordinariate to the Archdiocese for the Military Services, USA. The archdiocese serves members of and others employed by the United States military, the Veterans Health Administration and its patients, and Americans in government service overseas. The jurisdiction of the Archdiocese extends to any United States government property both in the  United States and abroad, including all military installations and U.S. embassies, consulates and other diplomatic missions. The archbishop oversees bishops and priests working at  military installations worldwide, and is assisted by auxiliary bishops.
The Ukrainian Catholic Metropolitan Province of Philadelphia consists of four eparchies of the Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church, and covers the entire United States.
The Byzantine Catholic Metropolitan Province of Pittsburgh is a ''sui iuris'' metropolia, traditionally linked to the Ruthenian Catholic Church.  The metropolia consists of four eparchies of the Byzantine Ruthenian Catholic Church and covers the entire United States, with jurisdiction for all Ruthenian Catholics in the United States, as well as other Byzantine Rite Catholics without an established hierarchy in the country.
The other Eastern Catholic Churches with eparchies (dioceses) or exarchates established in the United States are not grouped into metropoliae. All are immediately subject to the Holy See, with limited oversight by the head of their respective ''sui iuris'' church.
The Metropolitan Province of Agana comprises the United States overseas dependencies of the Territory of Guam and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, as well as Wake Island, an unorganized, unincorporated territory of the U.S.  Also included are the sovereign and independent nations of the Federated States of Micronesia, the Republic of the Marshall Islands, and the Republic of Palau. (The bishops in U.S. insular areas in the Pacific Ocean     the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, the Territory of American Samoa, and the Territory of Guam     are members of the Episcopal Conference of the Pacific.)
The Metropolitan Province of Samoa-Apia is foreign to the United States, but it includes     as its only suffragan     a single diocese that comprises a United States overseas dependency, the Territory of American Samoa. (The bishops in U.S. insular areas in the Pacific Ocean     the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, the Territory of American Samoa, and the Territory of Guam     are members of the Episcopal Conference of the Pacific.)
The Metropolitan Province of San Juan de Puerto Rico comprises the United States Commonwealth of Puerto Rico. (The bishops of the province form their own episcopal conference, the ''Conferencia Episcopal Puertorriquena.'')