In the episode, the press learns that Sabre printers catch on fire and Jo (Kathy Bates), suspecting that someone within the Scranton branch leaked the information, sets out to discover who the whistleblower is.
It was written by Warren Lieberstein and Halsted Sullivan and directed by Paul Lieberstein. The episode received mixed reviews from critics and was watched in 6.60 million households.
The press finds out that Sabre's printers catch on fire, and CEO Jo Bennett (Kathy Bates) shows up to the office in hopes of finding out who the whistleblower is. Everyone suspects Andy (Ed Helms), who adamantly denies he leaked the information, even though he was the first in the office to learn of it. Jo has Nick (Nelson Franklin), the IT guy, check everyone's computer to find evidence for a potential leak and is constantly harassed while trying to do so. Jo and Gabe (Zach Woods) interview everyone as well to find the potential leak, starting with Michael (Steve Carell). Although Michael suggests some very harsh treatment of the offender, which proves his innocence to Jo, he insists that no one in the office would have leaked the information.
During the interviews, Dwight (Rainn Wilson) comes in and offers Jo a long list of people she should fire to convince her it wasn't him.  Jo believes him and recommends to him that he should invest the money he made this year in real estate.  After a lot of consideration, Dwight decides to attempt to buy the Scranton Business Park, and suggests in a conversation with Hank (Hugh Dane) the security guard that he will implement sweeping changes to the place.
Meanwhile Michael tries to get Andy to confess he told the press. When Andy suggests that Darryl (Craig Robinson) is more nervous about the situation than anyone because he knows all about it too, Michael confronts him and gets him to confess. Darryl accidentally told a female reporter at a bar after work about the videotaped printer catching on fire. Pam (Jenna Fischer) confesses to Jim (John Krasinski) that she told another mother at the day-care center whose husband is a reporter. When she tells Michael, he asks her and Darryl to meet him in the parking lot. Kelly (Mindy Kaling) joins them as she had revealed the news on her various social networking sites out of boredom. The three suggest to Michael that he should try to talk to Jo about the situation so that they can confess but keep their jobs.
Michael tries to convince Jo to let the offenders off lightly which causes her to suspect that he knows the identity of the leak.  Michael refuses to say anything, so Jo takes him to the hangar with her private jet to talk with him about his problems. Michael admits many of the stresses he's had throughout the year, namely missing Holly.  Jo counters that she doesn't want to be remembered as someone who made a mistake, even though she will have to do a recall on the printers. Michael offers to "fall on his sword" and announce the public apology for her.
Back at the office, Gabe finishes interviewing everyone and deduces that Andy is the one who talked with the press. Everyone tries to suggest that it could be someone else, perhaps even Gabe. Former CFO David Wallace (Andy Buckley) reveals himself as a potential leak as he heard about it from a former client and then told other former clients and potential clients out of spite. At that moment, Nick announces that he is quitting to go teach inner city children in Detroit how to use computers. When Dwight and others mock him, Nick explodes and reveals personal computer information about many of the employees, and then reveals Andy was the leak due to the Quicktime video he shot with Darryl, as well as a letter/email he sent to a local newspaper. Nick walks off and insults everyone, and raises both middle fingers to everyone.
At the end of the day, Andy finds himself harassed by the other employees. However, Erin (Ellie Kemper) commends Andy's bravery, and he leaves smiling.
Michael is shown giving a public apology to a news crew, after which Jo tells him she will owe him a favor. When Michael half-jokingly asks to bring Holly back to Scranton, Jo sincerely tells him she'll look into it, leaving him at a loss for words as the episode ends.
In its original American broadcast, "Whistleblower" was viewed by an estimated 6.60 million households with a 3.4 rating/10% share in the 18   49 demographic coming second in its timeslot after the season finale of ''Grey's Anatomy'', receiving the same rating as last week's episode, "The Chump" and dropping 3% from last years finale, "Company Picnic" according to Nielsen Media Research. The episode, "Whistleblower" ranked 13th in the weekly 18-49 demographic ratings and ranked becoming the highest rated show on NBC that week. 
Cindy White of IGN gave the episode a 7.8 saying it was "Good" and "This was probably the weakest finale in the show's history, coming in just below "Hot Girl," which ended the first six-episode run by at least introducing a new potential love interest for Jim." Nathan Rabin of ''The A.V. Club'' gave this episode a B+, stating "tonight   s episode capped off a solid season on a promising note, tantalizing us with the prospect of Holly   s return." Joel Keller of AOL's TV Squad gave the episode a negative review for not having enough plot twists saying "'Whistleblower' was no 'Casino Night.' It wasn't even close. In fact, it sent the season out on a lame note, indicative of how up and down this season has been."
Darren Franich of ''Entertainment Weekly'' gave the episode a positive review and wrote "This was an interesting way for ''The Office'' to end its sixth, and least cohesive, season: an admission that not a whole lot happened, followed by a callback to a plotline from last season. Still, there was some real heft to this closing episode     enough to give me some hope. Will Leitch of ''New York'' said "''The Office'''s season six was usually funny and always big-hearted, but there was never much at stake." James Poniewozik of ''Time'' criticized the show for the lack of stakes during the season, but stated "The season finale, "Whistleblower," in some ways was characteristic of this season, in that some of its best moments came from characters at the periphery of the story. But it was also at best a sign of what this season could have been, and ended on at least a glimmer of hope for the next one."
TV Fanatic gave the episode a 3.5/5.0 saying "Instead, what shaped up like an seismic confrontation between Michael and Jo turned into a heart-to-heart of sorts. Enjoyable in its own right, yes. Epic finale material? Eh." M. Giant of Television Without Pity gave the episode a B+. Rick Porter of Zap2it said "While the entire conversation between Michael and Jo on her private jet was wonderful, a lot of the investigation into the leak of Sabre's printer problems was not."