What's the difference?    Preceding   comment added by   ( ) 05:39, 27 April 2010 (UTC)
Can anyone recommend a particular course for learning C++ or similar, with no previous knowlege, like a GNVQ or a foundation degree or something. I'm looking to get into coding and while I'm quite knowlegable in IT, holding a Level 3 qualification in System Support (Whos name I forget at the moment), I would like to get into programming, but am at a loss as where to start. Would a Computer Science qualification work as a jumping off point?   ( ) 08:14, 27 April 2010 (UTC)
I've been unable to access my mail account since switching to a different system at the office.  I've done several rounds of "verify ID - change password - sign in gizmo" clear cache (redo).  All it gets me to is the yahoo home page, which tells me I'm signed in, but when I click on the mail icon I get back into the loop.  I think this is some bug and can't possibly be resolved by a friendly poster at some forum. (Glad if one of our resident wizards could prove me wrong.)  So I was trying to find some contact info for a human being at yahoo mail who could sort this out.  All I found were oodles of links to "helpful" junk about how to use the mail account I can't get into.  The link is called "contact" but should probably be renamed "who do you think you are to try and contact us."  or shorter "no stinking yahoo contact here". :-) 
Any help highly appreciated.   ( ) 08:38, 27 April 2010 (UTC)
I like this biological diagram:  
Does anyone know which software was used to draw this diagram?
Thanks!
Thank you all! How did the author draw the RNA strands? Thanks. --david    Preceding   comment added by   ( ) 15:50, 27 April 2010 (UTC)
Is it possible to send emails from my home computers ip address, for example 1234@80.217.236.213    Preceding   comment added by   ( ) 12:51, 27 April 2010 (UTC)
Hi,
I am currently traveling and use a GPS data logger which can work as a portable storage device  also. It worked all right on the first two days but today I don't see anything on it. The properties show 3 MBs but I don't see any file. But all folders show 0 bytes.  There is an auto-run folder with some sub-folders  but no files.  The GPS data folder is empty. I am afraid I got the thing infected. What could be that 3 MB? My data or the firmware/software pre-installed? Will I lose my  recorded data? I am a bit worried. No efficient anti virus tool available. Use systems in Internet kiosks. I can delete all dat using the GPS function, but I will loose all GPS data.  If I don't delete my future data could also be lost.  What should I do? Can somebody offer some advice to salvage the data?   ( ) 14:24, 27 April 2010 (UTC)
Hi all,
I have a definition list which can be seen at http://geniverse.dev.concord.org/. This list is styled so that the dt is left-aligned and the dd is left aligned. In general, this works fine. However, when my dt is too long and wraps, the dd on the right doesn't respect this and leave whitespace. In otherwords, I would like to see
Instead I see
Here is the styling I'm currently using:
Any idea how to fix the list so that it respects wrapping correctly? (I'll use a table if I really must, but I'd prefer not to.) Thanks! &mdash; Sam   ( ) 15:22, 27 April 2010 (UTC)
How can I allow other people to connect to Polipo running on my computer to use it to have my ip address? The Polipo documentation on the site is too vague    Preceding   comment added by   ( ) 15:51, 27 April 2010 (UTC)
I've posted this question here as I think some software engineering techniques have similarities to this. 
I want to be able to draw on paper informal freehand diagrams that represent the sorts of things that happen in business or organisations. The purpose is to create clarify or design, rather than communicating to others. For example I might have a diagram of the money flows in a supermarket, where the direction of the arrow shows the direction of the money flow. There would be arrows between things like customer, wholesaler, staff, and so on. 
My question: is there any standardised way of expressing more complex or abstract things than the above? For example I might want to show in a diagram "Apply to Organisation A to be issued with Document A. Organisation B will issue Document B only if they recieve Document A. (Your goal is getting Document B)." Or "The Customer will shop at Store X only if they think Item Y will be there. (No direct concrete causal link between item Y and the Customer)". Thanks   ( ) 17:16, 27 April 2010 (UTC)
I want to start uploading videos to YouTube soon, and I'm looking into how I will encode them. Are there any ethical considerations in regards to choosing between Xvid and DivX? --  ( ) 18:20, 27 April 2010 (UTC)
Internet explorer has started saying that websites are unsafe and have certificate errors, like google, facebook, Yahoo, wikipedia and even msn websites
Im using IE 8
OP here