Propaganda cartography in this sense becomes defined by its function. If maps are created for political propaganda measures, it can according to this categorization be identified as cartographic propaganda (Tyner, 1974).
The third basic cartographic tool which may be used subjectively is design and layout. Seeking attention from the reader and an effective conveyance of the message is what the main-objective of design and layout is.
Thrower cites Halford J. Mackinder as an example of applying specific projections to persuade the reader of what he is communicating through the map . Mackinder, arguably one of the more influential, or at least known, academics for the foundation of geopolitics , used a very specific projection to make the American continent appear peripheral on his    heart-land    map-model .   
It is the field of geopolitics in the interwar period in Germany which Boria  argues is a time of great development of    suggestive cartography   . Boria, by understanding the map as an inherent product of power, sees it this genre of maps as dynamic representations of power. He is also careful to emphasize the rise of this cartography preceded that of national-socialist German rule. Similarly Cairo agrees geopolitical cartography and its association with nationalistic symbology precedes the Fascist rise in Germany, and has its roots in the Weimar-republic (Cairo 200?). Herb argues in his book German geographers viewed the lack of skills in map-making as a cause of the devastating effects of the Versailles-treaty for Germany (Herb 1997).
As where Herb, Cairo, and Boria  sees a connection between nationalism and a production of maps, they do not argue for an explicit association between this development in cartography and fascism. Tyner more explicitly sees this period of geopolitical cartography development as a continuous process associated with Nazis and World War II. In her book, she argues the development of propaganda maps are very closely related to the wider machine of propaganda by the Nazis (Tyner 1974). Valuable for this discussion, a categorization of the different types of propaganda maps used by the Nazi-government in Germany is presented. Tyner identifies four different categories of maps, where again it is the function that defines the map. Firstly, maps used to illustrate the condition of Germany as a people and nation is identified, secondarily maps with an aim at the morale of the Allied-side in the war by increased dramatic effects on the threat levels of Germany, mental offensive through maps to keep he U.S. neutral in the war by changing the perception of threats, and lastly, maps as blue-prints of the post-war world.
Jeremy Black points to how post-World War II U.S. would modify projections to create a menacing image of the Soviet Union in terms of a large state, and communism as expanding disproportionately throughout the world. The April 1, 1946, issue of ''Time'' published a map entitled 'Communist Contagion', which focused on the communist threat of the Soviet Union. The strength of the Soviet Union was enhanced by a split-spherical presentation of Europe and Asia, making the Soviet Union seem larger as a result of the break in the centre of the map. Communist expansion was emphasized by presenting the Soviet Union with a vivid red, the color of danger, and by categorizing neighbouring states in terms of the danger of contagion, using the language of disease: states were referred to as quarantined, infected or exposed. More generally, during the Cold War, small-scale maps served to make dangers appear menacing: with Vietnam appearing close to Singapore and Australia; or Afghanistan to the Indian Ocean. (Black 1997; 2008). Similarly, maps illustrating rocket positions used a polar azimuth projection, of course with the North Pole at its centre, giving the map reader a focus of the short distance between the two sides of the Cold War .