I'm a physics undergrad who's starting to appraise his options for a research career, and one field in particular that seemed interesting was molecular electronics. There seems to be elements of both physics and chemistry involved (which I don't mind), but I was wondering if a physics degree would properly prepare me for research in this area. I'm betting that an undergrad program won't matter all that much in the long run anyways, but what should I be looking into for graduate school? Also, while I don't mind chemistry I much prefer physics, so I need to know if such research can be more physics-based than chemistry-based. In other words, will I end up being a chemist or a physicist? Thanks.   ( ) 00:41, 28 April 2010 (UTC)
All I need to know is the definition of a Warm Sector for a lab titled "Frontal Weather."   ( ) 01:26, 28 April 2010 (UTC)
I read the article Si face but I still don't understand how to distinguish a si-face from a re-face. Please explain what they are.    Preceding   comment added by   (       ) 01:46, April 28, 2010
If yes, why are we able to use the cell-phone in them? (I assume that a Faraday cage would block a cell-phone wave). If not, why do they protect against a lightning? One possible answer that comes to my mind is that they are good enough to protect us against a lighting, but not good enough to block the cell-phone. Right?--    11:37, 28 April 2010 (UTC)
Looking at this informative , I was wondering about certain crustaceans (shrimps) that can see the UV spectrum (or animals that can see IR) and what colours they can actually see.  Then I had a random but intriguing thought - if we could see sound, what colour(s) would it be? How/why did the mechanisms of animals adapt to see higher/lower frequency EM and why can't any animal see sound?   ( ) 13:35, 28 April 2010 (UTC)
I've tried everything to improve my dream recall. I kept a dream diary, I interrupted the sleep cycle during rem sleep etc, I followed all the guides for dream recall and none of it works. So I was wondering, are there any scientifically proven methods that improve the recollection of memories from dreams?    ( ) 14:15, 28 April 2010 (UTC)
My son is working through a college report on string theory and asked me for help in understanding some key concepts one of which is "ambient construction".  I consulted the wiki page as I had no idea what it meant. 
I read: "In conformal geometry, the ambient construction refers to a construction of Charles Fefferman and Robin Graham for which a conformal manifold of dimension n is realized (ambiently) as the boundary of a certain Poincare manifold, or alternatively as the celestial sphere of a certain pseudo-Riemannian manifold."
Why Hg22+ is called Mercury(I)?--'''''  is on Wikipedia!''''' 14:36, 28 April 2010 (UTC)
Since the mercury ion contains two atoms and has a total charge of 2+, each atom has a charge of 1+, making it mercury(i).--  ( ) 19:21, 28 April 2010 (UTC)
I must be knowing any effect or dangers that would be coming if someone (not being me!) were to be ingesting 5 heroin filled game rabbits. please be helping. This is urgent!    Preceding   comment added by   (       ) 16:02, 28 April 2010 (UTC)
The new British moth is named after its discoverer. I thought he was supposed to name it after something other than himself, according to conventions.   ( ) 17:33, 28 April 2010 (UTC)
If One could efficiently (100%) convert mass to energy and v.v., how much mass could you get out of the energy stored in a AA battery?  How much mass could a 1GW nuclear reactor produce in an hour?    ( ) 19:37, 28 April 2010 (UTC)
Some of my colleagues of a similar age still shout "phwar" when a teenage girl walks past our window. I find I'm thinking "she's younger than my daughter" and only feeling fatherly thoughts. One guy said "what would you like to do if you had a night out with her" when one walked past. Of course I said "cor just imagine", but I was really thinking that if I would probably just treat her like my daughter and take her to the Pizza hut and talk about how her careers going! Is this normal for someone in their early fifties?    Preceding   comment added by   ( ) 20:07, 28 April 2010 (UTC)
Is the OP aware that his expletive "cor" is derived from "cor blimy", itself derived from "God blind me (if I tell a lie)"? This list can help linguistically challenged Americans.  ( ) 10:00, 29 April 2010 (UTC)
Can chromates be formed by reaction of chromium(III) oxide with a hypochlorite. When I react a chemical (formed by the neutralization using ammonia of Nichrome previously dissolved in acid) with sodium hypochlorite, a yellow solution is formed. How could you tell whether it was iron(III) chloride or sodium chromate? I duplicated this reaction with a chromium-containing stainless steel screw and it formed the yellow color too. --  ( ) 20:41, 28 April 2010 (UTC)
Iron(III) is a major Lewis acid (in addition to being an oxidant). I don't know as much tests but I am sure there are plenty. Cr(VI) prefers to oxidise over any Lewis acid ability, I think. Also Fe3+ forms many insoluble complexes ... whereas I believe Cr(VI) compounds tend to be more water-soluble.   ( ) 22:29, 28 April 2010 (UTC)
Btw, Iron(III) chromate forms an insoluble salt. If you didn't observe this, well you probably don't have both ions in there. I would test with some copper (II) chloride (will precipitate copper chromate), sodium sulfide (will precipitate FeS), etc. Your reaction might have just worked because iron(III) hydroxide is very insoluble in water.   ( ) 22:45, 28 April 2010 (UTC)
Adding a source of phosphate will also precipitate any Fe(III). (Try not to add it in the form of phosphoric acid...monoprotonated or free phosphate is preferred...)   ( ) 22:51, 28 April 2010 (UTC)
I did react it with ascorbic acid, a reducing agent, and the color faded, but the Fe(III) could have been reduced too. I wonder if alkali would work. --  ( ) 12:53, 29 April 2010 (UTC)
Recently a large quantity of "river rocks" have been imported to our area to be used in landscaoing. These rocks came from somewhere in Arizona. The rocks appear to be of great variety. some are granite some basesalt etc. They vary in size from one inch to one foot. A few of them are almost perfectly round, but the top and bottom are slightly and equally convex.  They are, of course, smoothed by errosion. I do not think, however, that errosion alone explaims there near perfect symmetry.  I suspect that they were magma which was blowen into the air by a volcano. As they spun in the air they would have developed into a ball shape. When they struck the ground they would have been flattened like a pancake. But if such were true, one would expect one side to be flatter than the other side. Such is not the case. Can some one explain to me the origin of these beautiful rocks?   Thanks, wsc   Preceding   comment added by   ( ) 23:04, 28 April 2010 
Is ghost really exist?  ( ) 23:38, 28 April 2010 (UTC)
I disagree, just because science has not proven something yet, does not mean it is untrue.  Also, if one has experienced paranormal activity, one is more likely to beleive, even if it cant be explained by science yet.  Auschwitz is a good example, there is a presence there that cannot be explained by science.  But it is there, and for obvious reasons.    Preceding   comment added by   ( ) 13:13, 29 April 2010 (UTC)