He graduated from Pleasantville High School in Pleasantville, New York in 1998, where he played quarterback for the school's football team. He briefly attended Syracuse University before dropping out to pursue acting in Los Angeles.
He is best known for his role as Brady Black on ''Days of our Lives''.  He played Brady from August 2000 until his final appearance on September 16, 2005, when Brady, along with his onscreen girlfriend Chloe Lane, married and departed for Europe.
In 2003, Lowder was nominated for a Daytime Emmy Award ("Outstanding Younger Actor in a Drama Series") for his role as Brady.
Lowder appeared in ''Friends'' as himself in the 2003 episode "The One with the Soap Opera Party".
Lowder took over the role of Rick Forrester on ''The Bold and the Beautiful'' in January 2007, replacing Justin Torkildsen, who after departing in 2004, appeared as a recurring character until 2006. Lowder is the 4th actor to play Rick. 
When Lowder's Rick returned to Forrester Creations from Paris he had a secret - while in Paris he had an affair with an older woman - Ashley Abbot, Forrester's current perfume maker.
Since his arrival as Rick Forrester, the character has become transformed from being a precocious young man to an adult. The character since returning from Paris has become antagonistic towards Ridge Forrester. He has frequently stated that Ridge is not a worthy husband to Rick's mother Brooke; he has dated Ridge's teenage daughter Phoebe Forrester but they had to break up after Ridge attacked him while on a trip to Australia. After that he started dating Phoebe's mother and Ridge's ex-wife Taylor Forrester who used him and only dated him to anger Brooke. After that revelation Rick and Taylor broke off their engagement. Rick and Ridge then fought over Rick's scheme to seduce Ridge's second daughter Steffy Forrester played by Jacqueline MacInnes Wood. After a heated argument on the Forrester Creations roof, Ridge pushed Rick off the building and Rick was paralyzed for a while, but kept faking his paralysis even after he was cured in order to keep Ridge and Brooke apart. Two attempts have been made on Ricks life including setting the Forrester beach house on fire and setting a bomb to his car. Both of which Rick believed to have been engineered by his stepfather Ridge Forrester but it has been revealed that Thomas Forrester was responsible for both events. 
Kyle also has studied classical voice and has a wonderful baritone singing voice.  He has sung on several episodes of B&B, and can be seen on You Tube singing the National Anthem at a Dodgers game.
Lowder left B&B in January 2011 to focus on the release of his debut CD. It charted at #3 on iTunes in the Classical Crossover category.
On August 3, 2002 he married his ''Days of our Lives'' co-star Arianne Zucker. The couple originally announced their separation in August 2007 but reconciled in February 2008.
In June 2009, the couple announced that they were expecting their first child. Their daughter Isabella was born on December 7, 2009.