The '''foreign policy of Mahmoud Ahmadinejad''' is the policy initiatives towards other states by the current President of Iran, as different from past, or future, Iranian foreign policy. Ahmadinejad's tenure as President came at a time of greater conflict, rhetorical or physical, than his predecessors. In following this there were various measures, external or internal, that led to his policy changes. This was primarily a division between relations with states of the western world (led by the United States) and the rest of the world (countries such as Venezuela and the Arab countries of Lebanon and Palestine).
In a break with the old regime, the face of the Islamic Republic in the west was changed early in Ahmadinejad's administration via the return to Iran of "virtually the entire corps of ambassadors based in the West"&nbsp;    diplomats who were experienced but also quite reform-minded.
During Ahmadinejad's presidency, Iran and the US have had the most high-profile contact in almost 30 years. Iran and the US froze diplomatic relations in 1980 and had no direct diplomatic contact until May 2007.
 reiterating Muammar al-Gaddafi's 1990 statement. The U.S. has sent signals to Iran that its posturing against Israel's right to exist is unacceptable in their opinion, leading to increased speculation of a U.S. led attack on Iran's nuclear facilities. Even though Iran has denied involvement in Iraq, then-President Bush warned of "consequences," sending a clear message to Iran that the U.S may take military action against it. The Bush administration considered Iran to be the world's leading state supporter of terrorism. Iran has been on the U.S. list of state sponsors of international terrorism since 1984, a claim that Iran and Ahmadinejad have denied.
On 8 May 2006, Ahmadinejad sent a personal letter to then-President Bush to propose "new ways" to end Iran's nuclear dispute. U.S. Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice and National Security Adviser Stephen Hadley both reviewed the letter and dismissed it as a negotiating ploy and publicity stunt that did not address U.S. concerns about Iran's nuclear program.Vick, Karl.  The Washington Post. Retrieved 29-10-2006. A few days later at a meeting in Jakarta, Ahmadinejad said, "the letter was an invitation to monotheism and justice, which are common to all divine prophets." Islamic Republic News Agency. Retrieved 29-10-2006. 
In 2006, Ahmadinejad also challenged George W. Bush to a live tv-debate about world affairs and ways to solve those issues. George W. Bush turned down this offer.
Ahmadinejad invited Bush to a debate at the United Nations General Assembly, which was to take place on 19 September 2006. The debate was to be about Iran's right to enrich uranium. The invitation was rejected by White House spokesman Tony Snow, who said "There's not going to be a steel-cage grudge match between the President and Ahmadinejad."
On November 2006, Ahmadinejad wrote an open letter to the American people, representing some of his anxieties and concerns. He stated that there is an urgency to have a dialog because of the activities of the US administration in the Middle East, and that the US is concealing the truth about current realities.
The United States Senate passed a resolution warning Iran about attacks in Iraq. On 26 September 2007, the United States Senate passed a resolution 76   22 and labeled an arm of the Iranian military as a terrorist organization.
In September 2007 Ahmadinejad visited New York to address the General Assembly of the United Nations. On the same trip, Columbia University invited Ahmadinejad to visit and participate in a debate. The invitation was a controversial one for the university, as was university president Lee Bollinger's introduction in which he described the Iranian leader as a "cruel and petty dictator" and his views as "astonishingly uneducated;" and for Ahmadinejad's statement in answer to a question&nbsp;    "We don't have homosexuals like in your country. We don't have that in our country. We don't have this phenomenon; I don't know who's told you we have it"&nbsp;    which prompted laughter and booing from the audience.
In a speech given in April 2008, Ahmadinejad described the September 11, 2001 attacks as a "suspect event." He minimized the attacks by saying all that had happened was, "a building collapsed." He claimed that the death toll was never published, that the victims' names were never published, and that the attacks were used subsequently as pretext for the invasions of Afghanistan and Iraq.
In October 2008, President Ahmadinejad expressed his happiness of 2008 global economic crisis and what he called "collapse of liberalism". He said the West has been driven to deadend and that Iran was proud "to put an end to liberal economy". Ahmadinejad used a September 2008 speech to the General Assembly of the United Nations to assert the American empire is soon going to end without specifying how. "The American empire in the world is reaching the end of its road, and its next rulers must limit their interference to their own borders," Ahmadinejad said.
On November 6, 2008 (two days after the 2008 US Presidential Election), President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad congratulated Barack Obama, the newly elected President of the United States, and said that he "Welcomes basic and fair changes in U.S. policies and conducts, I hope you will prefer real public interests and justice to the never-ending demands of a selfish minority and seize the opportunity to serve people so that you will be remembered with high esteem". It is the first congratulatory message to a new elected President of the United States by an Iranian President since the 1979 Iranian Hostage Crisis.
Since Ahmadinejad came to power Iran has stopped selling its oil in dollars, instead selling it in euros and other currencies in the Iranian oil bourse.
Immediately after the Islamic Revolution, Iran's relations with most of its neighbors, particularly those with large Shi'a  minorities, were severely strained.Abdel-Mageed, Dina . Retrieved 26-01-2008. Ahmadinejad's priority in the region has been to improve ties with most of Iran's neighbors in order to strengthen Iran's status and influence in both the Middle East and Greater Muslim World.
Turkey has always been important in the region due to its ties to the West through NATO, Israel, and its candidate status in the European Union. Ahmadinejad visited Ankara to reinforce relations with Turkey immediately after the 2007 NIE report was released. Relations were briefly strained after President Abdullah Gul had stated that he wants the atomic threat to be eliminated from the region, perhaps a hint to Iran; however, business has remained cordial between the two countries. Reuters. Retrieved 26-01-2008. Despite US disapproval, they signed a multi-billion dollar gas pipeline deal in late 2007. Reuters. Retrieved 26-01-2008.
Iran's relations with the Arab states have been complex, partly due to the Islamic Revolution of decades ago, as well as more recent efforts by the United States to establish a united front against Iran over the nuclear issue and War on Terror. Ahmadinejad has sought reconciliation with the Arab states by encouraging bilateral trade and posturing for Iranian entry into the Gulf Cooperation Council. Outside the Persian Gulf, Ahmadinejad has sought to reestablish relations with other major Arab states, most notably Egypt.. Retrieved 26-01-2008. As of 2007, Iran did not have an open embassy there.
Iran's ties to Syria have been most notable in the West. Both nations have had to deal with international and regional isolation. Both have cordial ties to the militant group, Hezbollah, Associated Press. Retrieved 26-01-2008. and concerns over Iran-Syria relations were further exacerbated following the 2006 Lebanon War, Asia Times. Retrieved 26-01-2008. which both Ahmadinejad and President Assad claimed as a victory over Israel.
 In particular, Ahmadinejad is interested in more bilateral talks between Iran and both Afghanistan and Pakistan. His administration has helped establish the "peace pipeline" from Iran that will eventually fuel both Pakistan and India. In theory, the plan will help to integrate South Asian economies, and, thus to calm tensions between Pakistan and India.
 Mammadyarov also expressed desire to expand the North-South corridor between Iran and Azerbaijan and to launch cooperative projects for power plant construction. Iran has also redoubled efforts to forge ties with Armenia; during Ahmadinejad's visit in October 2007 the discussions were focused on developing energy ties between the two countries.
Ahmadinejad has been a consistent supporter of Lebanon vis-a-vis Israel, and has supported Hezbollah's right of resistance.
Ahmadinejad planned to visit Lebanon in October 2010, after his trip was previously delayed. The visit came amidst concern from the United States, Israel, and a section of the March 14 alliance such as Samir Geagea. The ''Jerusalem Post'' said that during a visit to the south, Ahmadinejad planned to throw rocks across the border "to demonstrate his hatred" towards Israel.
 Other ministers and a former minister also hailed the visit.
Due to the similar culture and language Iran has with Afghanistan, the two countries have historically been close and, even though the US has a military presence in Afghanistan, President Hamid Karzai of Afghanistan maintains he wants Iran to be one of its closest allies.
Ahmadinejad was the first Iranian president to visit Iraq. Ahmadinejad, in Baghdad 2 March 2008 for the start of a historic two-day trip, said that "visiting Iraq without the dictator Saddam Hussein is a good thing." Heading home after a two-day visit to Iraq, Ahmadinejad again touted his country's closer relations with Iraq and reiterated his criticism of the United States.
During his tenure relations with neighbours to the north and west were increased as well. Despite Iran being the second largest producer of natural gas, a deal was signed between the two state companies to import Azeri gas to Iran. In an effort to build support around Iran in the face of increasingly heated rhetoric the two countries also signed a security agreement to deal with "such diverse subjects as border security, the war on drugs, organized crime and human trafficking, and the extradition of criminals." The Iranian Interior Minister said "The security of Azerbaijan is the security of Iran and the security of Iran is the security of Azerbaijan. We have no limitation for transferring experiences and training Azerbaijan's forces." Adding that the threat from elsewhere was such that "Aliens do not want to see friendship among the regional states and seek to sow discord among nations through various issues." In like measure, Azerbaijani Defense Minister, Safar Abiyev, "No threat will be made against Iran from Azerbaijan's territory and we will not help the enemies of the Islamic Republic of Iran under any circumstances."
Iran's ties with Turkey, particularly after the rise of the Justice and Development Party led by Recep Tayyip Erdogan were enhanced. Prime minister Erdogan said regarding the nuclear crisis in the Middle East: "Countries with nuclear weapons are not in a position to turn to another country and say: 'You are not supposed to produce nuclear weapons. Iran has consistently spoken of the fact that it is seeking to use nuclear energy for civilian purposes and that they are using uranium enrichment programmes for civilian purposes only. That is what Mr Ahmadinejad has told me many times before." Erdogan's good personal relationship with Ahmedinejad was used to increase commercial ties as well as bring Iranian hydrocarbons to European markets. Erdogan also claimed Iran sought Turkey's help in reaching out to the United States. He made common cause with the Iranians over the issue of PKK and Iranian Kurdish rebels of PJAK afflicting both countries, while condemning Iraq's refusal to hand over Kurdish suspects, as well as lauding Iran's willingness to share information on the matter.
Ahmadinejad has moved to strengthen relations with Iran's northern neighbor Russia, setting up an office expressly dedicated to the purpose in October 2005. He has worked with Vladimir Putin on the nuclear issue, and both Putin and Ahmadinejad have expressed a desire for more mutual cooperation on issues involving the Caspian Sea. More recently, Iran has been increasingly pushed into an alliance with Moscow due to the controversy over Iran's nuclear program. By late December 2007, Russia began to deliver enriched batches of nuclear fuel to Iran as a way of persuading Iran to end self-enrichment.
On 26 October 2005 Ahmadinejad gave a speech at a conference in Tehran entitled "World Without Zionism". According to widely published translations, he agreed with a statement he attributed to Ayatollah Khomeini that the "occupying regime" had to be removed, and referred to it as a "disgraceful stain  the Islamic world", that needed to be "wiped from the pages of history."*. CNN. Accessed 27-09-2007.
Ahmadinejad's comments were condemned by major Western governments, the European Union, Russia, the United Nations Security Council and then UN Secretary General Kofi Annan.
The translation of his statement has been disputed. Iran's foreign minister stated that Ahmadinejad had been "misunderstood": "He is talking about the regime. We do not recognise legally this regime."
Dr. Joshua Teitelbaum, an Israel-based professor with ties to AIPAC, in a paper for the Jerusalem Center for Public Affairs, examined the language that President Ahmadinejad has used when discussing Israel. Using Persian translations from Dr. Denis MacEoin, a former lecturer in Islamic studies in the United Kingdom, Teitelbaum wrote that "the Iranian president was not just calling for    regime change    in Jerusalem, but rather the actual physical destruction of the State of Israel," and asserted that Ahmadinejad was advocating the genocide of its residents as well. Teitelbaum said that in a speech given on 26 October 2005, Ahmadinejad said the following about Israel: "Soon this stain of disgrace will be cleaned from the garment of the world of Islam, and this is attainable." Teitelbaum said that this type of dehumanizing rhetoric is a documented prelude to genocide incitement. Dr. Juan Cole, a professor of modern Middle Eastern and South Asian history at the University of Michigan, has argued that Ahmadinejad was not calling for the destruction of Israel,    Ahmadinejad did not say he was going to wipe Israel off the map because no such idiom exists in Persian.    Dr. Stephen Walt, a professor of international affairs at Harvard University has said    I don   t think he is inciting to genocide."  According to Gawdat Bahgat of the National Defense University, "the fiery calls to destroy Israel are meant to mobilize domestic and regional constituencies" and that "Rhetoric aside, most analysts agree that the Islamic Republic and the Jewish state are not likely to engage in a military confrontation against each other."
In July 2006, Ahmadinejad compared Israel's actions in the 2006 Israel-Lebanon conflict to Adolf Hitler's actions during World War II saying that "like Hitler, the Zionist regime is just looking for a pretext for launching military attacks" and "is now acting just like him." On 8 August 2006, he gave a television interview to Mike Wallace, a correspondent for 60 Minutes, in which he questioned American support of Israel's "murderous regime" and the moral grounds for Israel's invasion of Lebanon. On 2 December 2006, Ahmadinejad met with Palestinian Prime Minister Ismail Haniyah in Doha, Qatar.  At that meeting, he said that Israel "was created to establish dominion of arrogant states over the region and to enable the enemy to penetrate the heart Muslim land."  He called Israel a "threat" and said it was created to create tensions in and impose US and UK policies upon the region.
When CNN's Larry King asked Ahmadinejad "does Israel remain Israel" in his version of the Middle East, Ahmadinejad suggested that throughout the Palestinian territories free elections for all be conducted under the supervision of international organizations. Ahmadinejad suggested that "..we must allow free elections to happen in Palestine under the supervision of the United Nations. And the Palestinian people, the displaced Palestinian people, or whoever considers Palestine its land, can participate in free elections. And then whatever happens as a result could happen."
While speaking at a gathering of foreign guests marking the 19th anniversary of the death of Iran's late revolutionary leader, Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, the official IRNA news agency quoted Ahmadinejad as stating that
Alternatively, the Iranian presidential website quotes Ahmadinejad as saying "O dear Imam (Khomeini)! You said the Zionist Regime that is a usurper and illegitimate regime and a cancerous tumor should be wiped off the map. I should say that your illuminating remark and cause is going to come true today. The Zionist Regime has lost its existence philosophy... the Zionist regime faces a complete deadend and under God's grace your wish will soon be materialized and the corrupt element will be wiped off the map." http://www.president.ir/en/?ArtID=10114
As one of the countries in the Latin American "pink tide," Bolivia consolidated relations with Iran during Ahmadinejad's presidency. Bolivian President Evo Morales visited Iran in 2010, where, together with the Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, he said there was a need to "strengthen the resistance front formed by independent and freedom-seeking nations to fight against imperialism and global hegemony."http://www.presstv.ir/detail/148405.html
Brazilian president Lula and Ahmadinejad have talked off their "personal relationship" that helped to boost ties between Brazil and Iran. Ahmadinejad first visited Brazil on a Latin American tour that took him to Venezuela and Bolivia, while Lula was involved in a landmark breakthrough in getting uranium produced in Iran to Turkey to be enriched and avoid another round of sanctions,. Lula's effort was not seen likely to solve the problem by the U.S. Foreign Minister, Clinton.
 Venezuela voted in favor of Iran's nuclear program before the United Nations, and both governments have sought to develop more bilateral trade. As of 2006, the ties between the two countries are strategic rather than economic; Venezuela is still not one of Iran's major trading partners.
During a 2010 visit to Iran, Chavez and Ahmadinejad signalled an intention to establish a "new world order."
Ahmadinejad also visited Nicaragua for the inauguration of Daniel Ortega in January 2008, where he signed multi-million dollar deals to fund infrastructure projects. He did the same in Bolivia for Evo Morales. While, he has solidified ties with Ecuador to the point that President Rafael Correa said his country was "punished for ties with Iran."
On September 23, 2009, Ahmadinejad gave a speech to the UN General Assembly which focused on accusing Western powers of spreading "war, bloodshed, aggression, terror and intimidation" in the Middle East and Afghanistan. He also promised that Tehran was "prepared to warmly shake all those hands which are honestly extended to us". But he accused the West of hypocrisy&nbsp;    saying it preached democracy yet violated its fundamental principles&nbsp;    and added that it was time for the world to respond.
He also spoke out against Israel for its "barbaric" attack on the Gaza Strip, "inhuman policies" in the Palestinian territories and what he called its domination of world political and economic affairs.the end of which focused largely on the plight of the people of Palestine and a blaming of Israel, though without mentioning the nation or Jews, referring only to "the occupiers" and "the Zionist regime".
During the opening session of the 65th General Assembly of the United Nations in New York City, Ahmadinejad gave three plausible theories about the September 11 attacks.
His evidence was "a few passports found in the huge volume of rubble and a video of an individual whose place of domicile was unknown but it was announced that he had been involved in oil deals with some American officials. It was also covered up and said that due to the explosion and fire no trace of the suicide attackers was found." Then he asked:
Consequently he proposed an independent UN fact-finding commission. The allegations was met with a walkout by the US, Canada, Israel and the 27-member EU bloc.
  This phrase is an English idiomatic expression which implies physical destruction. Juan Cole, a University of Michigan Professor of Modern Middle East and South Asian History, believes Ahmadinejad's statement was inaccurately translated; Cole says that a more accurate translation would be:
Despite these differences, Ethan Bronner does agree with Professor Cole that Ahmadinejad did not use the word "Israel" (but rather "regime over Jerusalem") and also did not use the word "map" (but rather "page(s) of time").  Emphasizing these points of agreement, Jonathon Steele from the Guardian concludes that "experts confirm that Iran's president did not call for Israel to be 'wiped off the map'".  Furthermore, Steele cites a source at the BBC, as well as the Middle East Media Research Institute (MEMRI), supporting the following translation:
While this translation is quite similar to Professor Cole's version, it does use the word "eliminated" rather than "vanish", which is consistent with Bronner's suggestion that an "active" verb would more accurately reflect the original Persian.
The official website of Mahmoud Ahmadinejad translates the phrase as "wiped off the map," Reuters translates that speech as "will soon disappear off the geographical scene" 
On 14 December 2005, Ahmadinejad made several controversial statements about the Holocaust, repeatedly referring to it as a "myth," as well as criticizing European laws against Holocaust denial. According to a report from Islamic Republic of Iran Broadcasting, Ahmadinejad said, referring to Europeans, "Today, they have created a myth in the name of Holocaust and consider it to be above God, religion and the prophets." The quote has also been translated as "They have created a myth today that they call the massacre of Jews and they consider it a principle above God, religions and the prophets."
In a 30 May 2006 interview with ''Der Spiegel'', Ahmadinejad insisted there were "two opinions" on the Holocaust. When asked if the Holocaust was a myth, he responded "I will only accept something as truth if I am actually convinced of it." He also said, "We are of the opinion that, if a historical occurrence conforms to the truth, this truth will be revealed all the more clearly if there is more research into it and more discussion about it". He then argued that "most" scholars who recognized the existence of the Holocaust are "politically motivated," stating that:
In August 2006, the Iranian leader was reported to have again cast doubt on the existence of the Holocaust, this time in a letter to German Chancellor Angela Merkel, where he wrote that the Holocaust may have been invented by the Allied powers to embarrass Germany. During the same month, in a public speech that aired on the Iranian News Channel (IRINN), Ahmadinejad reportedly implied that Zionists may not be human beings, saying    They have no boundaries, limits, or taboos when it comes to killing human beings. Who are they? Where did they come from? Are they human beings?    They are like cattle, nay, more misguided.      
On 11 December 2006 the "International Conference to Review the Global Vision of the Holocaust" was held in Iran. The conference was called for by and held at the request of Ahmadinejad. Western media widely condemned the conference and described it as a "Holocaust denial conference" or a "meeting of Holocaust deniers",
In his September 2007 appearance at Columbia University, Ahmadinejad stated "I'm not saying that it didn't happen at all. This is not judgment that I'm passing here"
At the 18 September 2009 Quds Day ceremonies in Tehran, he stated that "the pretext for establishing the Zionist regime is a lie, a lie which relies on an unreliable claim, a mythical claim, (as) the occupation of Palestine has nothing to do with the Holocaust". He also referred to the Holocaust as a sealed "black box" asking why western powers refuse permission for the claim to be "examined and surveyed," a statement which was immediately condemned by the US, UK, French and German governments. Widely interpreted as referring to the Holocaust, the media have been criticized for lack of objectivity by reporting the quote without context as it could equally be interpreted as referring to Israel's Biblical claims to the land of Palestine. Baltimore Chronicle September 19, 2009
In response to some of Ahmadinejad's controversial statements, the U.S. Senate, accused Ahmadinejad of anti-Semitism. Ahmadinejad's September 2008 speech to the UN General Assembly, in which he dwelled on what he described as Zionist control of international finance, was also denounced as "blatant anti-Semitism" by German Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier.
American President Barack Obama posed a direct challenge to Ahmadinejad during his June 2009 visit to Buchenwald concentration camp, saying that Ahmadinejad "should make his own visit" to the camp and that "his place is the ultimate rebuke to such thoughts, a reminder of our duty to confront those who would tell lies about our history".
In October 2008, Ahmadinejad's statements on the Holocaust were criticized within Iran by cleric and presidential hopeful Mahdi Karroubi.
Khamenei's main adviser in foreign policy, Ali Akbar Velayati, refused to take part in Ahmadinejad's Holocaust conference. In contrast to Ahmadinejad's remarks, Velayati said that the Holocaust was a genocide and a historical reality.
Ahmadinejad has denied accusations of Holocaust denial, and has stated that he is simply highlighting the issue of free speech and the right to research. "If the Europeans are telling the truth in their claim that they have killed six million Jews in the Holocaust during the World War II&nbsp;    which seems they are right in their claim because they insist on it and arrest and imprison those who oppose it, why the Palestinian nation should pay for the crime. Why have they come to the very heart of the Islamic world and are committing crimes against the dear Palestine using their bombs, rockets, missiles and sanctions.
Ahmadinejad has said he respects Jews and that "in Palestine there are Muslims, Christians and Jews who live together". He added, "We love everyone in the world&nbsp;    Jews, Christians, Muslims, non-Muslims, non-Jews, non-Christians... We are against occupation, aggression, killings and displacing people&nbsp;    otherwise we have no problem with ordinary people."
 Dossa was criticized in Canadian media, by university president Sean Riley, and by 105 professors at his university for his attendance at Tehran's Holocaust conference. Dossa replied he did not know Holocaust deniers would be in attendance, that he has "never denied the Holocaust, only noted its propaganda power", and that the university should respect his academic freedom to participate.