In his "A New Beginning" speech on June 4, 2009, at Cairo University in Cairo, Egypt, President of the United States Barack Obama announced that "I will host a Summit on Entrepreneurship this year to identify how we can deepen ties between business leaders, foundations and social entrepreneurs in the United States and Muslim communities around the world." The '''Presidential Summit on Entrepreneurship''', held in Washington, D.C., on Monday April 26, and Tuesday, April 27, 2010, at the Ronald Reagan Building, followed through on President Obama   s commitment by highlighting the importance of social and economic entrepreneurship, and strengthening mutually-beneficial relationships with entrepreneurs in Muslim-majority countries and Muslim communities around the world.
Participants were selected from around the world to represent their home countries, regions, and sectors at the summit. They hailed from over fifty countries on five continents and include successful entrepreneurs, investors, academics, and leaders of entrepreneurship networks, non-profit organizations, foundations, and businesses who are invested in promoting entrepreneurship.
Participants hailed from: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Australia, Austria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Brazil, Brunei, Cameroon, Canada, China, Denmark, Djibouti, Egypt, Finland, France, Gambia, Germany, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Israel, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kosovo, Kuwait, Kyrgyz, Lebanon, Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Mauritania, Morocco, Netherlands, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, the Palestinian Territories, Paraguay, the Philippines, Qatar, Russia, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Spain, Sweden, Syria, Tajikistan, Tunisia, Turkey, UAE, Uganda, United Kingdom, the United States, and Yemen.
Below are videos of briefings and remarks of participants in the Presidential Summit on Entrepreneurship, Washington, DC, April 26   27, 2010.
A town hall hosted by the U.S. Department of State on April 28 also featured remarks by Special Representative to Muslim Communities Farah Pandith and Special Envoy to the Organization of the Islamic Conference Rashad Hussain, as well as E-Summit delegate Asim Siddiqui, a community organizer from the UK. A panel discussion on cultivating grassroots partnerships followed, including Shelly Porges from the Bureau of Economic, Energy and Business Affairs, Rob Lalka from the Global Partnership Initiative, and Ari Alexander from USAID   s Center for Faith-Based and Community Initiatives:
In addition to the official events for the Presidential Summit, over thirty partner organizations invited participants to outside events, highlighting how the President and the US Government have helped catalyze a long-term, sustainable conversation on entrepreneurship. During recent months, the State Department coordinated with outside organizations on these related but independent events.
Events during the week of the Summit on Entrepreneurship included:
In addition, the US Government hosted special events for delegates, including briefings on business development by the US Small Business Administration, an economic support roundtable at the US Trade and Development Agency, and a reception hosted by the State Department for delegates with the Ambassadors to the United States from delegates    home countries.
The US Government released an interactive Google map with detailed information on each of these events, which was embedded on the websites http://www.state.gov/entrepreneurshipsummit/ and http://www.entrepreneurship.gov/summit/ and is available at http://maps.google.com/maps/ms?hl=en&gl=us&ie=UTF8&oe=UTF8&msa=0&msid=101425100571760103462.000483f33a9087a901671&ll=38.901187,-77.057676&spn=0.033665,0.109863&z=14
Several overseas institutions and partners have expressed an interest in hosting Follow-on Conferences to continue to advance the mission of the Entrepreneurship Summit beyond the April 26 and 27 Presidential Summit in Washington. These Follow-on Conferences will be locally or regionally focused and may focus on a specific element of advancing entrepreneurship (e.g. youth entrepreneurship, access to capital, etc.) We have told these partners that we want to be supportive of these events and acknowledge them at the Summit. We have said that we would attempt to have an appropriate USG official attend, but that we would not play any role in organizing them and would not expect to provide any funding assistance.
These Conferences have been initiated by partners who are heeding the President   s call to shared action and responsibility. Through their initiative, they will help to advance what the United States and its partners on the Presidential Summit on Entrepreneurship have started. We have received Statements of Intent for the following Follow-on Conferences:
Prime Minister of Turkey Recep Tayyip Erdogan sent a letter to Obama with Deulcom International's CEO Baybars Altuntas during the summit, proposing to hold the next Entrepreneurship Summit in Istanbul. During his remarks, President Obama embraced the proposal and stated that "Together, we   ve sparked a new era of entrepreneurship -- with events all over Washington this week, and upcoming regional conferences around the world. Tonight, I am pleased to announce that Prime Minister Erdogan has agreed to host the next Entrepreneurship Summit next year in Turkey. And so I thank the Prime Minister and the people and private sector leaders of Turkey for helping to sustain the momentum that we will unleash this week." 