Unlike most downtown areas in major cities, downtown Bakersfield does not have a towering skyline, although it has a few tall buildings such as the Bank of America Building (10 stories), the Bakersfield Marriott Hotel (9 stories), and the Padre Hotel (9 stories).
Bakersfield has always had some districts located downtown. Recently, as part of a redevelopment effort, others are being created.
Although structures representing the center of government, such as city hall and the court house are located there, growth has resulted in many services being moved to other places throughout the city. Also, many state and federal services are also placed in locations outside of the civic center.
Civic center has also become one of Bakersfield   s sport centers. The Rabobank Arena (formerly known as the Centennial Garden), is a large indoor multipurpose arena. McMurtrey Aquatic Center houses a 50 meter competition swimming and diving pool. There is also the Bakersfield Ice Sports Center, an indoor ice rink used for junior and adult league hockey and recreation.
Civic center also houses the Rabobank Theater and Convention Center (formerly known as the Civic Auditorium). This is the largest theater and convention facility in the city. It is also conveniently located next to the Marriott convention hotel.
A major attraction in the area is the Bakersfield Museum of Art. The Beale Memorial Library, which is the headquarters for the Kern County Library System, is also located in the district. Another important structure is the Amtrak station, which is Bakersfield   s rail link to the San Joaquin Valley.
The following are neighborhoods and districts which are near downtown. Some people consider them apart of downtown.
Formerly named Pierce Rd, it was renamed Buck Owens Boulevard in 1998 after country music legend Buck Owens. This area is located next to Highway 99, between Rosedale Highway/24th Street in Bakersfield, and Airport Drive in Oildale. It is the heart of the Bakersfield's Country Music scene. The main attractions are the Bakersfield Sign (formerly located at intersection of California and Union Ave.) and the Buck Owens Crystal Palace night club, museum, and restaurant. It is also located near Beach Park.
The '''Westchester''' neighborhood is just west of Downtown Bakersfield, although some people consider it part of downtown. It is bounded by the Kern River, F St, BNSF railroad yard and state route 99 (or Oak St). Westchester is a mostly residential neighborhood. The neighborhood is known for large shady trees and historic homes built between the 1900s and 1960s. Main points of interest include the Kern County Museum (with the Beale Memorial Clock Tower), and Sam Lynn Ballpark.
Being located in the heart of Bakersfield, getting to and from downtown is relatively easy. State route 178 freeway ends at the eastern edge, and provides connection to the northeast. State route 99 is approximately 1/2 miles west, and provides north/south connection to the rest of the city. Golden State Ave (state route 204), as a freeway ends at the north edge of downtown, and provides access to the northwest.
Downtown also is the primary hub for all modes of intracity and intercity transportation, except air travel. Golden Empire Transit (GET) provides transportation to Greater Bakersfield from the downtown transit center. Kern Regional Transit provides intercity transportation from GET downtown transit center or Amtrak station. Amtrak provides rail connection to the San Joaquin Valley north of Bakersfield, and several bus routes to points west, south and east of the city (with tickets that travel by train at least once).
Although traveling to downtown is relatively easy by car, traveling through it is more difficult. Since SR 178 freeway and Golden State Ave. (SR 204 freeway) stop at the edge of downtown, cars must travel on surface streets to connect to additional freeways. This has created heavy traffic on major connecting arterial roads, especially on 23rd/24th St. (one way in each direction). This is especially a problem for cars traveling from the northeast to the southwest, since 23rd/24th St. is the most direct route between those two points.