The film begins with an elderly inmate named Willie Long (Obba Babatunde) at the burial of his two friends who have just recently perished in a fire in the prison's infirmary. He begins to tell two young men (Heavy D and Bonz Malone) who are inmates at the prison their story.
Ray Gibson (Eddie Murphy) and Claude Banks (Martin Lawrence) are two New Yorkers in 1932 from different worlds. Ray is a small-time hustler and Claude has just been accepted for a job as a bank teller, trying to make something of himself. They are both at a club called Spanky's when Ray picks Claude as his mark to pick-pocket. Later they both end up in debt to the club's owner, a loan shark named "Spanky" (Rick James). Ray arranges to have himself and Claude do some boot-legging in order to pay off their debt.
They head down south from New York in order to buy a carload of Mississippi 'hooch'. Unfortunately, before they can get back to New York, a man named Winston Hancock (Clarence Williams III), who swindles Ray in a card game, is murdered outside of a juke joint. Through a misunderstanding, Ray and Claude are blamed for the crime, and are sentenced to life in prison. They are sent to an infamous prison camp called 'Camp 8', located at the Mississippi State Penitentiary.Cheseborough, Steve, ''Blues Traveling: The Holy Sites of Delta Blues''. University Press of Mississippi, 2004. . Retrieved from Google Books on September 29, 2010. ISBN 1578066506, 9781578066506.
At first Claude tries to get out by himself legally by telling his girlfriend Daisy to ask his attorney cousin Melvin to file an appeal on his behalf. Later, Claude gets a letter from Melvin and the news is not good. The appeal was denied and whats more, Daisy has left Claude for Melvin and are now engaged to be married (Daisy was clearly put off by Claude's selfishness since he was planning to abandon Ray). With any chance of getting out legally gone, Claude attempts to make be partners with Ray, who has a plan of getting out.
Ray and Claude make several attempts to escape the prison. Early in their incarceration, they simply try running away in the middle of the night, getting as far as Tallahatchie before being tracked down--they are sentenced to a week in solitary confinement. 
Around 1944, during World War II, they meet a mute inmate named 'Can't-Get-Right' (Woodbine) who happens to be a talented baseball player. He catches the eye of a Negros League scout who indicates he can get him out of prison to play baseball. Seeing this as a golden opportunity to get out of prison, Ray and Claude tell the scout to put a word in for them as well (as they relate to 'Can't-Get-Right' in that they can coax him best to play). A month before his release, a homosexual inmate, Biscuit (Miguel A. Nunez), commits suicide by deliberately running into a gun line. After 'Can't-Get-Right' is released to play baseball for the Pittsburgh Crawfords, Ray makes another escape plan (namely, hijacking a Stearman cropduster in a comically failed attempt to fly back to New York City) but Claude wants no part of it, angry with the fact that 'Can't-Get-Right' was released without them. Claude gives up trying to escape and accepts the fact that he will die in prison. This leads to an argument, which in turn leads to Ray and Claude going their separate ways. During the argument, it is revealed that Ray's father was sent to such a camp, and hung himself in despair. With them not talking, Camp 8 gets "a little harder and colder", and as 28 years (1944-1972) pass, all of the inmates who were friends of Ray, Claude, and Willie are either released or have passed on.
Many years later, in 1972, Ray and Claude are now much elderly and sent over to live at the Superintendent Dexter Wilkins' (Ned Beatty) mansion to work for him. Claude drives Superintendent Wilkins to pick up the new superintendent (R. Lee Ermey), who happens to be none other than Sheriff Warren Pike, the man who framed them 40 years earlier. 
While on a hunt one day, Ray sees Pike pull out a pocket watch, and realizes that is in fact his father's, which was taken from him 40 years earlier. Ray confronts Pike, grabs a shotgun and accuses him of murdering Hancock. When Wilkins asks if this is true, Pike brags that he not only committed the murder, but framed Ray and Claude, revealing that "The state of Mississippi got 40 years of cheap labor out of the deal". Enraged, Claude and Ray begin fighting over the gun, both determined to shoot him. Pike attempts to kill them with a hidden pistol, but is shot and killed by Wilkins, who now realizes that Ray and Claude are innocent. He tells Ray and Claude he intends to write pardon papers for the two of them, but passed away of a heart attack in his bathroom before he's able to do so.
In 1997, the present day, Ray and Claude are now more elderly, and living in the (now-integrated) prison's infirmary. They realize by now that the only way they'll escape the prison is when they pass away. Later, while playing poker with Willie and some other inmates, Claude tells Ray of a plan that he thought up, and after a short argument, Ray follows Claude to hear the plan. That night, however, the infirmary catches fire, and everyone is able to get out except Claude. Willie tells Ray he's still inside, Ray goes back in to find him, when the entrance caves in behind him, presumably killing him.
In present day, Willie concludes the tale and the two workers are saddened by the story, but he reveals that the fire was part of the plan thought up by Ray and Claude. The two bodies being buried, presumably of Ray and Claude, were actually taken from the morgue, and Ray and Claude planned to escape the fire and prison by hiding on the departing fire trucks. When the workers ask why the plan did not work, Willie tells them that he "never said it didn't work". Willie wheels himself away, laughing and smoking a cigarette, as the inmates realize that the bodies they buried are not Ray and Claude. 
The film ends with Ray and Claude back in New York, at a New York Yankees baseball game, Doing what they always do: Arguing. It concludes saying they now live in Harlem together.
The film has a 50% approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes from critics.
Even though ''Life'' was set in Mississippi, ''Life'' was filmed in California; filming locations include Locke, CA, Los Angeles, CA, Downey, CA, and Sacramento, CA. Parts of the film were actually shot at a Rockwell Defense Plant in California.
A soundtrack containing hip hop and R&B music was released on March 16, 1999 by Interscope Records. It peaked at 10 on the Billboard 200 and 2 on the Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums and was certified platinum for over 1 million copies sold on June 18, 1999.