The ever-growing demand for renewable energies is an efficient motor for scientific developments in this field. Most large-scale commercial solar cell factories today produce screen printed silicon solar cells. Silicon wafers are made by wire-sawing block-cast silicon ingots into very thin slices or wafers. The wafers are usually lightly p-type doped. To make a solar cell from the wafer, a surface diffusion of n-type dopants is performed on the front side of the wafer. This forms a p-n junction a few hundred nanometers below the surface. Anti-reflection coatings, which increase the amount of light coupled into the solar cell, are typically applied in the next step. They are typically formed as layers of around one hundred nanometers thickness. Subsequently, a full area metal contact is created on the back surface, and a grid-like metal contact made up of fine "fingers" and larger "busbars" is screen printed onto the front surface using a silver paste. The rear contact is also formed by screen printing a metal paste, typically containing aluminium. The paste is then fired at several hundred degrees Celsius to form metal electrodes in ohmic contact with the silicon. After the metal contacts are made, the solar cells are interconnected by flat wires or metal ribbons, and assembled into modules or "solar panels".
This typical solar cell manufacturing flow is not on the edge of scientific possibilities. One of the main problems associated with conventional manufacturing is the high thermal budget loaded on to the cells, resulting in cell bow, fragility and some efficiency degradation. One goal of current optimization steps is to avoid the high temperature steps or at least reduce the firing temperature drastically.
As a contact-less, highly precise and fast machining tool, lasers can be used for, and also substitute, some steps in the manufacturing chain of silicon solar cells. Applying optimized laser processes, the thermal load during manufacturing can be reduced and yield and throughput of the production can be improved. Although recently the industry is becoming more and more aware of the potential of laser processing for solar cells, applications in industrial production are still limited. Establishing lasers as a standard tool for Photovoltaics is the main goal of the European funded Solasys project. The project aims at the implementation of these processes into demonstration lines with industrial scalability.
High speed laser ablation is used for the isolation of the emitter front side from the backside of a solar cell, laser melting is used to form backside contacts, and laser drilling has been proven as a versatile tool for drilling silicon wafers for metal wrap through backside contacts. All these processes are currently performed with standard Q-switched Nd:YAG lasers with pulse durations of up to 100 ns, which provide process characteristics and results being far away from the technical and physical limits of possible laser processes. New laser sources such as ultra short pulsed lasers, time domain optimized lasers, wavelength adapted lasers, and ultra compact modular laser sources have been recently developed and provide a much better matching of laser parameters to the required processing characteristics. With these new laser sources flexible manufacturing steps can be realized leading to higher productivity and lower production costs as well as to higher efficiency of solar cells and modules and even new cell concepts. Within a consortium from laser manufacturers, system suppliers, research institutes, and end users the technical and physical potential of high quality and process tailored laser sources will be demonstrated throughout the project and evaluated for current and future photovoltaic manufacturing processes.
During the Solasys project prototype lasers will be developed which are individually optimized for the processes described in the following sections. To meet an industrial throughput of 2000 wafers per hour and more a high speed laser scanning system is developed. Otherwise the very high process rates can not be realized. In the end all the main new laser components and processes will be integrated into prototype photovoltaic manufacturing systems.
Within a consortium including laser manufacturers, system suppliers, research institutes, and end users the technical and physical potential of high quality and process tailored laser sources is demonstrated and evaluated for current and future photovoltaic manufacturing processes. The participants in the consortium are: 
New laser sources such as ultra short pulsed lasers, time domain optimized lasers, wavelength adapted lasers, and ultra compact modular laser sources have been recently developed and provide a much better matching of laser parameters to the required processing characteristics. With these new laser sources flexible manufacturing steps can be realized. 
In principle, three categories of lasers are being developed, high repetition rate ultra short pulsed lasers for ablation processes, pulse width tunable lasers for thermal processes such as doping and drilling, and high power diode lasers for the soldering process.
High speed scanheads are being developed accordingly to work with the new lasers. The development of a system for high speed scanning of the laser beam on large surfaces by simultaneously assuring the high beam quality of the used lasers and the small spot sizes, which are necessary for the manufacturing processes of solar cells and modules. This technology is developed to enable a high throughput of around one second per laser processing step and ensure a high quality of the laser processing, mainly in terms of accuracy and robustness of the processes.
SOLASYS aims to improve current processes and integrate new methods in industrial production. Six specific processes are involved:  
Laser drilling is used to create high efficiency back-contacted solar cells. Two different concepts make use of this process: metal wrap-through (MWT) and emitter wrap-through (EWT). Both aim at reducing the shadowing by the metal contacts on the cell   s front side and an easier module integration enabled by contacting both terminals from the back side. 
To produce MWT cells typically up to a hundred holes are drilled through the wafer, each of 100 to 200&nbsp;  m in diameter. Laser has been proven to be the most suitable tool for this process. The holes are then filled with metal so that the electrical current flows from the front to the rear side, where both terminals are located. Thus on the front side less metal is needed and its shadow effect is minimized.   
For EWT, however, several ten thousand holes of about 50 to 100&nbsp;  m diameter are needed. Through these holes the n-doped emitter is led to the rear side where again both terminals are located. But in contrast to MWT the EWT cells have no metal contacts on the front side at all. The goal in Solasys is to achieve laser drilling rates of more than 10,000 holes per second, enabling a processing time of around one second per wafer. The realization involves developing advanced optical concepts, such as combining beam splitting and ultra-fast scanning and simultaneous movement of a linear axis, selection of the proper laser source and processing parameters. In a recent research, the ideal laser process parameters have been proposed and process scheme has been designed. This study also suggests that more development in terms of optical systems and laser sources is required to achieve drilling rates of 10,000 vias per second in a single setup.
Surface texturisation is applied to the cell's front side to trap the sun light in the solar cell and thereby improving the cell efficiency. The standard process for texturization includes wet chemical etching, which creates specific surface morphologies, depending on the type of silicon and etching solutions used. Laser surface texturisation, which avoids chemicals and is insensitive to local crystal orientation etc., is considered as a promising alternative to these conventional methods. Such laser surface texturisation is usually done using femtosecond lasers and/or in special gas atmosphere. Due to the complexity of the system setup this technology can only be found in laboratories so far. The Solasys project explores possible routes for commercialization of this laser technology.
For standard solar cells a dielectric silicon nitride passivation layer is deposited onto the silicon wafer, giving them the typical dark bluish color. This layer serves two purposes: it reduces the reflectivity of the solar cell, allowing a larger fraction of the sunlight to enter the cell. Secondly it reduces the effect of the crystal lattice defects at the surface of the wafer. These so-called dangling bonds are passivated by the silicon nitride, which leads to increased lifetime of the carriers and thus to less electrical resistivity of the solar cell.
One disadvantage of the front passivation is the need for a high temperature step to drive the screen-printed metallization paste through the silicon nitride to form the electrical contact to the emitter. To avoid this firing step, or at least reduce the temperature, the passivation layer can be locally opened using laser radiation before metallization. Ultra-short pulse lasers promise to be the most suitable tool for this process, since with these lasers a high degree of control of the ablation is possible. Still, to avoid damage to the silicon beneath the passivation layer, which would degrade the wafer and lead to lower carrier lifetimes, the laser processing parameters have to be selected carefully. 
The opening of the front passivation also allows other metallization techniques like those based on plating. While for screen printing a mask is needed on which the positions of the metal lines are defined, electro-less and electro-plating processes allow a self-aligning of the metallization at those positions that are electrically conductive. To achieve this the passivation is opened locally by laser ablation and the plating creates the metal contacts at exactly the same positions. 
To make the ablation process industrially applicable several key issues have to be solved: firstly, the reduction of the damage to the silicon wafer. This is especially important for front-side ablation since here the emitter, which is only several hundred nanometers thin, lies beneath the passivation layers. Due to the thinness of the emitter it is critical to avoid damaging it. Secondly, the processing time of the whole wafer has to be around one second, since longer times would create bottlenecks within the manufacturing line. These two issues together with the spatial precision of the ablation and a stable ablation quality are addressed within the SOLASYS project.
Laser isolation is already used in photovoltaic production lines to isolate the negative and positive terminals of the cells. The non-contact technique is perfectly suited for the very brittle thin silicon wafers and inline processing. Commonly used laser sources are solid-state based in the second or third harmonic wavelength due to the short optical penetration depth in crystalline silicon. However, the pulse duration in the nanosecond range leads to recasting of molten or evaporated silicon and eventually to the diffusion of dopants deeper into the wafer material. As a result, the edge isolation is not perfect and requires rather deep laser grooves.
New high-power, high-repetition rate picosecond laser sources are a promising alternative because they ablate material nearly without melting. The movement of the dopants during ablation process is expected to be reduced to the minimum and this gives rise to less material removal, cleaner surface finish and less cell breakage. A recent study reveals that using high power ultra-short pulse laser as light source, an isolation groove assuring satisfactory electrical performance can be as shallow as 4 micrometres, which is a lot shallower than those isolation grooves scribed by nanosecond laser. This reduced material removal from the cells implies more electricity generation and less breakage during the manufacturing. The machining throughput achievable using this process scheme will be demonstrated faster than the throughput in the industry nowadays.
The selective emitter concept is one of the key subjects in the race to grid parity solar cell production. Currently the doping of the emitter represents a compromise between good conductivity and high carrier lifetime. Laser-based selective emitter doping solves this problem in a highly effective way. Instead of using the same standard doping concentration over the whole wafer area the laser doping process increases the concentration just at the contact regions to achieve high conductivity. The remaining wafer area retains a low doping concentration, enabling high carrier lifetimes. With this technique an efficiency increase of about 0.5% absolute can be achieved in only a single additional manufacturing step.
Although selective doping test has been tested out using laser at UV, VIS and IR bands, the green is used most often, which is due to the optical penetration depth of green laser light is comparable to the emitter depths of the cells. A recent study investigated the influence of laser pulse duration on the doping quality. A strong dependence of doping quality on laser power rather than pulse duration has been identified. An industrial scale-up estimation is also made and it suggests that with the commercial lasers and state-of-the-art metalization processes a laser doping machine could be competitive in terms of throughput if two lasers work in parallel.
Solar cells are connected in series by soldering techniques to form modules. Especially for very thin wafers the mechanical stress during conventional soldering poses an undesirable risk. In the future, the connection of several cells to form a single module will also be performed using lasers. Laser soldering permits precise control of the soldering temperatures and hence specific process optimization. If the temperature at the solar cell deviates from the set value, the laser output can be adjusted accordingly, which enables a high-quality solder joint and low thermal stress.
The integration of new laser components and processes into PV manufacturing systems is important to benchmark the capabilities of the equipment and the processes and to characterize the potential of improvement for the solar cell industry. In such a demonstration system development issues can be addressed in a reproducible way and the scalability to a full-scale production line can be shown. To establish such systems is the final goal of the Solasys project. In combination with handling equipment for wafer positioning and movement the different laser processes can show their potential as contactless manufacturing steps.
Dissemination, technology training and transfer of knowledge is an important part of the Solasys project. Specific activities include workshops for the presentation of project results, technical training units at the demonstration equipment and a student summer school. Goal of these activities is to avoid information loss by directly transferring knowledge gained during the project to the solar industry.
The project "SOLASYS - Next Generation Solar Cell and Module Laser Processing Systems" is partially funded by the European Commission within the 7th Framework Programme (Project number: TREN/FP7EN/219050/   SOLASYS   ) with a sum of 3,480,283.85    .
The project was launched on September 1, 2008, and lasts 36 months. In the first 12 months, the specifications of the laser processes were defined, various concepts for high speed processing were tested out and the evaluation of a part of the processes was carried out. In the second project year, all proposed laser processes will be optimized and finalized. All the new lasers will be fully functional and system integration will be initiated. The in-house prototype cell manufacturing tool will be running at the beginning of the third project year. All validations will be carried out. Further improvement on system stability and reliability will be pursued. In the mean time, various training and dissemination activities will be launched as well.