The following is a '''List of the Catholic cathedrals in the United States'''. The Catholic Church in the United States, informally known as the American Catholic Church, comprises ecclesiastical territories called dioceses led by prelate bishops. Each bishop is assigned to a cathedral from which he is pastor to the people of his diocese. Some dioceses also have a co-cathedral or a pro-cathedral. This is a complete list of the 193 cathedrals of the Catholic Church in the United States.
The Province of Anchorage comprises the state of Alaska.
The Province of Atlanta comprises the states of Georgia, North Carolina, and South Carolina.
The Province of Baltimore comprises all but five counties of the state of Maryland, and all of the states of Delaware, Virginia and West Virginia.
The Province of Boston comprises the states of Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, and Vermont.
The Province of Chicago comprises the state of Illinois.
The Province of Cincinnati comprises the state of Ohio.
The Province of Denver comprises the states of Colorado and Wyoming.
The Province of Detroit comprises the state of Michigan.
The Province of Dubuque comprises the state of Iowa.
The Province of Galveston-Houston comprises the eastern counties of the state of Texas.
The Province of Hartford comprises the states of Connecticut and Rhode Island.
The Province of Indianapolis comprises the state of Indiana.
The Province of Kansas City comprises the state of Kansas.
The Province of Los Angeles comprises the southern counties of the state of California.
The Province of Louisville comprises the states of Kentucky and Tennessee.
The Province of Miami comprises the state of Florida.
The Province of Milwaukee comprises the state of Wisconsin.
The Province of Mobile comprises the states of Alabama and Mississippi.
The Province of New Orleans comprises the state of Louisiana.
The Province of New York comprises the state of New York.
The Province of Newark comprises the state of New Jersey.
The Province of Oklahoma City comprises the states of Arkansas and Oklahoma.
The Province of Omaha comprises the state of Nebraska.
The Province of Philadelphia comprises the state of Pennsylvania.
The Metropolia of Philadelphia comprises all parishes of the Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church in the United States.
The Metropolia of Pittsburgh includes all parishes of the Ruthenian Catholic Church in the United States, as well as those parishes of other Byzantine Rite churches with no established hierarchy in the United States.
The Province of Portland comprises the states of Idaho, Montana and Oregon.
The Province of Saint Louis comprises the state of Missouri.
The Province of Saint Paul and Minneapolis comprises the states of Minnesota, North Dakota and South Dakota.
The Province of San Antonio comprises the western counties of the state of Texas.
The Province of San Francisco comprises the northern counties of the state of California and all of the states of Hawaii, Nevada and Utah.
The Province of Santa Fe comprises the states of Arizona and New Mexico.
The Province of Seattle comprises the state of Washington.
The Province of Washington comprises the District of Columbia, five neighboring counties in Maryland, and the U.S. Virgin Islands.
The Province of Agana comprises the United States overseas dependencies of Guam and the Northern Mariana Islands.  Also included are the sovereign and independent nations of the Marshall Islands and Micronesia.
The Metropolitan see of the Province of Samoa-Apia is foreign to the United States but the province however includes as a suffragan, a single diocese that comprises a United States overseas dependency, American Samoa.
The Province of San Juan includes the United States Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.