The '''Fra Mauro map''', "considered the greatest memorial of medieval cartography" according to Roberto Almagia, is a map made around 1450 by the Venetian monk Fra Mauro. It is a circular planisphere drawn on parchment and set in a wooden frame, about two meters in diameter.
A copy of the world map was made by Fra Mauro and his assistant Andrea Bianco, a sailor-cartographer, under a commission by king Afonso V of Portugal. This copy was completed on April 24, 1459, and sent to Portugal, but did not survive to the present day. 
The map was discovered in the monastery of San Michel in Isola, Murano, where the Camaldolese cartographer had his studio, and is now located in a stairway in the Biblioteca Nazionale Marciana in Venice, but is visible by entering in the Museo Correr, where it is accessible from the easternmost room upon request to the museum attendants there. A critical edition of the map was published by Piero Falchetta in 2006.
The Fra Mauro map is unusual, but typical of Fra Mauro's portolan charts, in that its orientation is with the south at the top, one of the usual conventions of Muslim maps, in contrast with the Ptolemy map which has the north at the top. 
Fra Mauro was aware of the Ptolemy map, and commented that it was insufficient for many parts of the world:
He recognized however the extent of the East given by Ptolemy, thereby suppressing the central position that Jerusalem had held on previous maps:
As was generally the case among Medieval scholars, Fra Mauro regarded the world as a sphere.  However, he used the convention of describing the continents surrounded by water within the shape of a disc, but had no certainty about the size of the Earth:
Although ''miglia'' is the Italian translation for miles, the modern mile was not standardized to be exactly 5,280 feet until 1592, so the intended estimation is somewhat ambiguous. Notably, the guess here only slightly underestimates the mean circumference of the Earth (approximately 24,880 miles).
The depiction of inhabited places and mountains, the map's chorography is also an important feature. Castles and cities are identified by pictorial glyphs representing turreted castles or walled towns, distinguished in order of their importance.
The description of Africa is reasonably accurate.
Fra Mauro puts the following inscription by the southern tip of Africa, which he names the "Cape of Diab", describing the exploration by a ship from the East around 1420:
Fra Mauro explained that he obtained the information from "a trustworthy source", who traveled with the expedition, possibly the Venetian explorer Niccolo da Conti who happened to be in Calicut, India at the time the expedition left:
Some of the islands named in the area of the southern tip of Africa bear Arabian and Indian names: ''Negila'' ("celebration" in Arabic), or ''Mangula'' ("fortunate" in Sanskrit.).
Fra Mauro also comments that the account of this expedition, together with the relation by Strabo of the travels of Eudoxus of Cyzicus from Arabia to Gibraltar through the southern Ocean in Antiquity, led him to believe that the Indian Ocean was not a closed sea and that Africa could be circumnavigated by her southern end (Text from Fra Mauro map, 11,G2). This knowledge, together with the map depiction of the African continent, probably encouraged the Portuguese to intensify their effort to round the tip of Africa.
The Fra Mauro map is one of the first Western maps to represent the islands of Japan (possibly after the De Virga world map). A part of Japan, probably Kyushu, appears below the island of Java, with the legend "Isola de Cimpagu" (a mis-spelling of Cipangu).
An even earlier map, the De Virga world map (1411-1415) also depicts the old world in a way broadly similar to the Fra Mauro map, and may have contributed to it.
The travels and book by Marco Polo is likely one source of information about the east. 
Fra Mauro also probably relied on Arab sources. This is suggested by the North-South inversion of the map, an Arab tradition exemplified by the 12th century maps of Muhammad al-Idrisi, and the detailed information on the southeastern coast of Africa, which was brought by an Ethiopian embassy to Rome in the 1430s.
Fra Mauro and his map were recently celebrated in James Cowan's novel ''The Mapmaker's Dream''.
Image:FraMauroMapAfrica.jpg|Fra Mauro's Africa (south is at the top, with the "Cape of Diab" marking the southern point)
Image:FraMauroMapChataio.jpg|Part of China
Image:FraMauroMapSpainPortugalNorthenAfrica.jpg|Spain, Portugal and Northern Africa
Image:FraMauroMapEurope.jpg|Europe
Image:FraMauroMapMiddleEast.jpg|The Middle-East
Image:FraMauroShips.JPG|Depiction of a Chinese junk, an Atlantic ship and a Mediterranean ship in the Fra Mauro map.
Image:WorldShips1460.jpg|Ships of the world in 1460, according to the Fra Mauro map. Chinese junks are described as very large, three or four-masted ships
Image:FramauroJava.jpg|The first mention of Java in a Western map
Image:Fra_Mauro_World_Map,_c.1450.jpg|High Resolution Full View.