The reception has become one of a number of ways the president recognizes the holiday, along with a proclamation/message, and participation by the president or a member of his staff in the lighting of the Hanukkah menorah (''Hanukkiyah'', special 9-branch Hanukkah candelabra) on the National Mall.  Additionally, in 1996, a United States postage stamp was issued for the first time in honor of the holiday.
Although the truth of the story is impossible to prove, there is an account about George Washington and the meaning of Hanukkah that has become part of American lore:
The story is told that Washington was walking among his troops when he saw one soldier sitting apart from the others, huddled over what looked like two tiny flames. Washington approached the soldier and asked him what he was doing. The soldier explained that he was a Jew and he had lit the candles celebrate Hanukkah, the festival commemorating the miraculous victory of his people so many centuries ago over the tyranny of a much better equipped and more powerful enemy who had sought to deny them their freedom. The soldier then expressed his confidence that just as, with the help of God, the Jews of ancient times were ultimately victorious, so too would they would be victorious in their just cause for freedom. Washington thanked the soldier and walked back to where the rest of the troops camped, warmed by the inspiration of those little flames and the knowledge that miracles are possible.
The historical source for the above story is a second-hand account, but is nonetheless fairly credible. In December, 1778, General George Washington had supper at the home of Michael Hart, a Jewish merchant in Easton, Pennsylvania. It was during the Hanukkah celebration, and Hart began to explain the customs of the holiday to his guest. Washington replied that he already knew about Hanukkah. He told Hart and his family of meeting the Jewish soldier at Valley Forge the previous year. (According to Washington, the soldier was a Polish immigrant who said he had fled his homeland because he could not practice his faith under the Prussian government there.) Hart's daughter Louisa wrote the story down in her diary. The story has been quoted by several Jewish historians, including Rabbi I. Harold Sharfman in his 1977 book, ''Jews on the Frontier''.
For two centuries after the time of the story about George Washington and Hanukkah, Christmas was the only winter religious holiday officially recognized by the White House.  In 1923, President Calvin Coolidge began lighting an official White House Christmas Tree, and also delivered the first formal presidential message for the holiday.  In 1927, his proclamation included the statement that, "   Christmas is not a time or a season, but a state of mind." Focusing on the holiday's message, he continued, would guarantee that     there will be born in us a Savior and over us will shine a star sending its gleam of hope to the world.   
Franklin Roosevelt continued the White House tradition of treating Christmas as if it were a holiday celebrated by all Americans, declaring that Christmas was a national holiday "because the teachings of Christ are fundamental to our lives."  Harry Truman did the same, using his Christmas message as an opportunity to ask Americans to "put our trust in the unerring Star which guided the Wise Men to the Manger of Bethlehem." However, although he may never have spoken about Hanukkah, Truman was historically linked to the holiday, at least indirectly, when in 1951, Israeli Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion made an official presentation of a Hanukkah menorah to Truman and the people of the United States.
Even John Kennedy described Christmas as an important time for citizens of all religions, without addressing the importance of Hanukkah to the Jewish community when he declared in 1962 that "Moslems, Hindus, Buddhists, as well as Christians, pause from their labors the 25th day of December the celebrate the birthday of the Prince of Peace," and that "there could be no more striking proof that Christmas is truly the universal holiday of all men."
Jimmy Carter was the first president who officially recognized Hanukkah, when in 1979 he walked from the White House to Lafayette Park to deliver brief remarks as he lit the new "National Menorah" erected by the Jewish group, Chabad-Lubavitch. Based on his sensitivity to Hanukkah, his next annual Christmas message was carefully worded, with greetings "to those of our fellow citizens who join us in the joyous celebration of Christmas."  Since then, every president has participated in a menorah-lighting ceremony to recognize Hanukkah, and directed the Christmas message to those citizens who celebrate that holiday. 
Later, President George H.W. Bush would "proudly display" the menorah he received as a gift from the Synagogue Council of America (SCA), a group representing the major denominations and movements of American Judaism. He also attend a Hanukkah party for staff in the Executive Office Building, in 1991.
However, gifts aside, it was not until the administration of President Bill Clinton that a president actually hosted a menorah-lighting ceremony in the White house. In 1993, he included a dozen or so school children for a ceremony in the Oval Office.  The event made the news because the ponytail on one of the girls, 6-year-old Ilana Kattan, briefly started smoking when it touched one of the flames from the candles -- but Clinton used his hands to "snuff out" the smoke. Clinton also joined Israeli president Ezer Weizman for a Hanukkah candle-lighting ceremony in Jerusalem, December 13, 1998.
Under Clinton, some Jewish leaders were among the guests at the White House Hanukkah menorah lightings. In 1996, during his administration, the first United States postage stamp honoring Hanukkah was issued, and was the first stamp to be a joint-issue between the United States and Israel.
The first official White House Hanukkah party was held on December 10, 2001, under the leadership of President George W. Bush, using a 100-year-old Hanukkah menorah that the White House borrowed from the Jewish Museum, in New York. Bush had hosted many annual Christmas parties, stressing the religious importance of that holiday, not merely referring to it as a "national holiday," but at the same time, began hosting a separate Hanukkah party for leaders of the Jewish community. He stressed that many presidents had participated in Hanukkah candle-lighting ceremonies, but that this occasion was the first time that the ceremony had been carried out as part of a larger official community celebration, reception, and observance of the holiday in the White House. Additionally, while previously, candles had been lit in the Oval Office, this was the first time in American history that the celebration would take place in the White House residence. He stated in his remarks that this residence, the White House, might be a "temporary home" for him and for his wife, Laura, but that "it's the people's house" -- and "it belongs to people of all faiths."  He also noted that 2001 had been a year of "much sadness" for America and for Israel -- and that they had grieved together. "But as we watch the lighting of this second candle of Hanukkah, we are reminded of the ancient story of Israel's courage, and of the power of faith to make the darkness bright."  He then went on to pray for a "better day" -- "when this Festival of Freedom may be celebrated in a world free from terror." 
Bush continued the tradition of White House ceremonies and receptions for Hanukkah, expanding both the guest list and preparations for the event.  For example, after an embarrassing incident in 2004 when non-kosher foods were mixed up with some special kosher foods that had been brought in for the occasion, the Hanukkah party in 2005 began the tradition of koshering the White House kitchen so that all foods served at the party would be kosher.
One Hanukkah activity involving the president's staff that might have been a "first" was OMB director Josh Bolten's reading of two Hanukkah bed time stories over the White House website, as part of a special series of stories set up by First Lady Laura Bush.  A number of other individuals, including Mrs. Bush herself, former First Lady Barbara Bush, and a number of cabinet members also took part in this program, with Bolten's selection to read Hanukkah stories presumably linked to his religious affiliation.
In 2008, Bush announced to the guests that he had cut short his farewell trip to Iraq and Afghanistan to ensure he was present for the final Hanukkah party during his administration.  For the candle-lighting, he introduced Yariv Ben-Eliezer, grandson of David Ben-Gurion, and Clifton Truman Daniel, grandson of President Truman, to light the historic Hanukkah menorah that Ben-Gurion had presented to Truman in 1951.  Bush linked the holiday and Israel in his remarks, explaining that:
This Hanukkah we celebrate another miraculous victory - the 60th anniversary of the founding of the state of Israel. When President Harry Truman led the world in recognizing Israel in May of 1948, many wondered whether the small nation could possibly survive. Yet from the first days of independence, the people of Israel defied dire predictions. With determination and hard work, they turned a rocky desert into fertile soil. They built a thriving democracy, a strong economy, and one of the mightiest military forces on earth. Like the Maccabees, Israel has defended itself bravely against enemies seeking its destruction. And today, Israel is a light unto the nations - and one of America's closest friends."
One small gaff that reached the press was the fact that the invitations to the Hanukkah party, sent to Jewish leaders throughout the United States, included the image of a horse-drawn cart pulling a Christmas tree to the White House. The White House staff quickly admitted it was a regrettable oversight, and apologized. Press secretary Sally McDonough explained that it was a "staff mistake" to use the same image on all holiday reception invitations, and that First Lady Laura Bush "is apologetic." McDonough added that the invitations would be resent, using the image of the menorah Ben-Gurion presented to Harry Truman as the illustration for the new invitations.
  But many leaders and pundits called criticism "chutzpah" (audacity), with one article in the Huffington Post stating that, Obama ought to be applauded, not attacked, as he and his administration continue efforts to govern in a bipartisan and inclusive manner; this Hanukkah party is just one positive reflection of this encouraging trend.
For the 2009 Hanukkah party, the White House had made arrangements to use a sterling silver Hanukkah menorah on special loan from the Jewish Museum in Prague, at the request of the First Lady.  She had toured Jewish historic sites in Prague in April, 2009, during her husband's official state visit.  The menorah was crafted by Viennese silversmith Cyril Schillberger, in 1783. Candles were lit by two young children of a Jewish soldier deployed in Iraq.
One "first" for President Obama was the fact that his 2009 Hanukkah message was issued in both English and Hebrew versions. The message recalls the Hanukkah story of Jews who fought for religious freedom against seemingly overwhelming odds, noting that the lesson for everyone is    that faith and perseverance are powerful forces that can sustain us in difficult times and help us overcome even the greatest odds.      
Other members of President Obama's staff -- and other U.S. leaders at all levels of government -- continued to participate in official Hanukkah ceremonies in the tradition of previous administrations.  For example, in 2009, White House Chief of Staff Rahm Emanuel participated in the lighting of the menorah on the National Mall and California Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger took part in a menorah lighting ceremony in the U.S. Capitol.
The 2010 White House Hanukkah Party was held on Thursday evening, December 2, and featured a Hanukkah menorah (hanukkiyah) salvaged from Congregation Beth Israel in Lakeview, New Orleans, after Hurricane Katrina.  The menu included kosher sushi and potato latkes, and the entertainment included a solo saxophone rendition of ''Ma'oz Tzur" ("Rock of Ages"), by saxophonist Joshua Redman, and other Hanukkah melodies performed by the United States Marine Band.
President Obama's remarks included his observation that the Hanukkah message of rededication is an important reminder to people of all faiths:
In addition to continuing the tradition of the White House Hanukkah party, the Obamas have attended and now host what have been called the first Passover Seders to be held in the White House, originally organized by a handful of Jewish staffers in 2008, who were surprised when the president tracked them down and joined them -- but which has now become an annual event, attended by the Obama family, where the president's daughters even help recite the traditional four questions.  
Additionally, on May 27, 2010, the Obamas hosted the first White House reception for Jewish American Heritage Month (JAHM), an annual month-long recognition (during May) of the contributions of the Jewish community to American society. The commemoration of JAHM was begun by President George W. Bush, but without a special White House reception linked to its observance.