Founded in 2004 in San Diego, CA, Anakam was an early enabler of the concept of mass-enabled, low cost two factor authentication solutions to the IT security and identity management marketplace. Traditionally, institutions achieve the    something you have    component of second factor authentication by issuing hard tokens, USB fobs or smart cards. Anakam accomplishes exactly the same level of second factor authentication at a fraction of the cost by using    something you already have.    Every-day devices users already own or have access to such as cell phones, home phones, web-connected computers and office phones are examples of user-owned devices. This is particularly helpful where two factor strong authentication is required and network access is difficult or very mobile/variable, such as in disaster response incidents.
Anakam.TFA Two Factor Authentication is a unique and scalable progressive authentication solution that provide numerous a wide variety of strong authentication capabilities integrated into a single enterprise-class platform.  Anakam   s progressive authentication technology gives the enterprise the ability to customize authentication levels based on internal risk, individual business units, user groups and compliance requirements. Based on the level of risk, Anakam.TFA distributes a one-time-passcode (OTP) through multiple out-of-band (OOB) channels   including SMS (text message) to a cell phone, interactive voice response (IVR or outbound voice) to a landline or cell, email, OATH token, or voice biometrics after successful completion of a first factor authentication (typically a username and password)
Anakam   s multi-factor authentication and identity verification solutions help organizations to determine whether a user is who they claim to be prior to granting access to web portals, customer databases, internal systems and networks. Anakam Identity Suite enables rapid mitigation of organizational risk and defense against unauthorized access, system breaches, data loss and fraud via a fully auditable platform, compliant with government and industry security standards and policies such as FISMA. Hundreds of the world's leading healthcare, government, banking and commercial organizations use Anakam technology as a standard method to provide trusted access to sensitive data and applications.
Anakam deploys their software into large scale enterprises, and some of their customers host Anakam as Identity as a Service or  Identity.  In these instances, Anakam interoperates with federated identity and access managers to provide strong authentication and identity proofing as part of a hosted credential service that can be consumed by numerous applications.
Anakam was named by Government Security News in 2009 as the "Best Authentication/Identification Product for 2009".