Based in Houston, Texas, Rick's operates clubs under the names Rick's Cabaret,
Rick's, Jaguars, Club Onyx, Tootsie's Cabaret, and XTC Cabaret. It also operates the websites NaughtyBids.com, an auction site; CouplesTouch.com, a dating site for swingers; and pornography website xxxpassword.com. The company's Media Group publishes the strip club trade publications ''Exotic Dancer'' and ''Club Bulletin'', and operates 25 industry websites.
Rick's is one of only two adult entertainment companies to be publicly traded on NASDAQ, and has been named on a ''Forbes'' magazine list of the 200 best companies.  Rick's Cabaret went public with an IPO in 1995.
Houston is home to Rick's Cabaret. The original location was opened in 1983 at 3113 Bering Dr. In 2005 it was changed to Club Onyx, Houston's first upscale urban strip club. Houston was also the start of XTC Cabaret in 1994. There are currently two XTC Cabarets, one Rick's Cabaret, and one Club Onyx in Houston.
Rick's has made major expansion into the Dallas/Ft. Worth area since 2007. Currently there is Club Onyx, XTC Cabaret, and two Rick's Cabaret in the surrounding areas.  Rick's is in the process of building another location from the ground up near DFW airport.
XTC Cabaret has been in Austin since 1997. A Rick's Cabaret was also opened but recently converted to a Club Onyx. In December 2009 Rick's acquired Joy of Austin and re-branded it as Rick's Cabaret.
San Antonio is home to an XTC Cabaret and a Rick's Cabaret.
In December 2007, Rick's acquired Tootsie's Cabaret for $25 million. Tootsie's is a  building featuring 250 entertainers nightly.
Bun's and Rose's was bought, remodeled, and name changed to Rick's Cabaret in 1997, in downtown Minneapolis.
The New York location was opened in September 2005. Rick's New York has been voted as best strip club in New York by Playboy.com. They have teamed up with PETA in an anti-fur campaign. And are Zagat rated.
Formerly Scores of Las Vegas, the property was purchased and converted to Rick's Cabaret in September 2008.
The  club at 2908 South Columbus Blvd., formerly known as Crazy Horse Too Cabaret, was remodeled and changed to Rick's Cabaret in April 2008. It has since been changed to a Club Onyx.
Rick's Cabaret expanded to Charlotte in May 2005. It too was converted to a Club Onyx in December 2006.