Born in Mount Vernon, New York, Seth Godin graduated from Tufts University in 1979 with a degree in computer science and philosophy.  Godin earned his MBA in marketing from Stanford Business School. From 1983 to 1986, he worked as a brand manager at Spinnaker Software. For a time Godin commuted every week between California and Boston both to do his new job and to complete his MBA.
After leaving Spinnaker Software in 1986, Godin used $20,000 in savings to found Seth Godin Productions, primarily a book packaging business, out of a studio apartment in New York City. It was in the same offices that Godin met Mark Hurst and founded Yoyodyne. After a few years Godin sold the book packaging business to his employees and focused his efforts on Yoyodyne, one of the first online marketing companies. It was with Yoyodyne that Godin came up with the concept of permission marketing. For a period of time, Godin served as a columnist for ''Fast Company''
Godin and his wife Helene now live in Hastings-on-Hudson, New York.
Godin believes that the end of the "TV-Industrial complex" means that marketers no longer have the power to command the attention of anyone they choose, whenever they choose. Second, in a marketplace in which consumers have more power, he thinks marketers must show more respect; this means no spam, no deceit and a bias for keeping promises. Finally, Godin asserts that the only way to spread the word about an idea is for that idea to earn the buzz by being remarkable. Godin refers to those who spread these ideas as "Sneezers", and to the spreading idea as an "IdeaVirus." He calls a remarkable product or service a  . Yahoo! currently has a model of a purple cow in the lobby of its Sunnyvale campus. ''Yodel Anecdotal blog''. August 14, 2006.
Advertisements on television and radio are classified as 'interruption marketing' which interrupt the customer while they are doing something of their preference. Godin introduced the concept of "permission marketing" where the business provides something "anticipated, personal, and relevant".
In 1995, Godin launched Yoyodyne which used contests, online games, and scavenger hunts to market companies to participating users. In August, 1996, venture-capital firm Flatiron Partners invested $4 million in Yoyodyne in return for a 20% stake. ''BusinessWeek'' February 9, 1998 The site gained significant traction, with over one million viewers visiting the site, and companies like America Online, American Express, H&R Block, Microsoft, Procter & Gamble, Sony Music, Sprint, and Volvo using its services. ''Earthweb News''. October 12, 1998.
At Yoyodyne, Godin developed the principle of permission marketing and authored ''Permission Marketing: Turning strangers into friends and friends into customers''.
In 1998, Godin sold Yoyodyne to Yahoo! for $30 million ''Wired.com''. October 12, 1998. and became Yahoo's vice president of direct marketing, a position he held until 2000. on ''SLA.org''.
In March 2006, Godin launched Squidoo, a community website allowing users to create pages (called "lenses") for subjects of interest. The site donates 5% of the profits to charity, and 50% to the lensmasters. Godin and Squidoo have been profiled on CNN and the Washington Post. The site was given top prize in SXSW's community/wiki category. As of July 2008, Squidoo is one of the 500 most visited sites in the world.
Godin developed the idea for ChangeThis, a website aimed at spreading ideas through PDF files. In the summer of 2004, Godin hired five interns   Amit Gupta, Catherine Hickey, Noah Weiss, Phoebe Espiritu and Michelle Sriwongtong   to build and develop the website. ''ChangeThis''. The website went live on August 14, 2004. ''Seth Godin's Blog''. August 14, 2004. Tom Peters, Chris Anderson, and Guy Kawasaki all had manifestos featured on ChangeThis. ''Seth Godin's Blog''. "We featured authors as diverse as Tom Peters, Amnesty International, Chris Anderson, Hugh Macleod, George Lakoff and Guy Kawaski." In July 2005, ChangeThis was turned over to 800-CEO-READ, the leading distributor of business literature in the United States. on 800-CEO-Blog. July 1, 2005 on bnet. September 12, 2005
In December 2008, Godin announced in a blog post that he would be offering a six month alternative MBA program at his office in Hastings on Hudson, NY.  48,000 people looked at the post and 340 applied. He invited 27 applicants to his office for a group interview. They spent two hours interviewing one another. After co-mingling, they and Godin together wrote down the names of their favorite candidates. Three weeks later the chosen 9 showed up at Godin's office. This group graduated in July 2009.
Godin is the author of 11 books; his ''Free Prize Inside'' was a Forbes Business Book of the Year in 2004,
Beginning with ''Permission Marketing'', Godin uses the concepts discussed in the books to promote the book. For ''Permission Marketing'', Godin gave 1/3 of the book away for free to anyone who sent an e-mail. For ''Unleashing the Ideavirus'', Godin released the entire eBook on the Internet for free, which led to eventual publishing deals in 41 countries and a public speaking career. For ''Purple Cow'', Godin created a milk carton container for the book which generated attention from work colleagues. For ''Tribes'', Godin launched an exclusive online community for the first 3000 people who pre-ordered the book. For Linchpin, Godin gave the book away for three weeks before its release for free to anyone willing to give $30 to the Acumen Fund for the $20 book, and raised $100,000 for the Acumen Fund.
Godin's blog,