The '''Internationale Automobil-Ausstellung''' (''IAA'', English: International Automobile Exhibition), also known as the ''Frankfurt Motor Show'' or ''Frankfurt Auto Show'', is one of the world's largest motor shows. It is held biennially in Frankfurt, Germany.
The IAA is organized by the Association of the German Automotive Industry (VDA). Since 1991 the show is split in two: Even-numbered years show commercial vehicles in Hanover and odd-numbered years passenger vehicles (including some motorcycles) in Frankfurt.  The show is scheduled by the Organisation Internationale des Constructeurs d'Automobiles, which considers it a major international auto show.
There were around 940,000 visitors to the 2005 show.
The following major introductions were made at the 2005 show:
The following major concept cars were presented at the 2005 show:
The 2007 Frankfurt Motor Show's key theme was sustainable mobility.
The following major introductions were presented at the 2007 show:
European automakers demonstrated a new interest in hybrid and electric vehicles at the 2007 Frankfurt Motor Show. For example, Mercedes-Benz arrived at the show with seven hybrids, including a luxury sedan concept vehicle called the F 700, a -long car that achieves a fuel economy of 44.4 miles per gallon (mpg). The research vehicle features a homogenous charge compression ignition engine, a technology that produces the high fuel economy of a diesel engine from a clean-burning gasoline engine. Mercedes has also mated its clean-diesel engine to an electric motor, creating the Bluetec hybrid. The company plans to introduce a gasoline-fueled hybrid SUV and sedan in 2009, followed by two Bluetec hybrids in 2010, one of which will achieve 51 miles per gallon of diesel fuel. In addition, the Mercedes Car Group exhibited its smart car in three new incarnations: an electric-only vehicle and both diesel and gasoline versions with "micro hybrid drive", a belt-driven starter and alternator that allows the engine to shut off at stops. See the DaimlerChrysler press releases about the auto show and the F700.
Opel, a subsidiary of General Motors, unveiled the Flextreme, a plug-in hybrid that can travel  on its lithium-ion battery before a small diesel engine starts charging the battery.  Opel also unveiled the Corsa Hybrid, a coupe that combines a belt-driven starter and alternator with a lithium-ion battery.
Volvo Cars, a division of Ford Motor Company, exhibited a plug-in hybrid with motors in each of the wheels. The Volvo ReCharge can travel about  on battery power alone, using a lithium-polymer battery pack that can be recharged in a standard outlet.
The Citroen C-Cactus regular diesel-electric hybrid vehicle debuted at the 2007 Frankfurt Motor Show.
The theme of the 2009 Frankfurt Motor Show can best be summed up in one word: "electrification" Virtually every manufacturer has unveiled a vehicle using the latest battery technology,
The following major introductions were presented at the 2009 show: