Steiner graduated from the University of California, Irvine with honors in 1996 with a Bachelor's Degree in Political Science.  He attended law school at the University of California, Hastings College of the Law, from which he graduated in 1999.  There, he served as Publications Editor of the Hastings West-Northwest Journal of Environmental Law and Policy.  His student note, "Case Management Orders:  Use and Efficacy in Complex Litigation and the Toxic Tort" was selected for Publication in that Journal in 1999.
In December 1999, Steiner began work as a Deputy District Attorney in the Orange County District Attorney's Office.  In 2005, he was selected by District Attorney Tony Rackauckas to serve as head of the Hate Crime Unit of that Office.  In 2008, Steiner was promoted to the Gang Unit.  In that same year, he began teaching as an adjunct professor of California Evidence at Chapman Law School.  In 2009, he was selected to serve as the Character Evidence instructor for the California District Attorney's Association.
In 2007, Steiner was selected to receive a scholarship to pursue an LL.M. Degree in Prosecutorial Sciences from Chapman University School of Law, a degree he received in May 2009.  His Master's Thesis, "Habitations of Cruelty:  Pitfalls of Expanding Hate Crime Legislation to Include Homelessness" was selected for publication in West Publishing's Criminal Law Bulletin in September 2009.
In 2000, at the age of 26, Steiner ran unsuccessfully for a seat on the Orange City Council.  In 2006, members of that same body appointed Steiner to the Orange Planning Commission.  He was selected by his fellow commissioners to serve as Chairman of the Planning Commission in February 2008.  Steiner chaired the Planning Commission for two years before resigning on June 9, 2010, the day after his election to the Orange County Superior Court.
Steiner has been actively involved in supporting the Constitutional Rights Foundation.  That organization undertakes an annual Mock Trial Competition amongst the nation's high schools.  He has served on the Mock Trial Committee of CRF since 2003, and has served as a mock trial coach since 1999.  He has also served as presiding judge for the American Collegiate Moot Court Association, the American Mock Trial Association, the National Moot Court Competition, and the Thomas Tang Moot Court Competition.
On June 8, 2010, Steiner won election to the Orange County Superior Court of California, receiving over 325,000 votes.  He was elected without opposition, becoming the youngest person to be elected judge in the history of the Orange County Superior Court.  He succeeded Judge Margaret Anderson, who endorsed him and supported his campaign efforts.  Steiner received substantial bi-partisan and law enforcement support for his campaign, including endorsements from the heads or former heads of both the Republican and Democratic Parties of Orange County.  Steiner began a six-year term on January 3, 2011.