As industries    environmental impacts become more apparent, green topics have not only taken center stage in pop culture, but the financial world as well. Steve Schueth, President of First Affirmative Financial Network in Colorado Springs, Colorado, said that in the 1990s many investors    began to look for those companies that were better than their competitors in terms of managing their environmental impact.    While some investors still focus their funds to avoid only    the most egregious polluters,    the emphasis for many investors has switched to changing    the way money is used,    and using    it in a positive, transformative way to get us from where we are now ultimately to a truly sustainable society.   
The Global Climate Prosperity Scoreboard - launched by Ethical Markets Media and The Climate Prosperity Alliance to monitor private investments in green companies     estimated that over $1.248 trillion has been invested in solar, wind, geothermal, ocean/hydro and other green sectors since 2007. This number represents investments from North America, China, India, and Brazil, as well at other developing countries.
While many Eco investments may be considered socially responsible investments, and vice versa, the two are not mutually exclusive. Socially responsible investing is the practice of investing only in those companies which satisfy a certain moral or ethical criteria. This may include companies with an interest in the environment, but also supports various other social and religious issues.
Eco investing narrows in on the interests of sustainable environmental issues. Specifically, Eco investments focus on companies who work on renewable energy and clean technologies.
There are several sectors that fall under the Eco investing umbrella. Renewable energy refers to both solar, wind, tidal current,wave and conventional hydro technology. This includes companies that build solar panels or wind turbines, or the raw materials and services that contribute to these technologies It also refers to Energy Storage - companies that develop and use technologies to store large amounts of energy, particularly renewable energies. A good example of this is the fuel cells used in hybrid cars. Also under the renewable energy sector are Biofuels. This group includes companies that use or supply biological resources (like algae, corn or waster wood) to create energy or fuel. Other technologies that are included in the renewable energy group are: Geothermal (companies who use or convert heat to electric energy), Hydroelectricity (companies who harness water energy to make electricity), and natural gas.
The Buildings and Efficiency sector refers to companies that manufacture green building materials or energy-efficient services in the world of engineering and architecture. Green building materials include energy-efficient glass, insulation, and lighting among others. Recycling companies and energy conservation companies also fall under this sector.
The Eco Living sector refers to companies that offer sustainable goods and services for healthy living. This includes organic farming, green pesticides, health care and pharmaceuticals.
There are several exchange traded funds (ETFs) and mutual funds that cover the Eco investing sector, including: