From Initiate Productions comes a decidedly irreverent satire about the wages of greed and an enchanting comic adventure that riffs on an iconic theme     the American salesman     with a twist. For this tale of door-to-door marketers takes place in a world heretofore never seen on screen: that of 1960s manure salesmen, AKA    the Men of Manure.    Having brought to life an original assortment of American misfits and dreamers, with    The Smell of Success    now turns an unabashedly comic eye to the wonders of the American wasteland . . . literally.
It all begins when a tragic fan accident ends the life of Mr. Roses, the scientific genius behind Roses Manure Company, forcing his cosmetics salesgirl daughter Rosemary (TEA LEONI) to take control of the company. Rosemary isn   t sure if she has a nose for the family business, but when she discovers the company is about to go under, she is determined to find a way to turn the foul into financial profits. To do so, she   s going to need the help of her father   s best salesmen -- led by the steely-eyed; silver tongued Patrick Fitzpatrick (BILLY BOB THORNTON) for whom    bull    is not just a product but an art form     even if they don   t exactly trust a lady in charge.
But the times, they are a changing and so is the business. When the suspiciously clean-cut Jimmy St. James (KYLE MACLACHAN) and his band of slick salesmen drop into town ready to take over with their newfangled    fertilizer    and fancy marketing techniques, it becomes clear that Rosemary   s quest is no longer simply about selling as much crap as she can. It   s all-out war.
The Smell of Success was filmed on location in Santa Clarita,California.
Singing the Blues - Guy Mitchell
Dig a Little Deeper - JD Sumner and the Stamps
Backporch Bluegrass Rag - Tommy Hannum and Crew 22
Bongo Rock - Preston Epps
There Ain't Enough Love - Little Jerry
Hoe Down/Down the Road/Hounddog Blues/Mudcat Rag - written by Rick Kritzman, (performer unrecorded) (5 Alarm Music)
Riverboat Blues - Apple Trax
Take Me Away Baby (5 Alarm Music)
The Abduction From the Seraglio (composer and performers not recorded)
Chuck's Cherry - Warren Bennet and Mark Griffith
Sweet Baby on My Mind - Jim Owen, 1st Digital Music
Painted Pony - Wylie Gustafson
Rip Roaring Ready - Finn and the Sharks
Tombstone for Your Head - Terry Campbell
Tu N'y es Pour Rien - Sylvie Royer
L'Homme Que J'Adore - Allison Adams-Tucker
Piedmont Blues - Apple Trax
Big City Woman - Doug McLeod
Have Some Fun - Robby Wyckoff
Because of My Best Friend - The Clickettes
Dust Bowl Days - Shadrick Smith and the Billy Buffalo Band
Lover's Prayer - The Clickettes
Bad Day for a Funeral - DG Powell
Maxwell Swing - The Texas Gypsies
It's Amazing - The Texas Gypsies
Get Rhythm? - The Peter Blair Big Band
Nice "N Easy - Eddie Cochrane
Cheatin' on Me Baby - The Ramblers
Betty Ann - The Ramblers
To Be Loved - The Pentagons
Come and Get Me - The Sunsets