Brian David Mitchell was born on October 18, 1953, in Salt Lake City, Utah. He was the third of six children born into a strict household of mainstream LDS mormonsThe Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.  According to family members Brian's paternal grandfather suffered from mental illness and was hospitalized for a time at the Utah State Hospital as a mental patient. Brian's immediate family- his parents and siblings- were described by neighbors as friendly and main stream mormons but a bit odd; Brian's father Shirl claimed he heard a voice telling him, "You are Christ" when he (Shirl) was seven years old but said he never heard such a voice again. In 1997 Shirl Mitchell published a lengthy tome of his theologically tinged personal philosophy titled ''Spokesman for the Infant God or Goddess.'' 
Brian was considered the black sheep of the Mitchell family during his youth and adult years 
Brian Mitchell's first known sexual offense was as a teenager when he exposed himself to an underaged girl, an act for which he was sentenced to time in a juvenile detention facility. The resulting stigma from his time in detention further alienated him from his family and community.
The first of Brian David Mitchell's three known marriages was when he married his 16 year old pregnant girlfriend when he was 19 years old. The first marriage produced two children before ending in divorce, with Mitchell gaining custody of the children until his former wife remarried. She then claimed and obtained custody of the two children but Mitchell fled to New Hampshire to prevent the children returning to their mother. This was the first time Mitchell kidnapped, although it was as a parental kidnapping which was not considered a felony at the time.
After some time as a fugitive Mitchell decided to return the children to their biological mother for a time, accepting the court's decision, though he would periodically petition, unsuccessfully, for full custody of the children during his subsequent marriages. His next marriage was after he became an active member of the LDS Church and married a divorcee with three children from a previous marriage and with whom he would father two additional children.
Mitchell's second wife alleges that he molested one of his two teenaged stepdaughters and one of his own biological children.  During the publicity following his capture his second wife stated to news media that she reported him to public authorities and to church authorities but Mitchell was never prosecuted or disciplined by the church. However most of these reports were made after they divorced. She said amongst other things: "I reported to four different agencies, plus the doctors knew... They were very well aware that my little 18-month-old was being molested because of what she was doing." She also filed a police report alleging abuse but no action was taken. Mitchell's stepdaughter corroborated her mother's statements, stating that she was repeatedly sexually abused by Mitchell who manipulated her into remaining silent: "He would whisper in my ear not to tell anybody and if that I did nobody would believe me." Mitchell's second wife claimed that during their marriage he changed from a gentle man, at least on the surface, into a controlling, abusive, and dictatorial husband who repeatedly tried to frighten her. She was also concerned about his interests in Satan. However, it was Mitchell who filed for divorce in 1984, accusing his second wife of being violent and cruel to their children.
  Details of his conviction at 16 resurfaced during the November 2010 Federal trial as evidence of his pattern of sexual predation. During cross-examination Mitchell's elderly father stated that Mitchell had been arrested for exposing himself to a 3- or 4-year-old girl and sent to juvenile detention.
 Part of the story also was that as 'Immanuel' he had the right to lead the LDS Church after the death of church president Ezra Taft Benson and to reintroduce the practice of polygamy. Mitchell believed himself the fore-ordained angel born on earth to be the Davidic "servant" prepared by God as a type of Messiah who would restore the divinely led kingdom of Israel to the world in preparation for Christ's second coming. (Mitchell's belief in such an end-times figure &ndash; also known among many fundamentalist Latter Day Saints as "the One Mighty and Strong" &ndash; appeared to be based in part on a reading of the biblical book of Isaiah by the independent Latter Day Saint Hebraist, Avraham Gileadi, with which Mitchell became familiar from his former participation with Stirling Allan's American Study Group.) 
 The first of these revelations, completed in April 2002, included instructions for Mitchell to marry 7 more wives; God's chastisement of members for rejecting the Book of Mormon and especially the words of Ezra Taft Benson; for loving money and seeking the praise of the world; for ignoring the poor and needy; for failing to testify against secret combinations; and for turning to doctors to cure illness instead of relying on faith, herbs, and fruits. All of those heterodoxies went against the current teachings of the LDS Church so, according to testimony given by his wife, Wanda Barzee, to avoid church discipline and likely excommunication from the LDS Church he kept these revelations secret, sharing them only with family and a few close acquaintances. But they eventually reached local church officials who then excommunicated Mitchell and Barzee in absentia in June 2002, the same month Elizabeth Smart was kidnapped, specifically "for activity promoting bizarre teachings and lifestyle far afield from the principles and doctrines of the Church". Mitchell was also accused at the time of having pornographic pictures of young girls raising further suspicions of pedophilia amongst LDS Church members, but it was not included in his Church disciplinary council process. 
According to Daniel Petersen, a scholar of religion, including Mormon studies, Mitchell's revelations were "logical," falling within the traditions of breakaway Mormon groups. The name Mitchell/Immanuel gave his proposed group was the Church of Jesus Christ and the Sanctified and the Last Days. As later described by psychologist Richard DeMier, these revelations said Mitchell would at one point come to battle the Anti-Christ, with Barzee becoming the "Mother of Zion," with her being able to conceive a male child, despite her having had a hysterectomy, which future child would in turn become the Davidic king in his own right. (Later, Forensic investigator Richard Forbes characterized Mitchell's behaviors and writings as controlling, similar in this manner to those engaged in by other criminals Forbes had researched such as Ervil LeBaron and Charles Manson.) 
 in Davis County, Utah. Being unsuccessful in both attempts, Mitchell then received a new revelation in which, according to testimony from Barzee, he was commanded to forcibly take Mormon girls between the ages of 10 and 14 to become his polygamists wives. This new revelation was then supplemented by another one where he was commanded to forcibly take a 14 year old to become his first polygamist wife, of a total of 350 wives (seven times seven wives plus one, again times seven) that the revelation told Mitchell to take. He then kidnapped Elizabeth Smart from her home at knife point around 2 a.m. Later he would unsuccessfully attempt to kidnap Olivia Wright, a cousin of Elizabeth Smart, for which he was indicted in Utah on aggravated burglary and conspiracy to commit aggravated kidnapping charges. Later he also attempted to kidnap a 12-year-old girl near San Diego, California, but was unsuccessful in that attempt too. After this second failed kidnapping attempt Mitchell would claim that the Lord revealed that they were not yet ready to receive more wives.
The issues surrounding Mitchell's competence to stand trial revolved around his revelations and whether in following them made him incompetent and/or insane. In the federal trial his insanity defense was based on his propensity to receive revelations from God, as he claims, and then to act out according to what he is told by those revelations, something which met the standard for an insanity defense according to his lawyers.  However other people, especially Elizabeth Smart and Wanda Barzee as well as other lay witnesses, testified that Mitchell used these so called revelations only to manipulate others and for self gratification.
Mitchell was declared incompetent to stand trial by Salt Lake City District Judge Judy Atherton on July 26, 2005, who ordered he be retained until he becomes competent to stand trial. The ruling was based on expert psychological reports, mainly from , who found Mitchell to be a paranoid schizophrenic with little grasp of reality who could not rationally assist counsel in preparing a defense nor did he understand the legal proceedings against him. The same Judge rejected forcibly medicating Mitchell due to the reported low probability of a positive outcome.  Mitchell was committed to a psychiatric prison hospital in Salt Lake City. He was again found "incompetent to stand trial" on December 18, 2006.
In 2008 US District Attorney Brett Tolman commenced federal proceedings to prove Mitchell's competency to stand trial before the statutes of limitations expired for a federal kidnapping case. His strategy was based on both expert witness testimony, mainly from New York forensic psychiatrist Michael Welner, an associate professor of psychiatry at NYU School of Medicine and chairman of The Forensic Panel, plus many lay witnesses including Elizabeth Smart and staffers who attended to Michell in the State Hospital. The use of lay witnesses testifying as to his competence was a new legal strategy utilized in hearings to determine competence and has established a precedent. Several defense motions to stop lay witnesses testifying and to move the trial outside of Utah were rejected. The hearing commenced in October 2009, with Smart giving early testimony, and continued throughout November and December 2009.
The mental health professionals who found Mitchell incompetent (over time) include: Richart DeMier, a court appointed forensic psychologist from the U.S. Medical Center for Federal Prisoners in Springfield Mo, who said Mitchell was not making rational decisions about his criminal defense and specifically "If he believes he's going to be miraculously delivered from prison by God in two years time, that's not a rational thought process,". He concluded that Mitchell is a paranoid schizophrenic who is incompetent partly due to Mitchell's belief "that he is divinely ordained to fulfill a special role at the end of the world, putting himself on par with Jesus or God"; forensic psychologist Stephen Golding, who concluded Mitchell to have a delusional disorder with deviant sexual behavior and paranoia; and , a psychology professor from the University of California-Irvine who found Mitchell incompetent to stand trial for the Utah state process in 2004, finding that he has a rare delusional disorder. She wrote in her 2004 report for Judge Atherton that Mitchell believes that "he would be held in jail for seven years until a day of judgment when he would be rescued by God and reunited with Smart and his now-estranged wife, Wanda Barzee" which would be during 2010, counting from the time of Mitchell's arrest.
Michael Welner, a psychiatrist from New York City, found Mitchell competent to stand trial, finding that he suffers from a range of disorders, including pedophilia, anti-social and narcissistic personality disorders, but that he was not psychotic nor delusional. Dr Welner was critical of other mental health professionals who did not research the level of acceptance and the roles played by revelations, prophets and prophesies in religions of the Latter Day Saints movements or Mormonism which Mitchell was a part of. His conclusions included the fact that Mitchell can control situations and that "Lust trumped religion" for Mitchell  He also noted that Mitchell is used to operating in a parallel world of concealment and obfuscation just as most polygamist breakaway groups from the modern LDS church do. In his conclusions, he also compared Mitchell's behavior to that of pedophile Catholic priests who "routinely and dramatically distort their relationship with God" to justify their sexual acts.
In this third competency hearing, this time before Judge Dale Kimball of the U.S. Federal Court for the District of Utah, Mitchell was found competent to stand trial on March 1, 2010, with Kimball's describing Mitchell as an "effectively misleading psychopath" who has manipulated people into thinking him incompetent.
Mitchell's criminal trial on federal kidnapping charges began on November 8, 2010. The jury ended up deliberating for only about five hours, a relatively short time given the amount of evidence they needed to cover, rejected the insanity plea and return guilty verdicts on both counts early on Friday 10 December 2010.
In summarizing Mitchell and his behavior for reporters outside the courthouse Dr. Michael Welner said to reporters outside the courthouse:  "Brian David Mitchell is someone who had severe personality disorders, narcissistic and anti-social....there is no questioning that he was bright and thought that he might have a better future...and as someone who had psychopathic qualities ...he stumbled into the structure of the LDS and that was good for him and it was healthy for him, it gave him an opportunity to rise and gave him an opportunity to have structure. But we are who we are, and he reached the place where he could only go so far and the way he was could not be boxed in that LDS place. The natural graduation, for him,...who had his pedophilic demons, was through that fundamentalist LDS schism track...and he went along a path that could accommodate him. Somewhere along that line, where he could express himself in a grand way....that path....intersected with his pedophilia, which was part of his life at some points and not part of his life at others. And it's when that path intersected with his pedophilia that  brought us to the point where we all meet here today."