Sunetric Capital, LLC is a separate entity that provides funding via capital investment for the Sunetric Power Plan, a Power Purchase Agreement designed by Mullen and Tiller whereby the company pays for the up-front costs of commercial projects and acts as owner and maintainer while customers (host) pay for the electricity generated by the renewable energy system. This reduces the initial cost to the business-owner or nonprofit entity.
Sunetric's push for photovoltaic installations is of particular import to the State of Hawaii, which, despite having already reached grid parity, relies on fuel imports for 90% of its energy needs, making it an ideal candidate for energy independence. Photovoltaic customers in Hawaii qualify for both a 35% state tax rebate and a 30% federal tax rebate on all photovoltaic installations.
According to the Honolulu Department of Planning and Permitting photovoltaic permit records, Sunetric performs, on average,  the installation and activation of 40% (the majority market share) of net-metered photovoltaic systems in Hawaii. Since its founding in 2004, the company has performed approximately 1,525 residential solar power installations and approximately 95 commercial installations, totaling over 12.5 megawatts throughout the islands.
In December 2008, Sunetric completed both the largest roof-mounted photovoltaic installation in Hawaii on top of  shopping mall and the second-largest solar farm in Hawaii at Wilcox Memorial Hospital on Kauai. The Wilcox Memorial Hospital installation comprises 2,190 solar panels connected to 3 solar inverters with a rating of 504 kilowatts.
Since 2006, the company has installed more than 2 megawatts of photovoltaic systems for military bases in Hawaii, including Schofield Barracks, Fort Shafter, Hickam AFB, Bellows AFB, and Aliamanu Military Reservation. The company is responsible for a photovoltaic system used to power the hydrogen fuel cell plant at Hickam Air Force Base.
In September 2010, Sunetric partnered with national solar electricity company SunRun to offer an expanded Power Purchase Agreement to Hawaii homeowners, whereby homeowners pay for electricity usage but do not buy solar panels outright, reducing the initial out-of-pocket expense. This partnership, new to Hawaii, makes the state the seventh in which SunRun operates.