Warren is the third family member of Antoine E. Cartier and his wife Eliza Ann of a family of nine. He was born in Manistee, Michigan, on January 12, 1866. His family moved to Ludington, Michigan, in 1877. 
Warren went to parochial schools as well as public schools for his schooling while he was growing up. From there he attended a business college near Montreal for two years. 
Warren enrolled at Notre Dame University in 1884 at the age of 18 and graduated in 1887 with a Civil Engineering degree. While there he was on the first football team of the University. Some years later the university was expanding and their Athletic Association decided to build an enclosed field for the varsity sports. The problem was however, they couldn't raise funds for project. A letter was sent to Warren in June 1899 asking if he would like to help. He had a reputation of "respected for his abilities and for his genial character." He responded by purchasing  and furnishing the lumber required for the fencing of an enclosed athletic field. He also furnished the lumber required for a grandstand. Because of his generosity the athletics field was named the Cartier Athletic Field.
Warren moved back to Ludington after he graduated from Notre Dame in 1887 to work with his father in various lumber businesses. He married Catherine (Kate) Dempsey on May 22, 1888. The city of Ludington embraced the newlyweds in a grandeur manner showering them with spledid wedding gifts, including table linens, silver spoons, pearl-handled fruit knives, oyster forks, teapots, pickle castors, decortive vases, and poetry books.  Their marriage produced 3 children: Warren Ray, Morgan Edward and Vincent George.
Warren was a devoted Catholic. He helped found the Catholic Church Extension Society, which aided under-resourced poor parishes and missions around the United States. He was later awarded a knighting by the pope for his work and aid. Both he and his wife were communicants of the Catholic Church, in which they held membership in the St. Simon church of Ludington, Michigan.
Warren held at one time or another the following positions in these various businesses:
Warren was connected with or a member of the following organizations:
Warren was a supporter of the Republican party. He was a secretary of the Mason county Republican committee for two years. In 1908 he represented the 26th congressional district of the state as presidential elector on the ticket for the Republican party. He served two years as city recorder of Ludington, Michigan. Warren was the Ludington city mayor in 1899 and 1903. 
Warren and his wife's primary residence was at Ludington, Michigan. They received a fully furnished Victorian style home from Warren's parents when they were first married. The home was one door east and had recently been remodeled and updated. Warren later built a home on the west side on Ludington Ave in 1905. This three-story neoclassical style mansion was built of Roman pressed brick and trimmed with Bedford limestone. It had a steam heating system, a pulley-operated draft system to provide cooling, and chandeliers of gas and electricity. The interior consisted of mahogany, cherry, walnut, white maple, oak, and hickory. It is currently a Bed & Breakfast lodge.
In the winter time the Cartiers' home was at Fort Myers, Florida. They were neighbors of Thomas Edison, Henry Ford and Harvey Firestone. They lived about a block from Thomas Edison.Ludington Daily News (Sunday - Extra), Volume XLI, No. 304; Oct 18, 1931 "Warren Cartier depicts home life of Edisons, neighbors in Florida" by Warren A. Cartier - ''Mrs. Cartier and myself have considered it a great privilege to have our winter home in Fort Myers, Flordia, so close to the Edison home., both being practically in the same block.''
Warren recalls in a newspaper article on the date of Edison's death that he visited the Edisons often in the past while in Florida. He mentions that Mr. Edison was deaf in his left ear and nearly so in his right. This made conversations "tiring" on the throat. He says Thomas Edison considered the handicap a benefit, since then he didn't have to bother with social matters and could then just concentrate on his projects he was interested in. 
Warren remembers Mr. Edison allowing his grandchild, Morgan Cartier Jr., to be photographed with him. Another picture was taken with Mr. and Mrs Edison holding hands with the grandchild, whom was only but five years of age then. He recalled how these pictures were precious and would become family heirlooms.
Warren died in Chicago November 7, 1934, of kidney failure. He had a kidney ailment since October 27 and was hosipitalized then receiving medical attention and two blood transfusions. Warren is buried in the Pere Marquette cemetery at Ludington, Michigan next to his wife Catherine.