Yodel Australia is located in Macquarie Park, NSW, and is a subsidiary of parent company fulfilNET Pty. Ltd. It  began trading in 1998 targeting the SME (Small and medium enterprises) online market.  John Howard made a notable appearance at the opening of the new fulfilNET offices in North Ryde, stressing the importance of small and medium enterprises.
In 2002, fulfilNET announced a 12-month expansion programme, to move from "$5 million to $10 million price range"   and in 2003, it partnered with Melbourne IT to provide a range of web site design services for Melbourne IT customers. Three years later fulfilNET established ''Yodel Australia'' as a local website advertising company, and in May 2006, Yodel became the first authorised reseller of Google Adwords and Yahoo! Search Marketing in Australia and New Zealand. Since registering with  WhoisGAP, Yodel has grown to be a company with over 7000 customers and 160 employees.
Yodel renewed its contract with Google in 2007 and expanded to New Zealand, and in 2008, as part of its international expansion strategy, fulfilNET Australia announced that it has secured a strategic alliance with Google for Yodel Australia to sell Google AdWords service in South Africa, Ireland and the UK. while also  establishing an office in France.
The managing director of Yodel Australia, Paul Harvell, manages the relationships that Yodel has with Google Australia and Yahoo! Search Marketing.
Yodel is an official reseller of Google AdWords in Australia and a certified Google AdWords Qualified Company, and this is their main advertising service. It employs 26 Google AdWords Professionals to manage the Pay Per Click advertising campaigns of small to medium businesses located in Australia.
Yodel also builds and manages their customers' websites, providing ready-made template sites that can be customised and edited by the client as well as associated hosting and domain name services.  In June 2010, Yodel launched their Search Engine Optimisation services.