The '''Warren Court''' refers to the Supreme Court of the United States between 1953 and 1969, when Earl Warren served as Chief Justice. Warren led a liberal majority that used judicial power in dramatic fashion, to the consternation of conservative opponents. The Warren Court expanded civil rights, civil liberties, judicial power, and the federal power in dramatic ways.
The court was both applauded and criticized for bringing an end to racial segregation in the United States, incorporating the Bill of Rights (i.e. applying it to states), and ending officially sanctioned voluntary prayer in public schools. The period is recognized as a high point in judicial power that has receded ever since, but with a substantial continuing impact.
Prominent members of the Court during the Warren era besides the Chief Justice included Justices William J. Brennan, Jr., William O. Douglas, Hugo Black, Felix Frankfurter, and John Marshall Harlan II.
One of the primary factors in Warren's leadership was his political background, having served three terms as Governor of California  and experience as the Republican candidate for  vice president in 1948.  Warren brought a strong belief in the remedial power of law.  According to Bernard Schwartz, Warren's view of the law was pragmatic, seeing it as an instrument for obtaining equity and fairness.  Schwartz argues that Warren's approach was most effective "when the political institutions had defaulted on their responsibility to try to address problems such as segregation and reapportionment and cases where the constitutional rights of defendants were abused." 
A related component of Warren's leadership was his focus on broad ethical principles, rather than narrower interpretative structures.  Describing the latter as "conventional reasoning patterns," Professor Mark Tushnet suggests Warren often disregarded these in groundbreaking cases such as ''Brown v. Board of Education'', ''Reynolds v. Sims'' and ''Miranda v. Arizona'', where such traditional sources of precedent were stacked against him.  Tushnet suggests Warren's principles "were philosophical, political, and intuitive, not legal in the conventional technical sense."
Warren's leadership was characterized by remarkable consensus on the court, particularly in some of the most controversial cases.  These included ''Brown v. Board of Education'', ''Gideon v. Wainwright'', and ''Cooper v. Aaron'', which were unanimously decided, as well as ''Abington School District v. Schempp'' and ''Engel v. Vitale'', each striking down religious recitations in schools with only one dissent.  In an unusual action, the decision in ''Cooper'' was personally signed by all nine justices, with the three new members of the Court adding that they supported and would have joined the Court's decision in ''Brown v. Board''.
Professor John Hart Ely in his book ''Democracy and Distrust'' famously characterized the Warren Court as a "''Carolene Products'' Court." This referred to the famous Footnote Four in ''United States v. Carolene Products'' in which the Supreme Court had suggested that heightened judicial scrutiny might be appropriate in three types of cases: those where a law was challenged as a deprivation of a specifically enumerated right (such as a challenge to a law because it denies "freedom of speech," a phrase specifically included in the Bill of Rights); those where a challenged law made it more difficult to achieve change through normal political processes; and those where a law impinged on the rights of "discrete and insular minorities." The Warren Court's doctrine may be seen as proceeding aggressively in these general areas: its aggressive reading of the first eight amendments in the Bill of Rights (as "incorporated" against the states by the Fourteenth Amendment); its commitment to unblocking the channels of political change ("one-man, one-vote"), and its vigorous protection of the rights of racial minority groups. The Warren Court, while in many cases taking a broad view of individual rights, generally declined to read the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment broadly, outside of the incorporation context (see ''Ferguson v. Skrupa'', but see also ''Griswold v. Connecticut''). The Warren Court's decisions were also strongly nationalist in thrust, as the Court read Congress's power under the Commerce Clause quite broadly and often expressed an unwillingness to allow constitutional rights to vary from state to state (as was explicitly manifested in ''Cooper v. Aaron'').
Professor Rebecca Zietlow argues that the Warren Court brought an expansion in the "rights of belonging," which she characterizes as "rights that promote an inclusive vision of who belongs to the national community and facilitate equal membership in that community."  Zietlow notes that both critics and supporters of the Warren Court attribute to it this shift, whether as a matter of imposing its countermajoritarian will or as protecting the rights of minorities.  Zietlow also challenges the notion of the Warren Court as "activist," noting that even at its height the Warren Court only invalidated 17 acts of Congress between 1962 and 1969, as compared to the more "conservative" Rehnquist Court which struck down 33 acts of Congress between 1995 and 2003.
Important decisions during the Warren Court years included decisions holding segregation policies in public schools (''Brown v. Board of Education'') and anti-miscegenation laws unconstitutional (''Loving v. Virginia''); ruling that the Constitution protects a general right to privacy (''Griswold v. Connecticut''); that states are bound by the decisions of the Supreme Court and cannot ignore them (''Cooper v. Aaron''); that public schools cannot have official prayer (''Engel v. Vitale'') or mandatory Bible readings (''Abington School District v. Schempp''); the scope of the doctrine of incorporation (''Mapp v. Ohio'', ''Miranda v. Arizona'') was dramatically increased; reading an equal protection clause into the Fifth Amendment (''Bolling v. Sharpe''); holding that the states may not apportion a chamber of their legislatures in the manner in which the United States Senate is apportioned (''Reynolds v. Sims''); and holding that the Constitution requires active compliance (''Gideon v. Wainwright'').
The Brown decision of 1954 marked, in dramatic fashion, the radical shift in the Court's--and the nation's--priorities from issues of property rights to civil liberties. Under Warren the courts became an active partner in governing the nation, although still not coequal. Warren never saw the courts as a backward-looking branch of government. 
The Brown decision was a powerful moral statement clad in a weak constitutional analysis. His biographer concludes, "If Warren had not been on the Court, the Brown decision might not have been unanimous and might not have generated a moral groundswell that was to contribute to the emergence of the civil rights movement of the 1960s. Warren was never a legal scholar on a par with Frankfurter or a great advocate of particular doctrines, as were Black and Douglas. Instead, he believed that in all branches of government common sense, decency,  and elemental justice were decisive, not stare decisis, tradition or the text of the Constitution.  He wanted results. He never felt that doctrine alone should be allowed to deprive people of justice. He felt racial segregation was simply wrong, and Brown, whatever its doctrinal defects, remains a landmark decision primarily because of Warren's majestic interpretation of the equal protection clause to mean that children should not be shunted to a separate world reserved for minorities.
The one man, one vote cases (''Baker v. Carr'' and ''Reynolds v. Sims'') of 1962   1964, had the effect of ending the over-representation of rural areas in state legislatures, as well as the under-representation of suburbs. Central cities--which had long been underepresented--were now losing population to the suburbs and were not greatly affected.
In the key apportionment case Reynolds v. Sims (1964)   Warren delivered a civics lesson: "To the extent that a citizen's right to vote is debased, he is that much less a citizen," Warren declared. "The weight of a citizen's vote cannot be made to depend on where he lives. This is the clear and strong command of our Constitution's Equal Protection Clause." Unlike the desegregation cases, in this instance, the Court ordered immediate action, and despite loud outcries from rural legislators,  Congress failed to reach the two-thirds needed pass a constitutional amendment. The states complied, reapportioned their legislatures quickly and with minimal troubles. Numerous commentators have concluded reapportionment was the Warren Court's great "success" story.
In ''Gideon v. Wainwright'',  the Court held that the Sixth Amendment required that all indigent criminal defendants receive publicly-funded counsel (Florida law at that time required the assignment of free counsel to indigent defendants only in capital cases);
While most Americans eventually agreed that the Court's desegregation and apportionment decisions were fair and right, disagreement about the "due process revolution" continues into the 21st century.  Warren took the lead in criminal justice; despite his years as a tough prosecutor, always insisted that the police must play fair or the accused should go free. Warren was privately outraged at what he considered police abuses that ranged from warrantless searches to forced confessions. 
The Warren Court also sought to expand the scope of application of the First Amendment. The Court's decision outlawing mandatory school prayer in ''Engel v. Vitale'' (1962) brought vehement complaints by conservatives that echoed into the 21st century.
This decision was fundamental, after Warren's retirement, for the outcome of Roe v. Wade and consequent legalization of abortion.
With the exception of the desegregation decisions, few decisions were unanimous. The eminent scholar Justice John Marshall Harlan took Frankfurter's place as the Court's self-constraint spokesman, often joined by Potter Stewart and Byron R. White. But with the appointment of Thurgood Marshall, the first black justice, and Abe Fortas (replacing Goldberg), Warren could count on six votes in most cases.