I would like to know who has created the countries of the plant - God, humans or the nature or is it because we have different knids of humans?
Best regards Daniel 
The frontier between Spain and France has always been delimitated by the Pyrenees mountain range, all modifications of that frontier were in parts that are easy to cross. So, if God created mountains, then you can say that the frontier between Spain and France was created by God.
I dem for stuff like the great plains in the West part of Russia, preventing any invasion from Europe; the swamps and rought terrain in Central America, preventing contact between Maya civilization/Aztec civilization and Inca civilization. 
There was this documental in TV saying how one of those precolumbian civs had discovered the wheel but they couldn't use it because it was all rough terrain and they hadn't animals big enough to pull a cart, and the other civ had big animals that could easily pull a cart (llamas?) but they hadn't discovered the wheel. Because of the bad terrain they never entered in contact and they could never discover the chariot and conquer all of the American continent and join all of it in a common culture that could unite the land in a single country and culture (kind of what Alexander the Great tried to do with Greek culture, Napoleon and Hitler with Europe, Greek with the Aegean Sea, Romans with the Mediterranean, etc). 
Similar problems for Africa, with too many jungles and deserts to make it feasible to create a single African culture. 
Arguibly, the European Union exists only because the European countries all have a common culture, and that culture was obtained by cultures managing to conquer all or most of the continent, then other cultures absorbing them and conquering stuff again, etc, until all countries get at least a part of the common culture that results from all the mixes. This was possible due to the mix of mountains and fertile plains in Europe, which allows for small civs to develop, conquer, and get conquered, and make it impossible to keep the terrain conquered for too long (too many connections with paths of invasion allowing Muslims, Turks, Huns, etc. to enter, too many thick forests and snow in the North, etc). So, again, if God created Europe's geography, it was God's fault that the European Union exists, and that there no things like the African Union or the Asian Union (the American Union kind of exists, but there is one for the Latin-conquered part, and another for the English/French conquered part). --  ( ) 09:20, 21 June 2010 (UTC)
History of Belgium   ( ) 10:01, 21 June 2010 (UTC)
Hi OP.  Just so you know, science has definitively discounted "God" as the answer to any question about "who did" something.  (except in fiction).  In point of fact, some things humans made, the rest nature made - God made, makes, did, and does nothing, except in the fiction written or believed by humans.  This is, at least in my estimation, the upshot of the enlightenment (an end to this kind of superstition), and, if you ask me, the major source of progress in the past few hundred years.  The first step to everything you see around you, from the computer you're typing on, the mass produced furniture you're probably sitting at, the electricity powering your house, the first step toward all of this was realizing that the answer was not, is not, and will never be "God wanted it this way."   ( ) 15:01, 21 June 2010 (UTC)
While mankind contonues to research outer space, water bodies, land ceaselessly and while scientists explore the deposits undergound, why have we not vigorously studied the various ocean beds/ ocean floors?
Why doesn't antimony nitrate have an article? Is it subject to hydrolysis and therefore unstable? --  ( ) 11:31, 21 June 2010 (UTC)
Looking at periodic properties, you might be interested in  of an attempted preparation of anhydrous Sn(NO3)2! From the description given, it is clear than the Sn(II) was oxidized to Sn(IV) before the anhydrous salt could be prepared. Simple Sn(NO3)2 is still unknown, although basic nitrates are known. Tin tetranitrate is covalent.     14:29, 21 June 2010 (UTC)
Obviously humans use tools, and a few other animals can make and use tools, but are humans unique in that they are the only animals that use tools to make other (better) tools?    ( ) 14:21, 21 June 2010 (UTC)
I have a big stainless steel kitchen knife. As far as I know, it doesn't have a means of being sharpened. The knife has been in some pretty disgusting situations (due to people putting it in the same part of the sink where food gets stuck and sits for days and I had no time to wipe it down with bleach and wait 20 minutes, so I just took the range support off the stove and lit up a gas flame (there's a hole underneath the burner) and ran the knife through the base of the flame.
I didn't run it through until it was red hot but I had some water droplets on the side of the knife and I basically watched the droplets boil off as my "diagnostic". The thing I'm wondering is whether I can ruin my blade if I heat it up too long? And I noticed particles coming off as I washed it -- I hope I didn't melt any temperature-sensitive protective coatings or anything.   ( ) 15:18, 21 June 2010 (UTC)
I reacted tin(II) sulfate (probably some of it oxidized to tin(IV) sulfate) with some ammonium hydroxide to get a tan precipitate. I reacted it with more and I got a gray precipitate. Tin(II) oxide states that it is black, so is it a mixture of tin(II) oxide and tin(IV) oxide? Thank you. --  ( ) 15:40, 21 June 2010 (UTC)
Racking for ideas... my group has lots of experience with animal cells, but not plant cells. This afternoon we are going to see how plant cells with their cell walls digested are going to behave around gold nanoparticles treated with TAT and other membrane-penetrating proteins (normally used on animal cells). At the same time I am brainstorming for other ideas. It will be very exciting if plant cells have vestigial endocytosis capabilities that get activated.
I'm also wondering how plant cells take in starch. Do they? After all, when sugar is transported up and down stems through the phloem, it's through the form of starches and not simple sugars, right? 
Basically anything that would get relatively large nanoparticles (20-60 nm) into cells. (Excitingly, we may soon have a means of using much smaller particles -- 2-10 nm without suffering aggregation problems usually associated with them, if we probe the right ligands.) We know animal cells endocytose particles that large -- up to a limit of 100 nm, but they get stuck in endosomes and usually remain unprocessed for hours (by that time, since we are using particle tracking the cells have apoptosed on our microscopes). Is it crazy perhaps to try to maybe enter through plasmodesmata machinery? (If that's how starches are transported?) Very few people in my group are plant specialists. 
I was thinking of coating the particle with various carbohydrate-like polymers (or even just lots of monomer ligands) that would make the particle look like useful food for a plant cell. Despite being quite large. Normally I know plants rely on bacteria, protists or fungi to digest nutrients for them.   ( ) 16:11, 21 June 2010 (UTC)
I have noticed that when wiping off an unfinished solid wood stool with a clean wet paper towel that a yellowish stain comes off onto the paper towel. What is the yellowish stain since the wood is unfinished?     Preceding   comment added by   (       ) 18:27, 21 June 2010 (UTC) 
My grad student sort of likes the plasmodesmata idea; we're now looking at particular movement protein papers to see if anything like this has been attempted before. But I want to ask -- do plant cells have responses against movement proteins? I don't know which viral proteins are particularly targeted. I want to know how much nanoparticles treated with movement protein can be added before I start eliciting defence responses.
Also anyone have tips for controlled cell disruption on one end of a plant cell culture (on a microscope slide) while leaving most of the cells alive and not in the process of apoptosis? In particular I'm thinking of using our glass-washing sonicator. I could dip the slide in a solution with mild surfactant while in the sonicator. I know the part that is not exposed to the sonicator solution will still feel sound waves, but they will be much less damaging, right?   ( ) 18:38, 21 June 2010 (UTC)
Anyone have suggestions on surfactant? I don't want to completely dissolve the cell membrane of the targeted cells -- I need to leave the gap junctions intact.   ( ) 20:06, 21 June 2010 (UTC)
I would like to determine the (theoretical or real) amount of water that stays on a surface that has been dipped in water (or a water based solution). For the real value, I suppose I could weight the object before and after it has been dipped (and before the water/solution dries). Can anyone point to the theory behind this? Other methods? Or perhaps point to known answers for different objects? I want to determine this for sugar maple and aspen leaves, dipped in a sucrose solution. Ideally to figure the amount of sucrose per unit of leaf surface added by dipping.   (       ). 19:24, 21 June 2010 (UTC)
I'm trying to understand what makes a transverse flux motor move.. for example  which seems typical - I can understand figures 4 and 5 ie with current applied causes magnetic field goes through the rotor... But the only way I can understand this working is on a reluctance motor principle (with more than one set of current windings) - operating on a sort of stepper principle - ie a synchronous type motor. (or maybe AC drive with sets of magnets in alternating pole direction where current reversal causes alternate rotor poles to allign , again by the reluctance principle..) Can shed more light on this?   ( ) 20:46, 21 June 2010 (UTC)
In starting a new exercise program, I'm trying to determine how many calories are burned per each push-up I do.
I don't remember where I read that 2,600 calories equals one pound and that one calorie equals 4.184 joules.
That doesn't help me in converting push-ups to calories burned.  I also remember reading, but don't remember where, 
Basically, what I want to know is; for a man weighing 255 pounds, approximately how many calories would he burn 
Is water/salt water conductive enough to be used as an effective faraday cage? How much protection would it provide against emp/super-emp weapons? If not what could be added to it to increase conductivity enough to provide adequate protection? I suppose I could put my cell phone in some tupperware, submerge it, and try to call it, but I think that'd be an apples to oranges comparison. Cheers.   ( ) 22:10, 21 June 2010 (UTC)
Foodborne illness mentions a number of the most common offending pathogens   which, if any, is most likely to be contracted from drinking spoiled milk?