Dexter Industries was founded in July 2009 by a group of engineers with an interest in robotics    specifically in the Lego Mindstorms NXT system. Their first product was the dSwitch and have since created several products for the Lego Mindstorms NXT system. Dexter Industries is located in Washington D.C.
Dexter Industries produces flexible motion sensor, pressure sensor, and temperature sensors. The temperature sensors are thermistor-based; they are read as an analog sensor by the NXT. 
The dFlex is the flexible sensor available from Dexter Industries. This sensor measures the bend of the sensor and records mechanical motion. dFlex is the newest product from Dexter Industries and is reviewed on several robotics blogs.
For the temperature sensors, there are two versions: an open version and a protected version. The sensors come with a 2 meter long cord.
The dPressure sensor is made specifically for the Lego NXT Mindstorms system. It is capable of measuring up to 250  kPa (30 psi) and 500 kPa (70 psi) of pressure and gauge vacuum.
For the dSolar sensor, there are two 9V versions with different wattages: a 2W and a 4W model, both of which can power the NXT system or a user's robot.  Dexter Industries also produces three additional adapters that relate to the solar sensor.  The first is an optional capacitor bank that serves as a mini-battery; it provides continuous power for NXT projects if the system runs under a shadow or cloud.  Second, there is an adapter that allows three solar panels to be plugged in simultaneously; this can provide up to 750 mA at 10 volts.  The third adapter is a battery pack that can recharge the NXT battery pack utilizing solar power. 
The dGPS sensor provides GPS coordinate information to the user's robot and calculates navigation information.  The sensor provides latitude, longitude, time, speed and heading to the user's project or robot.  The sensor can also navigate to target coordinates.  The dGPS output data is compatible with Google Maps. 
An educational workbook written by a technical writer is in production for the dGPS.  This book includes instructional projects with questions and descriptions that teach students about mapping, robotics, programming and navigational terms.
The dSwitch is designed to control household appliances. The device acts as a switch, allowing a NXT invention to control power sources. The device may be used for turning on a power function based on temperature thresholds. The device may also be used for other means, such as an automated battery recharger 
Dexter Industries produces third-party software for support of the Lego Mindstorms NXT Systems. The company also works with other developers to create driver software for their products.