Six series of the show were created between 1999 and 2002. Produced in Cardiff, Wales, by TV company ''Presentable'', they aired on Channel 4, and were later repeated on Discovery Home & Leisure in the UK.
A celebrity version of the show was produced on 12 October 2000, featuring (in finishing order from 1st to 7th place) Anthony Holden, Al Alvarez, Martin Amis, Victoria Coren, Patrick Marber, Stephen Fry and Ricky Gervais. This led into the creation of Celebrity Poker Club.
In 2005 an all-amateur tournament by the name of PartyPoker.com Late Night Poker Ace was broadcast, following a qualification round on the aforementioned website. The tournament was won by 46-year-old security van driver John Shaw from Dunfermline, who won the   50,000 first prize. Further tournaments under the same or similar names were played in 2006 and 2008, and, since 2009 under the name Full Tilt Poker Late Night Poker.
A series of ''Late Night Poker'' consists of 9 programmes - 7 heats, one semi-final, and the final. Each heat has 7 players. The 7 winners of the heats progress straight to the final, and the runners-up go to the semi-final, where one additional player progresses, for a final table of 8 players.
Although the precise sums of money involved have varied, the typical buy-in has been in the region of   1,500, with a first prize of between   40,000 and   60,000.
The shows lasted 60 minutes when broadcast, with the season finals lasting 90 minutes. When shown in America on FSN, the episodes were cut into two (or three) 30-minute parts.
Nevertheless, in contrast to most Poker shows, ''Late Night Poker'' tends to use these cameras in a rather minimalist way. For example, in a two-way pot, often only one player's cards are shown, with the commentators trying to infer from the other player's actions what cards he or she holds, and how the first player should act. Because of this, the commentary often mirrors the actual decision-making process of a Poker player. Only late in the hand, at the time of a critical decision, would the other player's cards be shown, possibly revealing a startling bluff or an unexpectedly strong hand.
Former winners Dave Ulliott and Padraig Parkinson have publicly stated on the Hendon Mob's forum that they will not be playing in the event due to favourable efforts being made towards foreign players by the show's producers. 
The following players will be returning: Joe Beevers, Barny Boatman, Dave Colclough, Peter Costa, Liam Flood, Ken Lennaard, Marcel Luske, Donnacha O'Dea, Pascal Perrault, Ben Roberts, Surinder Sunar, Willie Tann, Simon Trumper and Ram Vaswani
The new players featured are Roy Brindley, Peter Davidsen, Tony G, Kenna James, Iwan Jones, Theo Jorgensen, Michael Keiner, Lothar Landauer, Sean Murphy, Mikael Thuritz, and 8 online qualifiers. 