At Seton Hall, Hartage was a student and community organizer. He organized an African-American Student Science Organization, to promote student entry and matriculation in science and math and served as president. Under his leadership the organization developed the New Jersey State Black Students Science Conference which held state-wide conferences from 1972 through 1974.
Community Service - As a County Commissioner, Hartage was a moderate Democrat, very progressive on social issues and more conservative on fiscal matters.
In 1998, Hartage ran for the Orange County Commission in district 6, a non-partisan race. His primary opponents in 1998 were Bruce Antone, Ralph Armstead, Charlene Mitchell, Billie Tate and Sylvia Young. He faced Republican Charlene Mitchell in the 1998 run-off election. He ran for re-election in 2002 and faced primary opponents Rico Brown, Mervyn Cordner and Chick Fryar. Hartage received 52% of the votes winning in the primary and avoiding a run-off election.
Commissioner Hartage served on the; Value Adjustment Board, Black Business Investment Fund Board, Lynx Transportation Board of Directors, Vice Chair of the Cultural Arts Task Force, which he founded, East Central Florida Regional Planning Councils Governing Board, International Drive Master Transit and Improvement District Board of Directors, Central Florida Fair Board of Directors, Board of Directors Arts and Cultural Affairs Council, Metro Plan Orlando, Enzian Theater Advisory Board, Florida Association of Counties - Chairman, Large Urban County Caucus; member of the Foundation Board of Directors and the Justice; member Public Safety Steering Committee, Metro Orlando International Affairs Commission
Prior to serving on the Board of Commissions Hartage served on the following boards; Orange County Planning and Zoning Commissionn 1992   1995; Chairman 1995, Orange County Board of Zoning Adjustment, and the Greater Orlando Leadership Foundation Alumnus (GOLF).
In 2010, Homer Hartage qualified as a candidate for the first county-wide Orange County School Board Chair position to represent Orange County Public Schools, Orlando, Florida.
Hartage's public service was recognized with two Congressional Citations, one in 2006 by Congresswoman Corrine Brown and in 2010 by Congressman Allan GraysonCongressman Allan Grayson.
Homer Hartage was born September 1951, in Richland, Georgia, Webster County. His mother Laverne and father Homer Hartage Sr. relocated to Florida that same year. Hartage met his wife of 33 years the former Rosemary Gadsden, a native of South Carolina at Seton Hall, while working for the IRS. They married in 1976 and have 3 children and 6 grandchildren.  His sons Gaidi and Jamal are both entrepreneurs. Gaidi is the former CEO of Asenda Inc. a computer programming company which developed kiosks for hotel guest registration, and in 2010 he is currently a web designer for ESPN. Jamal is founder and president of Business IT Services Inc, a computer and technical service company.
Homer Hartage is founder and CEO, of Orlando, Florida based Nuchia Foods Corporation. Nuchia Foods is gluten-free and a food manufacturing company established in 2007. Nuchia Foods manufactures Chia Seed Flour and this is the first company in the world to produce Chia flour. The Chia Flour was developed by Homer Hartage following 18 months of research and development. Chia Seed flour is alternative flour to wheat flour.Teri Gruss, MS  It is the first alternative flour that can replace wheat flour 1 to 1 in traditional recipes and meet consumer expectations of ease of use, taste, texture, and quality.
Chia Seed Flour offers life saving alternative for 3 million Americans with Coeliac disease, individuals with celiac disease cannot tolerate gluten, a protein found in wheat, rye and barley. Additionally, Nuchia Foods Chia Seed Flour is Hypoallergenic, tasty, and safe for the tens of millions people with Autism, Crohn   s disease and food allergies Nuchia products are widely accepted and the company has been featured in articles in leading national and international new sources including; Forbes, Washington Post,Leigh Lambert Leigh Lambert  E-Trade, AOL Money & Finance, Inns Magazine, International Business Times, BNP Brief, Food Business News, Milling News, Grainnet: Breaking News, Orlando Business Journal, Yahoo Finance, Side Dish, The Bond Report     in Cyprus and more.
Hartage was guest lecturer at Drexel University Goodwin College in April 2010, demonstrating the use and benefits of Chia Seed flour. He also worked with Massey University in Singapore Polytechnic campus, Republic of Singapore to study the isolation and characterization of a hydrocolloid from Chia seeds (Salvia Hispanica l).
Hartage Invented Chia Seed Flour. Established the Striving to Achieve Academic Readiness Program (STARR) at Jones High School and funded it with $80 thousand. The program coordinated donations of school supplies and services designed to help improve FCAT scores at failing schools.
In 1998   1999 he donated 100% of his Commissioner discretionary funds, $150,000 to public schools to purchase non-budgeted computers and media equipment for deserving schools.
Lead the County to become self insured for health insurance in 2006. It produced and estimated $14 million in annual savings to the County.
Lead on persuading Orange County to pursue ownership of County buildings verses leasing buildings at a projected savings of over $10 million a year.
Creation of the Cultural Arts Taskforce and established the first recurring funding source for the arts, tied to the Tourist Development Tax.  In 2006, $3 million was derived from this source. Subsequently the Cultural Arts Council was created and is celebrating its seventh year of operations.  His work here was recognized with a proclamation by the Orange County Cultural Arts Council.
As a member of the Lynx Board of Directors, Central Florida   s Regional Mass Transit System, and Hartage lead Lynx to record improvements in service, getting them their single largest one year financial commitment from Orange County and other public funding sources, a record $37 million single year funding increase. The Lynx Board recognized this with a proclamation.
Lead on improved funding allocations  for HIV/AIDS and administration service and budgets to get more dollars to African American owned service providers to better service those most affected by the disease.
In the area of making neighborhoods safer and neighborhood improvement, Hartage put millions of dollars into neighborhood improvement. He created the Ivey Crime Task Force which is credited with reducing crime and reviving the neighborhoods of Washington Park and Holden Heights.
He sponsored the Commissioner Hartage, Christmas Toy -Give- Away program 7 years in a row, helping thousands of the Counties neediest families.
Founded the Arthur    Pappy    Kennedy Prayer Breakfast to honor Orlando   s first African-American elected official and had a street named in honor of Reverend W.D. Judge, a Civil Rights advocate.
With Lieutenant Governor Frank Brogan, and Senator Mel Martinez he traveled to South Africa and Puerto Rico respectively on a trade missions meeting with top government and business leaders.  He has been a frequent traveler to Haiti supporting economic development, and lead Haitians in the establishment of the Haitian Consulate General office in Orlando, Florida, and when floods hit Haiti he quickly organized efforts to send an entire 727 airplane full of supplies to the neediest families in Haiti. And he incorporated Flavie International S.A, in Haiti to promote agricultural development. In 2002, Hartage led a Cultural Arts trade mission to Milan, Italy, exposing Central Florida artist to an international audience and creating market value for Florida artist.  The success of this mission led to the publication of a book,    Orlando Furioso.   
Homer Hartage is a resident of Orlando, Florida, where he has lived since 1978. Prior to moving to Orlando he lived in Gainesville, Florida, Jersey City, New Jersey and his hometown, Leesburg, Florida.