 There is also a multiplayer mode consisting of up to 16 players that will pit spies versus mercenaries.
Alongside team deathmatch and other standard game modes there are massive objective-based battles where players have to work as a team to attack or defend various spy-themed goals. The player also pilots several vehicle types throughout the course of the game.
The story is set some time after the events of Quantum of Solace. It begins with Greco (Luis Soto), an international terrorist planning a suicide attack on the G-20 Summit at the Acropolis structure in Athens. M (Judi Dench) sends Bond (Daniel Craig) to investigate and prevent an attack from occurring. After a brief encounter with Greco on his yacht, Bond pursues him through Athens. After a second confrontation with Greco which ends with Greco left alive, Bond stops a bomb-laden car destined for the Acropolis structure by knocking off the road with an Aston Martin, saving the G-20 summit from potential disaster.
The next morning, Bond is assigned to rescue a missing professor, Malcolm Tedworth. Tedworth was originally feared dead until an anonymous tip and tracing of his cell phone led MI6 to an Istanbul construction site. Bond investigates the area that Tedworth   s phone signal was lost in. In the catacombs, Tedworth is interrogated by a man called Bernin who demands the password to a USB drive. Tedworth submits to the torture and is promptly executed. Bond interrupts, pursues Bernin by car and on foot, ending at an old coliseum.  Bernin however manages to get the data extracted, only to reveal Stefan Pomerov's name to Bond before being kicked off a ledge.
After learning that Pomerov is going to be in Monaco, Bond travels to Nice, meeting with his contact, a wealthy jewellery designer named Nicole Hunter (Joss Stone).  She takes Bond to one of Pomerov's casinos in Monaco.  Nicole distracts Pomerov while Bond sneaks in and breaks into his safe. Bond recovers documents and a camera that contains a video of Tedworth   s interrogation. On it, Tedworth reveals that he was the lead scientist who was trying to create an antidote to both Smallpox and Anthrax to cure soldiers in the event of a biological attack. Having been discovered, Bond shoots his way out of the casino and escapes with Nicole. M informs Bond that the files he found were invoices for sophisticated chemical manufacturing equipment designated to a defunct Siberian chemical refinery owned by Pomerov.
In Siberia, Bond and Nicole enter the refinery with Bond posing as her bodyguard. Nicole enters the building to get into Pomerov's office while Bond is contacted by Tanner at Q Branch and says they found Tedworth's research but were locked out before they could read them, Bond locates and manages to gain access to the main computer As he does so, Bond discovers that Pomerov built a bio-factory and is manufacturing toxins. Bond makes his way to a central control room where he triggers a meltdown. Nicole and Bond pursue Pomerov's train by car, which is meant to smuggle the toxins out of the country. Bond follows the train to a port where the toxins are loaded onto an ekranoplan that takes off along the river with Pomerov inside. Using a boarded hovercraft, Bond damages the plane and boards it, killing Pomerov in the process by shooting the emergency exit, sucking him out of the plane. The bio-weapons are recovered, and Bond and Nicole part ways. He tells M that the tip about the bio-weapons was fabricated and it was set up by someone who wanted Pomerov dead. Using Bernin's cell phone, Bond finds a lead from Bangkok. Bond contacts Chinese intelligence officer Colonel Ping (David K.S. Tse) in Bangkok. Meeting at an aquarium, Ping tells Bond he had a team in Geneva following a lead on a man called Rak (James Goode) who operates out of Bangkok. Before Ping can reveal more, an assassin kills him. Bond pursues the assassin on the rooftops of Bangkok and then chases him by a tow truck while the assassin pilots a dump truck, Bond drives off a unfinished bridge and ends up getting the dump truck to crash and the assassin is killed. Bond tries to get background information on Rak from M while evading the police. Then Bond meets up with a old friend known as Silk (Richard Dillane) who tells him where Rak's secret hideout is; when Bond leaves, Silk informs someone where Bond is going and also says to make sure Bond does not make it. Bond is caught by Rak's henchmen and is captured.
Bond is taken to Burma where he is tortured. Shortly after he escapes, Bond engages in multiple fights with Rak. The conflict enters its climax when Bond fights Rak on a catwalk in a dam, eventually knocking him off. Rak tries to call for mercy, but Bond has already deduced who Rak's employer is. Bond leaves Rak to fall to his death, only for Rak to land on top of his Osprey.  Bond shoots Rak, who accidentally shoots it up with a grenade launcher, causing it to blow up with Rak still on it.
Back in Monaco, Nicole is revealed to be the one who kidnapped Tedworth and is planning another kidnapping.  She drives off in her car and Bond follows her, ultimately cornering her on a bridge. After being confronted, Nicole reveals that she did it to prove herself to a rich and powerful man.  Bond tries to get his name but she refuses to give it claiming he   s bigger than everything, and that he was watching them. Suddenly, an unmanned drone flies toward them and shoots Nicole dead. M then contacts Bond and asks him if everything is all right. He claims that she will need a new contact in Monaco and prompts her to stay in contact. As Bond signs off, he is left alone on the bridge with Nicole dead.  As the game is about to show the credits, a message is displayed that says, "James Bond will return" which suggests a sequel.
 Then on April 23, Activision reserved a web domain name called bloodstonegame.com. The game was officially announced in an Activision press release on July 16. Famed ''James Bond'' film writer Bruce Feirstein was chosen to pen the story for the game. The game itself is built on developer Bizarre Creations' Bespoke engine, which was first created for the game ''The Club''. Ben Cooke, who is Daniel Craig's stunt double in the films, has provided the motion capture choreography for Bond's digital animation. He is credited as the game's stunt coordinator.
The game's soundtrack is composed by British composer Richard Jacques. Joss Stone provides an original musical track to the game titled "I'll Take It All" written and performed by her and Dave Stewart. The song is featured exclusively in the game.
Several leaked photos were found online depicting a possible new game in the Bond series currently being developed by Activision's studio, Raven Software. Like Blood Stone, this iteration appears to be played from the third-person perspective and could include tactical combat similar to recent releases in the Splinter Cell series. Not much else is currently known about the status of the game including if it is a straight sequel to Blood Stone or an early version of a game based on ''Bond 23''.  A new 007 video game is in the works at Activision, with a release date scheduled for the second half of 2011.