It seems a lot of people are looking for lapel pins with the same design of the Deepwater Horizon explosion memorial ribbons. What could be a good place to start?  ( ) 01:15, 26 July 2010 (UTC)
I wasn't going to make and sell them. Actually, I wanted to purchase at least one. Are there any companies selling premade Deepwater Horizon memorial ribbon pins?  ( ) 07:01, 27 July 2010 (UTC)
Does anyone know of a book or paper that speaks at length on how adversity helps Jews hold fast to their religious identity/faith? To put my question into context, the Kaifeng Jews never faced bigotry in Chinese society, so they began to assimilate very quickly. In order to advance their family's social status, many Jews gave up learning Hebrew so that they could study the Confucian Classics and pass the imperial exams. This happened on such a wide scale that by 1800 CE, the last Rabbi died leaving no one with knowledge in Hebrew. This is the exact polar opposite of what I am talking about. --  ( ) 06:13, 26 July 2010 (UTC)
The OR answer, to paraphrase Tony Blair, is education, education, education. Traditionally, Jews have been prepared to suffer all kinds of privations in order to ensure the next generation is well educated. Rejection of the religion by those well-steeped in its knowledge has been and is comparatively rare. It also strikes me (more OR) that the all-encompassing aspect of the religion - it also has strong elements of ethnicity and culture - make it hard to really part from, hence the phenomenon of "Chicken soup Jews". --  ( ) 16:02, 27 July 2010 (UTC)
How can I contact him by email?     12:57, 26 July 2010 (UTC)
Anyone knows if there is any online archive/website were one can find scans of old Japanese socialist publications, such as ''Shinkigen''? --  ( ) 16:36, 26 July 2010 (UTC)
I am researching Stretham education starting with  (via ). His information is tantalising but seems incomplete so I am looking for his original sources. For example, all on page&nbsp;158 ...
I am trying to find out more about the education (from as early as possible) in Stretham, Cambridgeshire. VCH is a good starting point (see above), but does not give enough general information. VCH references are obscure (to me anyway) in any case. What is going through my head is something like "early (? 15 century) through to the mid 19 century education of the poor in Stretham was led by the church or guilds and feoffees (i.e. charities) as it was in all of England. There were attempts to centralise such education via national societies". I do not have any references or clues if any of that stuff is real. Help me find information on education in Stretham, Cambridgeshire please --  ( ) 17:53, 26 July 2010 (UTC)
I recently saw one of several available  of Senator Al Franken drawing a freehand map of the United States.  He begins by drawing a mostly straight line which forms the northern borders of  Washington, Idaho, Montana, North Dakota, and Minnesota, then finishes drawing Minnesota, where he's from.  As a kid, I was also extremely interested in geography, and by the time I was 10 or 11, could draw a similar map (although not so well, and not in 120 seconds).  Anyway.... I found Mr. Franken's drawing interesting because the first state he finishes drawing is Minnesota.  When I draw a map of the United States, I start with Utah, where I grew up.  This has made me wonder if other people from other states begin their maps with their own state.  Just curious and would love to read everyone's input.  Thanks!     19:46, 26 July 2010 (UTC)
What happens if in a jury of twelve (like in most trials in America), 11 are for imposing the death penalty on the defendant while 1 is for life without parole. --  ( ) 22:35, 26 July 2010 (UTC)