The company that owns and operates the schools, Education Corporation of America, is a privately held corporation headquartered in Birmingham, Alabama.  ECA also owns , which offers distance education academic programs via the Internet; Golf Academy of America; Culinard, and the Culinary Institute of Virginia College, offering degrees in the culinary arts.
According to Jason Mann, Vice President of Marketing for Education Corporation of America, the Colorado location was selected because of the state's renewable energy resources as well as the state government's green-friendly nature. The facility features solar panels and wind turbines on its roof, as well as "solar trees" on the grounds and motion-sensitive lighting.
In a press release, Ecotech has stated that it intends to "expand across the U.S." following the establishment of its Colorado campus.
Ecotech's first classes began in July, 2010 in a temporary facility. Ecotech Institute opened its doors in January, 2011 to almost 200 students, some starting their third quarter. 
According to Colorado Energy News, Ecotech "features 30 classrooms, 12 state-of-the-art computer and science labs (e.g. electrical, wiring, solar, wind safety, controls and environmental science), studios, student and faculty lounges, a library, and a variety of other amenities":
According to the Aurora Sentinel, in response to President Barack Obama's January 25, 2011 State of the Union speech, U.S. Rep. Ed Perlmutter (D-Golden) "said Aurora is already leading the way in clean energy creation with its Ecotech Institute, a college dedicated to preparing students for careers in renewable energy." 
Ecotech's energy-saving zero-client technology was highlighted in a Technology Alabama article. 
Ecotech Institute offers coursework in renewable energy, sustainable design, and energy efficiency. Specific programs are:
All of which are two-year associate's degree (in applied science) programs except for the Sustainable Interior Design program which is being offered as a certification.
Ecotech Institute programs are accredited by the ACICS but is not regionally accredited, so Ecotech Institute courses are usually not accepted for credit at regionally accredited schools. National accreditation is recognized by the U.S. Department of Education. Degrees from the college may be accepted by employers for entry-level jobs.