The '''Willow Creek Association''' (WCA), a 501(c)3 not-for-profit ministry, is an international, evangelical Christian association of more than 9,000 member churches from 90 denominations and 45 countries.
The WCA, Led by ,  believes the effectiveness of a local church is largely dependent upon the sold-out, Christ-centered devotion of its leadership core.  Whether staff or volunteers, the whole church benefits when leaders develop themselves spiritually and personally.  The WCA exists to maximize the transformative power of the local church.  "I am passionate about what can happen when God captures the heart of a faith community and it becomes a life-transforming agent to its community and the world   as He intended." - Jim Mellado
While  is certainly  anchor event each year, it's just one of the many developmental tools and resources available to your staff and church through the WCA.  
WCA serves Christ-following leaders fuels by a holy discontent for their church's effectiveness in impacting lives.  As an aggregator of leaders, ideas, and innovations- and by investing in new research and resources- WCA is committed to give church leaders access to best-practice strategies for effective discipleship at every stage of the faith journey. 
WCA President Jim Mellado describes WCA as follows:  "Since 1992, the Willow Creek Association has been linking like-minded, action-oriented churches with each other and with strategic vision, training, and resources. Our desire is to serve local church leaders in building biblically functioning churches that reach increasing numbers of lost people, not just with innovations from Willow Creek, but with God-given breakthroughs with widespread potential from any church in the world." The WCA had revenues of $22 million in 2009. Since its inception, the WCA has been a member is good standing of the Evangelical Council for Financial Accountability.
The  along with  started the Global Leadership Summit in 1995 as an annual training event for church, ministry and other leaders to sharpen their skills. The Global Leadership Summit exists to transform Christian leaders around the world with an injection of vision, skill development, and inspiration for the sake of the local Church. The Summit telecasts LIVE from the campus of WIllow Creek Community Church near Chicago reaching more than 185 premier host sites across the United States. In the months following, the Summit moves into more than 200 cities in 70+ countries across the globe, via videocast. 
Each year this two day event features experts in the arena of leadership in lecture and interview formats, plus worship singing and dramatic skits. Past speakers have included Bono (former Time Magazine Co-Man of the Year and U2 lead singer), Ken Blanchard ("One Minute Manager"), Marcus Buckingham ("StrengthFinders"), Jim Collins ("Good to Great" and "Built to Last"), and Mike Singletary (NFL Hall of Fame linebacker for the Chicago Bears). Speakers at the Leadership Summit have included Presidents Bill Clinton and Jimmy Carter, Karen Hughes, Special Advisor to President  George W. Bush, Lady Vols' women's college Basketball coach Pat Summitt, Dallas, Texas pastor Bishop T.D. Jakes, University of Southern California president Steven Sample, Yahoo!'s Tim Sanders, business author and leadership consultant Marcus Buckingham, Rick Warren, pastor of Saddleback Church and author of The Purpose Driven Life and former United States Secretary of State, Colin Powell. 
The 2005 Leadership Summit had over 53,000 attendees in over 100 locations across North America. and over 80,000 attended in 2006. The 2006 and 2009 Leadership Summit featured Bill Hybels interviewing U2 frontman Bono. In addition, the 2009 lineup included former British Prime Minister Tony Blair, Gary Hammel, Tim Keller, Jessica Jackley, Dan and Chip Heath, David Gergen and many others.  The Summit 2010 attracted 122,000 leaders   representing more than 12,000 organizations and churches that serve more than five million individuals.
It's more than a 2-day event. Increasingly, the Summit is an organic leadership movement that unites hundreds of thousands of leaders across the globe seeking to maximize the impact of their churches or organizations to bring the hope of Christ to our broken world.