The company was established in 1989. Its objectives are to bring about organisational change and transformation through programmes of learning and communications.
LINE has over 100 members of staff  based in offices in London, Sheffield and Zurich.
LINE Communications was founded in 1989 by Piers Lea (CEO). Initially the team consisted of four members of staff. In 2004, it opened a second office in Sheffield and a third in Zurich in 2007. The company   s workforce is now over 100. In the three years leading up to 2007, the company trebled turnover and saw a 75% increase in staff. Since 2009, LINE has been recognised by the British Computer Society as the UK market leader in bespoke e-learning content development.
LINE has produced programmes for a range of global corporations. Clients include: Anglo American, BAA, PricewaterhouseCoopers, British Airways, BP, Tetra Pak, BT, Credit Suisse, Ford, IKEA, Lafarge, Standard Life, Swiss Re, Jaguar Land Rover, Tele Atlas, and Volvo Car Corporation.
Between 2004 and 2009 the Volvo Car Corporation saved   7.5m as a result of using LINE   s internet-based inductions.
Since 2008, Inter IKEA Systems has saved    1.5m per year as a result of a LINE blended learning programme that reduced the duration of training, the numbers of trainers, printed material and travel and accommodation. 
In 2009 LINE saved British Airways   984,000 per year on training and related costs with a computer-based training tour of the Boeing 777 aircraft.
Also in 2009, LINE designed a blended learningprogramme for Ford of Europe that enabled them to reduced training costs by 74%, make training time three times faster and increase car sales by 2.4 cars per year per salesperson.
LINE works with a variety of UK Government departments including: the Home Office, HM Revenue and Customs (HMRC), the British Museum, National College for School Leadership and the BBC.
In 2000 LINE created BBC GCSE Bitesize; a secondary school revision resource for students studying their GCSEs, featuring written content, interactive content, audio, video and games.
The company was also employed to update the National Learning Network   s (NLN) Round 1&2 e-learning materials.
In 2004, Over 10,000 people took an editorial policy course designed by LINE, making it the BBC   s most popular training package. The programme was updated in 2007 and LINE was awarded Online Solution of the Year at the World of Learning Awards.
Both the British and US Armed Forces have used modules or programs designed by LINE as a method of training their servicemen. In 2008, LINE won e-learning Project of the Year for producing Culture Awareness; a training programme for the Ministry of Defence (MoD). The interactive, scenario-based programmes were used by servicemen in preparation for service in Iraq and Afghanistan. The judges commended the use of embedded video diaries from experienced army personnel, as well as the    Culture Risk Meter    which assesses the user   s actions.
The company produced the Air Power training programme for the RAF in 2009. The programme allowed personnel to study Air Power up to the level of the Basic Air Warfare Course (BAWC).
In 2004, LINE was also the first e-learning company to produce modules for the Royal Navy.