Note:  If you are seeing this page as a result of an attempt to re-nominate an article for deletion, you must manually edit the AfD nomination links in order to create a new discussion page using the name format of  .  When you create the new discussion page, please provide a link to this old discussion in your nomination. -->
The result was    '''keep'''.   '' '' 03:30, 5 September 2010 (UTC)
This Wiki article is based almost entirely on the completely fictitious essay written by one Dan Troxell for the Kentucky Historical Society.  There is no earlier reference of any kind to such an incident taking place.   ( ) 20:21, 13 August 2010 (UTC)
There is ZERO reference to a "Massacre at Yahoo Falls" prior to Troxell's fictional account.  Not even a hint.  A myth based on the fantasies of a New Age wannabe Indian in the late 20th century does not deserve an article and having it hurts the crediblity of Wikipedia as a source of accurate information.  As to number of people who believe that the "Massacre at Yahoo Falls" really happened, one-fifth of Americans believe President Obama is a Muslim but taht doesn't make it so.   ( ) 15:00, 27 August 2010 (UTC)
Chris, on the grounds you invented above, it is valid for anyone to make up whatever they like about anything under the sun, get enough people to believe it, then write an article about it for Wikipedia.  That rationale just doesn't hold up.   ( ) 17:11, 27 August 2010 (UTC)
Not, it doesn't.  It is not even an urban legend. For starters, the one, the only source for the story is Dan Troxell's tale in the mid-1990's which he offered with no attempt to verify with reliable and valid sources.   ( ) 23:46, 27 August 2010 (UTC)
Again, the fiction of the "Massacre at Yahoo Falls" is in nowhere near the same category of any of those that you mention. It's a made-up story by a single individual from the 1990's, not a widely publicized legend believed or utilized by many with an influence across a broad range of human culture that has existed for centuries or even millenia, the sole purpose of which was to buoy up the imaginary legitimacy of the two made-up tribes to which its author claims to belong, the "Mighty Cumberland Plateau Thunderbolt Cherokees" and the "Southern Ky Cumberland River Shawnee".   ( ) 06:09, 28 August 2010 (UTC)
OK, I've '''rewritten''' it, referenced everything, and change my opinion to '''Keep'''. I've read all the sources, and what I've written is a correct summary of them - there appear to be no written mentions of this before 1975, and everything since is either based on that or propagated by one or other of the Troxall family. This thing is all over the internet, in books and encyclopaedias, and I think it worthy of a small article so long as that article makes it clear that this may not have happened. However, I would recommend that it be moved to Alleged massacre at Ywahoo Falls and this page turned into a redirect.   ( ) 06:55, 28 August 2010 (UTC)
Some of the contributors to this debate should be ashamed of the way they have been bickering with each other. I have relisted for discussion of Chris' rewrite.   '' '' 07:25, 28 August 2010 (UTC)
ON SECOND THOUGHT, after further examination, while I realize the story of the massacre is a farce, it was printed in a history of Daniel Boone National Forest written for the Forest Service (though without vetting for accuracy), and was a source of local interest, as spurious as the account is.  In addition, the anonymous, and illegal, erection of the monument followed quickly by its removal by the USFS make the story at least somewhat noteworthy, as long as the full story is told rather than just a summation of the alleged massacre itself.  I'm not withdrawing my nomination for its deletion but will be satisfied with whatever the concensus decides.   ( ) 01:52, 2 September 2010 (UTC)